Table of Contents 
F.-Ch. Barlet and the Initiatic Societies 
1 
Some Precise Details of the H.B. of L. 
5 
Sédir and the Hindu Doctrines 
8 
Léon Champrenaud (1870-1925) 
10 
Cologne or Strasbourg? 
11 
Madame Chauvel de Chauvigny 
13 
The Gift of Languages 
14 
The Compagnonnage and the Bohemians 
17 
The Secret Language of Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ 
20 
The Thunderstones 
31 
The Triple Druidic Precinct 
35 
Some Aspects of the Symbolism of Janus 
39 
The Guardians of the Holy Land 
45 
Atlantis and Hyperborea 
53 
Concerning the Masons of the Middle Ages 
59 
A New Book on the Order of the Elect Priests 
63 
About the ‘Lyonnais Rose-Cross’ 
68 
The Symbolism of Weaving 
71 
Atma-Gita 
75 
The Greater Holy War 
79 
Regarding Pilgrimages 
82 
At-Tawḥīd 
87 
Al-Faqr 
90 
The Limits of the Mind 
95 
The Sifra di-Zeniuta 
99 
Sacerdotal Initiation and Royal Initiation 
103 
The Science of Letters (ʾIlm al-Hurūf) 
106 
The Rind and the Core (Al-Qashar wa al-Lab) 
112 
The Hermetic Tradition 
116 
The Rose-Cross and Rosicrucians 
121 
Magic and Mysticism 
126 
The Hieroglyph of Cancer 
129 
The Place of the Atlantean Tradition in the Manvantara 
134

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sheth 
138 
The Language of Birds 
143 
Some Remarks on the Name Adam 
147 
Cain and Abel 
151 
The Symbolism of the Theater 
155 
The Secret Language of Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ 
158 
Hermes 
165 
Chirology in Islamic Esoterism 
171 
Initiatic Organizations and Religious Sects 
175 
New Insights into the Secret Language of Dante 
179 
Taoism and Confucianism 
184 
Conditions of Initiation 
196 
Initiatic Regularity 
202 
Initiatic Transmission 
209 
Initiatic Centers 
216 
Initiation and Counter-Initiation 
221 
Initiatic Rites 
225 
Initiatic Trials 
230 
Qabbalah 
234 
Initiatic Knowledge and Profane ‘Culture’ 
238 
‘Fedeli d’Amore’ and ‘Corte d’Amore’c Centers 
216 
Initiation and Counter-Initiation 
221 
Initiatic Rites 
225 
Initiatic Trials 
230 
Qabbalah 
234 
Initiatic Knowledge and Profane ‘Culture’ 
238 
‘Fedeli d’Amore’ and ‘Corte d’Amore’

242 
Kabbalah and the Science of Numbers 
248 
Kundalini-Yoga 
256 
Kundalini-Yoga II 
262 
Initiatic Education 
268 
The ‘Religion’ of a Philosopher 
274 
The Holy Grail 
279 
The Holy Grail II 
285 
Initiation and Crafts 
290 
‘Verbum, Lux, and Vita’ 
295 
Initiatic Death 
299 
Alleged Empiricism of the Ancients 
303 
Ṣūfism 
307 
Initiatic Organizations and Secret Societies 
313 
Initiatic Organizations and Secret Societies II 
318 
Initiatic Secrecy 
324 
Profane Names and Initiatic Names 
330 
The Rite and the Symbol 
335 
Confusion of the Psychic and the Spiritual 
342 
The Arts and Their Traditional Conception 
345

--- PAGE BREAK ---

So-Called Psychic ‘Powers’ 
350 
The Rejection of ‘Powers’ 
354 
Some Errors Concerning Initiation 
358 
The Hindu Theory of the Five Elements 
362 
Myths, Mysteries, and Symbols 
378 
Dharma 
385 
Symbolism and Philosophy 
389 
Varṇaḥ 
394 
Synthesis and Syncretism 
399 
The Being and the Milieu 
403

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F.-Ch. Barlet and the Initiatic Societies 
F.-Ch. Barlet et les sociétés Initiatiques, April 1925.Syncretism 
399 
The Being and the Milieu 
403

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon

--- PAGE BREAK ---

F.-Ch. Barlet and the Initiatic Societies 
F.-Ch. Barlet et les sociétés Initiatiques, April 1925.

Before taking part in the beginnings of the movement which one can 
label as properly Occultist, F.-Ch. Barlet was one of the founding mem-
bers of the first French branch of the Theosophical Society. Shortly fol-
lowing this, he contacted the organization widely designated by the ini-
tials H.B. of L., meaning Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor,1 which pro-
posed as its principal goal “the establishment of external centers in the 
Occident that would resurrect the rites of ancient initiations.” This or-
ganization’s claimed origin went back 4,320 years before the year 1881 
of the Christian era; obviously this is a symbolic date referring to certain 
cyclical periods.2 It professed to be connected with a properly Occidental 
tradition, for, according to its teachings, “the Hermetic Initiates have bor-
rowed nothing from India; the similarity that manifests between a num-
ber of different names, doctrines, and rites of the Hindus and Egyptians, 
far from showing that Egypt has drawn its doctrines from India, only 
makes it clear that the defining characteristics of their respective teach-
ings were derived from a singular stock, and this original source was 
neither Indian nor Egyptian, but the Lost Island of the Occident.” As for 
the form taken recently by the order, here is what was said: “In 1870, a 
follower of the old Order, which still existed, in the original H.B. of L., 
with the permission of the initiates beside him, resolved to choose in 
Great Britain a neophyte who could properly transmit his views.” After 
completing a significant private mission in mainland Europe, he landed 
in Great Britain in 1873, where he managed to find a neophyte whom he 
instructed, after sufficiently verifying the authenticity of his credentials. 
The neophyte then obtained permission to establish an outer circle of the3, where he managed to find a neophyte whom he 
instructed, after sufficiently verifying the authenticity of his credentials. 
The neophyte then obtained permission to establish an outer circle of the

1 A similar organization named ”Hermetic Brotherhood of Light”, or the “Frater-
nité Hermétique de Lumière”, which seems to have been a rival or dissident 
branch to the Hermetic Brotherhood of Luxor. Furthermore, we can notice that 
the name “Luxor” means “Light,” and even doubly so when broken down into 
two words (Lux-Or) which each carry the same meaning in Latin and Hebrew, 
respectively. 
2 These cycles are referred to in Trithemius’ “Traité des Causes secondes,” the 
teaching of which was included in the teachings of the H.B. of L.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 
The Veil of Isisspectively. 
2 These cycles are referred to in Trithemius’ “Traité des Causes secondes,” the 
teaching of which was included in the teachings of the H.B. of L.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 
The Veil of Isis

H.B. of L., to draw in those worthy of the form of initiation for which 
they would qualify. 
Upon joining the H.B. of L., Barlet had some hesitations: was mem-
bership compatible with being a member of the Theosophical Society? 
He posed this question to his Master, an English clergyman, who rushed 
to reassure him by stating that “he and his Master (Peter Davidson) were 
also members of the Council of the Theosophical Society.” Nonetheless, 
a thinly veiled hostility existed between the two organizations since 
1878, when Madame Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott had been expelled 
from the H.B. of L., which they had been affiliated with since 1875 
through their acquaintanceship of the Egyptologist Georges H. Felt. 
Without a doubt, when the Théosophist journal claimed in one of its issue 
that this outer circle of the H.B. of L. only dated back to 1884 it was meant 
to conceal this unflattering expedition of the two founders of the Theos-
ophy Society; peculiarly, the same journal had published an advertise-
ment from the ‘Occult Magazine' of Glasgow in 1885, a publication of the 
H.B. of L., wherein it appealed to people who wished “to be admitted as 
members of an Occult Fraternity, who does not openly boast of their 
knowledge, but freely and unreservedly instructs all those whom it finds 
worthy of receiving its teachings” an indirect, but very clear, allusion 
towards the opposing processes which the Theosophical Society was 
known and criticized for. The hostility of the Theosophical Society was 
to come to fruition later when members of the H.B. of L. began a project 
to found an agricultural colony of sorts in America; Madame Blavatsky 
found this opportunity favorable to avenge her previous expulsion, and 
she managed to have the Secretary-General of the Order, T. H. Burgoyne, 
barred from obtaining residency in the United States. Peter Davidson, 
who bore the title of “Northern Provincial Grandmaster,” was the only 
one permitted to enter, wherein he settled with his family in Loudsville, 
Georgia, where he died several years ago.3 
In July 1887, Peter Davidson wrote a letter to Barlet where, after de-
scribing “esoteric Buddhism” as “an attempt to corrupt the Western 
spirit,” he states,  
“the genuine and sincere Adepts do not teach these doctrines of 
‘karma’ and ‘reincarnation’ put forth by the authors that profess 
“esoteric Buddhism” and other theosophical works. Neither in the 
works discussed above, nor in the pages of the Theosophist, isof 
‘karma’ and ‘reincarnation’ put forth by the authors that profess 
“esoteric Buddhism” and other theosophical works. Neither in the 
works discussed above, nor in the pages of the Theosophist, is

3 While the H.B. of L. was falling inactive, Peter Davidson founded a new organ-
ization called the ‘Order of the Cross and the Serpent.’ Another of the foreign 
leaders of the H.B. of L., of his own accord, was at the head of a movement of a 
very different character, which Barlet was also involved in, but which we will 
not deal with here.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eaders of the H.B. of L., of his own accord, was at the head of a movement of a 
very different character, which Barlet was also involved in, but which we will 
not deal with here.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
3 
there, as far as I am aware, an accurate and esoteric sense of these 
important questions. One of the main objects of the H.B. of L. was 
to reveal to those brothers that have shown their worth the com-
plete mysteries of these grave and profound subjects. It must be 
noted that the Theosophical Society is not and has never been, 
ever since Madame Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott arrived in India, 
to be under the direction or inspiration of an authentic and real 
Himalayan Fraternity, but under that of an inferior Order belong-
ing to a Buddhist cult.4 I am speaking here of something that I 
know and hold to be true with indisputable authority; but, if you 
hold some doubts about my assertions, Mr. Alexander de Corfou 
has several letters from Madame Blavatsky in which she clearly 
confesses some of the same as what I have told you.”  
One year later, Peter Davidson wrote in another letter, this slightly 
enigmatic phrase: “The true Adepts and the true Mahatmas are like two 
poles of a magnet, although several Mahatmas are in the ranks of our 
Order, but they only appear as Mahatmas for very important reasons.” 
At this moment, which is to say, in the middle of 1888, Barlet was leaving 
the Theosophical Society, following dissensions which had occurred in 
the Parisian ‘Isis’ branch, and in the echoes of the ‘Lotus’ branch of the 
period. 
It was also at about this time that Papus began to formally organize 
Martinism; Barlet was one of this first to be summoned to his Supreme 
Council. It was first established that Martinism’s purpose was to serve as 
a preparation point for its members to enter into an order which could 
confer a true initiation on those who would be capable of receiving it; 
the Order which was intended for this purpose was none other than the 
H.B. of L., of which Barlet had become the official representative for the 
Order in France. This is why, in 1891, Papus wrote: “Genuine Occult so-
cieties exist which still possess the integral tradition; as a witness, I name 
one of my Masters in practice, one of the most scholarly Westerners, Pe-
ter Davidson.”5 However, this project did not succeed, and it was recog-
nized that the superior center of Martinism was the Kabbalistic Order of 
the Rosicrucian, which had been founded by Stanislas de Guaita. Barlet 
was also a member of the Supreme Council of this Order, and when 
Guaita died in 1896, he was named to succeed him as Grandmaster; how-
ever, if he ever actually had the title, he never exercised his functions in 
an effective manner. In fact, the Order had no regular meetings after the 
death of its founder, and later, when Papus thought to revive it, Barlet,had the title, he never exercised his functions in 
an effective manner. In fact, the Order had no regular meetings after the 
death of its founder, and later, when Papus thought to revive it, Barlet,

4 This is the organization headed by the Rev. H. Sumangala, the principal of the 
“Vidyodaya Pirivena” of Columbo. 
5 Methodical Treatise on Occultic Science, p. 1039.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 
The Veil of Isiss the organization headed by the Rev. H. Sumangala, the principal of the 
“Vidyodaya Pirivena” of Columbo. 
5 Methodical Treatise on Occultic Science, p. 1039.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 
The Veil of Isis

who was no longer affiliated in any Occultist groups, declared he was 
disinterested entirely; he thought, no doubt with reason, that such at-
tempts that rested on no solid foundation could only lead to new failures. 
We shall not speak further of some organizations that are, more or 
less, ephemeral, to which Barlet affiliated with perhaps a little too easily; 
his great sincerity and honest, confident character prevented him in 
these circumstances from seeing that some people only sought to use his 
name as a guarantee of “respectability.” In the end, these unfortunate 
experiences had led him to be more cautious and to question the useful-
ness of all the associations which, under pretensions of initiation, hid 
their lack of knowledge, and which were ultimately but a pretext for 
adorning themselves with pompous titles; he understood the vanity of 
the external forms in which truly initiatic organizations are clear of. Sev-
eral months before his death, he spoke of a new so-called Rosicrucian 
society that was imported from America, which he was invited to join. 
He told us that he would do nothing about it, because he was absolutely 
convinced, as we are, that true Rosicrucians never founded societies. We 
will close on this conclusion that Barlet reached at the end of so much 
research, and which should give many of our contemporaries very seri-
ous thought, if they want, as the teachings of the H.B. of L. said, “To learn 
to know the enormous difference between the intact truth and the ap-
parent truth,” that exists between the real initiation and its innumerable 
counterparts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Precise Details of the H.B. of L. 
Quelques précisions à propos de la H. B. of L., October 1925.,” that exists between the real initiation and its innumerable 
counterparts.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Precise Details of the H.B. of L. 
Quelques précisions à propos de la H. B. of L., October 1925.

The “Occult Review,” in its May 1925 issue, published a note on the arti-
cle we have devoted to F.-Ch. Barlet and his experience with a variety of 
initiatory societies, but specifically with the ‘H.B. of L.’ (“Hermetic Broth-
erhood of Luxor”), there has been a plethora of inaccurate information 
which has surrounded discussions of this topic, and in order to rectify 
this we would specify what has been said previously.  
Firstly, when Barlet was affiliated with the ‘H.B. of L.,’ the seat of the 
organization had not yet been moved to America; this affiliation must 
have been a little earlier than the publication of the Occult Magazine 
which appeared in Glasgow in 1885 and 1886, of which we possess the 
complete collection. This journal was indeed an official publication of the 
H.B. of L., whose motto was “Omnia vincit Veritas;” At this time, Peter 
Davidson resided in Banchory, Kincardineshire, New Brunswick, and it 
was only at the end of 1886 when he moved to Loudsville, Georgia, where 
he was to spend the rest of his life. It was much later that he published a 
new magazine entitled ‘The Morning Star,’ which was the official publi-
cation of the ‘Order of the Cross and the Serpent,’ founded by him after 
the H.B. of L. returned to inactivity. 
On the other hand, it was in the ‘Occult Magazine’ of October 1885 
that a note was first published, publicizing for the first time the project 
of organizing an agricultural colony of the H.B. of L. in California; this 
note was signed with the initials of T. H. Burgoyne, the Secretary-Gen-
eral of the Order (and not the title of Northern Provincial Grandmaster, 
which belonged to Davidson). This project was often mentioned in dis-
cussion related to this, but the idea of establishing the colony in Califor-
nia was soon abandoned in favor of Georgia; it was even announced that 
Burgoyne would be at Loudsville beginning April 15, 1886, but he never 
arrived, of which is credited to Madame Blavatsky’s previously alluded 
to intervention. Burgoyne had previously been convicted of fraud; Mad-
ame Blavatsky, aware of this fact, succeeded in obtaining documents 
which contained proof of the conviction, which she sent to the American 
government, in order to prevent Burgoyne from staying in the United 
States; the reasoning behind this was to take revenge for her and General 
Olcott’s exclusion from the ‘H.B. of L.’ eight years earlier in 1878. As forto prevent Burgoyne from staying in the United 
States; the reasoning behind this was to take revenge for her and General 
Olcott’s exclusion from the ‘H.B. of L.’ eight years earlier in 1878. As for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 
The Veil of IsisUnited 
States; the reasoning behind this was to take revenge for her and General 
Olcott’s exclusion from the ‘H.B. of L.’ eight years earlier in 1878. As for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 
The Veil of Isis

Davidson, whose honesty was never questioned, he did not have to “flee 
to America,” as the ‘Occult Review’ put it; but there was nothing pre-
venting him from establishing himself in Georgia with his family, to form 
the first nucleus of the future colony, nonetheless, this never succeeded 
as the long-awaited development. 
The editor of the ‘Occult Review’ says that Davidson acted on behalf 
of Burgoyne, which is not correct, since their respective positions did not 
involve subordination of the former to the latter; and, what is more 
astonishing, he then asserts that behind even Burgoyne was an ‘ex-Brah-
man’ named Hurychund Christaman: this is an odd mistake, and one 
which requires some explanation. Madame Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott 
had been affiliated with the American branch of the ‘H.B. of L.’ around 
April 1875, through George H. Felt, who claimed to be a professor of 
Mathematics and Egyptology, and with which they had been put in touch 
with through a journalist named Stevens. One of the consequences of 
this affiliation was that, in the spiritualist séances which Madame Bla-
vatsky held, the manifestations of the famous ‘John King’ were replaced 
by those of a so-called ‘Serapis’ on September 7, 1875, and on November 
17 of the same year that the ‘Theosophical Society’ was founded. About 
two years later, ‘Serapis’ was in turn replaced by a certain ‘Kashmiri 
brother;’ this is the moment where Olcott and Madama Blavatsky had 
met Hurrychund Chintamon (and not Christaman), who was not the hid-
den head of the ‘H.B. of L.,’ but rather the representative in America of 
the ‘Arya Samaj,’ an association founded in India in 1870 by Swami Da-
yananda Saraswati. In September or October 1877, in the words of Mad-
ame Blavatsky, “an offensive and defensive alliance” was established be-
tween the ‘Arya Samaj’ and the ‘Theosophical Society;’ this alliance was 
to be broken in 1882 by Dayananda Saraswati himself, who then spoke 
very critically of Madame Blavatsky’s conduct. The latter, for reasons 
still yet unknown, later manifested a real terror of Hurrychund Chin-
tamon; but what is important to remember is that his relations began 
precisely with the moment when he began to refute the assertion of the 
‘Occult Review.’ 
Now, an explanation of this error still remains to be seen: would there 
not have been simply some confusion, because of the partial similarity of 
the two names Chintamon and Metamon? This latter name is that of the 
master of Madame Blavatsky, the magician Paulous Metamon, who was 
of a Coptic or Chaldean origin (we never could be exactly sure), who she 
had met in Asia Minor in 1848, then tracked down in Cairo in 1870; but, 
it will be asked, what is the relation between this character and the ‘H.B. 
of L.?’ To answer this question, we need to inform our associate, the ‘Oc-
cult Review,’ who seems to ignore it, the identity of the real leader, or, torelation between this character and the ‘H.B. 
of L.?’ To answer this question, we need to inform our associate, the ‘Oc-
cult Review,’ who seems to ignore it, the identity of the real leader, or, to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
7 
speak more precisely, the Grand Master of the ‘Outer Circle’ of the ‘H.B. 
of L.’ This Grand Master was Dr. Max Théon, who was to later create and 
direct the ‘Cosmic Movement;’ and this explains why Barlet, the former 
representative of the H.B. of L. in France, took this step from the begin-
ning (that is, if we are not mistaken, from 1899 or 1900). Regarding the 
origins of Dr. Max Théon, who has always been very mysterious, we 
have but one testimony, but which deserves some serious consideration: 
Barlet himself, who was known for his honesty and consistency, assured 
us that he was Paulous Metamon’s own son; if this is true, everything is 
explained by this one fact. 
We had not wanted, in our previous article, to implicate any living 
people, and this is why we had refrained from naming Mr. Théon, to 
whom we had only made an allusion; but, following the intervention of 
the ‘Occult Review,’ a clarification was necessary in the interest of his-
torical truth. It is expected that these explanations will provoke more 
questions, for we do not pretend to dispel all obscurities at once; there 
must be other witnesses to the facts in question, and since certain ques-
tions are asked, could they not make it known what they know?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sédir and the Hindu Doctrines 
Sédir et les doctrines hindoues, April 1926.acts in question, and since certain ques-
tions are asked, could they not make it known what they know?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sédir and the Hindu Doctrines 
Sédir et les doctrines hindoues, April 1926.

We have learned with sadness of the premature death of Paul Sédir just 
as we were reading his article, in the previous issue of Amitiés Spiritu-
elles, the article he had devoted to Hindu metaphysics, which dealt spe-
cifically with our book Man and his Becoming according to the Vedanta. 
Sédir, in fact, had formerly been fascinated in the Indian doctrines; it is 
especially, we believe, the influence of Dr. Alphonse Jobert which had 
helped to push him in this direction. He had then published a study on 
The Incantations, which as an essay remained vague, but, nonetheless, 
gave hope for further in-depth works. However, he only later gave some 
notes that were used in lectures regarding the Hindu tradition, and 
which, if our memory does not fail us, appeared in Mr. Jollivet-Castelot’s 
journal. We also, for the record, wish to make mention of a booklet on 
Fakirism, a simple summary of the existing knowledge on the subject, 
which, incidentally, is of secondary importance. Sédir was not long in 
changing his orientation from study turning towards a rather special 
Christian mysticism, much more concerned with action than with mere 
knowledge; a great number of his friends, while always recognizing his 
great sincerity, could not help but regret this change which disappointed 
them. It must be said to be true, because it may help to explain some 
things, that Sédir had found little encouragement from the few Hindus 
whom he had met, who he considered to be too concerned with ‘phe-
nomena;’ had it not been for this, perhaps, he would have persevered to 
get rid of this Western tendency and to penetrate further into the 
knowledge of the veritable doctrines. Unfortunately, he shut himself up 
in a hostile attitude which always caused us some astonishment: he 
sought, between Christianity and the Oriental traditions, oppositions 
which did not exist; he saw a sort of irreconcilable divergence, where we 
saw a profound harmony and a real unity under the diversity of external 
forms. His final article still bears the mark of this way of looking at 
things; but on the other hand, we believe that there is proof that he never 
ceased to be interested in those doctrines of India, in the depths of him-
self and in spite of appearances, which had exercised so much attraction 
to him at the beginning of his career; and if he had lived longer, who 
knows if he might not come back with other dispositions, and if he wouldof appearances, which had exercised so much attraction 
to him at the beginning of his career; and if he had lived longer, who 
knows if he might not come back with other dispositions, and if he would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
9 
not have seen new horizons that had opened to him. This thought can 
only add to the regret felt by those who knew him following his sudden 
and unexpected end.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Léon Champrenaud (1870-1925) 
Léon Champrenaud, May 1926.ned to him. This thought can 
only add to the regret felt by those who knew him following his sudden 
and unexpected end.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Léon Champrenaud (1870-1925) 
Léon Champrenaud, May 1926.

Léon Champrenaud died on October 23, 1925, only at the age of 55, after 
a long and painful period of illness. He has been involved in the contem-
porary Occultist movement since a very young age, nearly from the be-
ginning, and he had taken a very active role, despite writing little. He 
became a member of the Supreme Council of the Martinist Order, under 
the name ‘Noël Sisera,’ he was the editor-in-chief of a little-known pub-
lication: L’Initiateur, an initiatory study bulleting reserved for Martinist 
representatives, which had only published seven issues between January 
1904 and March 1905. From the fourth issue onwards, Sisera’s name as 
editor-in-chief was replaced by that of Sédir’s; it was around this time 
that Léon Champrenaud began to depart from Western occultism, which 
had appeared to him to be a standstill, and turned definitively towards 
the study of the Oriental doctrines, in which he had some interest for 
some time already. It was then that he founded the review La Voie with 
Matgioi, which was published from April 1904 to March 1907. Under the 
name of Théophane, he published the first part of the Secret Teachings of 
Gnosis with Simon (Matgioi); this volume was to be followed by two more 
volumes, but these were never published. It was again under the same 
name of Théophane that he gave in 1910 a study on Matgioi, his role in 
the Chinese secret societies, and a summary of Taoist metaphysics. Fi-
nally, between 1909 and 1912, he also looked after the journal La Gnose, 
which he helped to direct in the study of the Oriental traditions. Having 
known him at this time, and having worked with him constantly for 
many years, we do not want to let him disappear without sending out an 
impactful remembrance and not recalling that he was one of the first to 
work and make known the true Metaphysical doctrines of the East in 
France.t want to let him disappear without sending out an 
impactful remembrance and not recalling that he was one of the first to 
work and make known the true Metaphysical doctrines of the East in 
France.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cologne or Strasbourg? 
Cologne ou Strasbourg?, January 1927.ecalling that he was one of the first to 
work and make known the true Metaphysical doctrines of the East in 
France.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cologne or Strasbourg? 
Cologne ou Strasbourg?, January 1927.

The question which was posed and considered in the previous October 
issue of Le Voile d’Isis must, as we understand it, be divided in twain: a 
question of a historical order and a question of a symbolic order; the di-
vergence of opinion resides, in fact, only on the first of these two points 
of view. Moreover, this contradiction is perhaps only apparent and not 
in essence: if the Strasbourg cathedral is indeed the ‘official’ center of a 
certain rite of compagnonnage, could it not be that the cathedral of Co-
logne is a center of the same rite? And would it not make sense, precisely 
for this reason, that two separate Masonic charters, one originating in 
Strasbourg and the other Cologne, could have given rise to confusion? 
This would have to be investigated, and it would also become necessary 
to know whether the charters bear the same date or different dates. This 
point is especially interesting from the historical view; this is not of spe-
cial important for us, but it is not without value either, because it is re-
lated in a certain way to the symbolic point of view: it is not for arbitrary 
reasons that these places were chosen as a center by organizations such 
as those in question. 
In any event, we are in complete agreement with Mr. Albert Bérnet, 
when he says that the “sensory point” must exist in all cathedrals which 
have been built according to the true rules of art, and when he states that, 
most importantly, it must be analyzed from the symbolic point of view. 
There is, in this regard, a curious connection to be made: Wronski af-
firmed that in every body there is such a point that, if it is taken away, 
the entire body is thereby broken up, volatilized in such a way that all of 
its molecules are dissipated; and he claimed to have found the means of 
determining the point of such a center of cohesion. Is that not, especially 
considering the symbolic as we believe must be done, the same as this 
“sensory point” of the cathedrals? 
The question, at its most general, is that of what can be labelled the 
‘vital knot.’ The defining point relating to this issue is the same expres-
sion as the famous ‘Gordian knot’ of antiquity; despite this, the modern 
Masons would be shocked if they were told that their sword can act, rit-
ually, in the same respect, as the role of Alexander.sion as the famous ‘Gordian knot’ of antiquity; despite this, the modern 
Masons would be shocked if they were told that their sword can act, rit-
ually, in the same respect, as the role of Alexander.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 
The Veil of Isis

Or we can reiterate, once again, that the effective solution of the issue 
in question is related to the ‘power of the keys’ (potestas ligandi et sol-
vendi), as it is extended in its Hermetic meaning, or, what corresponds to 
the second phase of the coagula, the solve of the Alchemists. It must not 
be forgotten that, as pointed out in the article in Regnabit to which Mr. 
Paul-Redonnel referred, Janus, being the god of initiation into the Mys-
teries for the Romans, was at the same time the patron of collegia fabro-
rum, the guilds of craftsmen and artisans that have continued through 
the Middle Ages, and even continued into modern times through the rite 
of compagnonnage. Few, no doubt, understand today any semblance of 
the profound symbolism of the ‘Lodge of Saint John.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Madame Chauvel de Chauvigny 
Madame Chauvel de Chauvigny, May 1927.

Last February 9, after a long period of painful illness borne with great 
courage, Marie Chauvel de Chauvigny died in Toulon, the place she had 
retired to in recent years. All those who knew her, and those who appre-
ciated the qualities in the depths of her heart and intelligence, will be 
painfully moved to hear of her demise. 
Under the name of ‘Esclarmonde,’ she had collaborated in the journal 
La Gnose, publishing some original works, including a brief exposition of 
the Gnostic doctrine; however, the greatest part of her writings remains 
to be published. 
We wish to thank, on behalf of all her friends, the members of the 
psychic group in Toulon who assisted her in her final moments, and 
those who were kind enough to take care of the pious burial.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Gift of Languages 
Le Don des langues, August 1927.ic group in Toulon who assisted her in her final moments, and 
those who were kind enough to take care of the pious burial.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Gift of Languages 
Le Don des langues, August 1927.

Among the gifts of the true Rosicrucians, or, to speak more precisely (be-
cause the word ‘gifts’ could give rise to incorrect interpretations), among 
their characteristic features, we often mention the ‘gift of languages;’ 
which has never been clearly explained what is meant. Of course, the 
literal meaning of such an expression can be justified in certain ways: 
indeed, the possession of certain keys of language can provide, in order 
to understand and speak a diverse array of languages, the means that are 
quite other than those understood ordinarily; and it is certain there exists 
what might be called a ‘sacred philology,’ which is entirely different from 
profane philology. Nevertheless, while accepting this initial interpreta-
tion, it is permissible to concede above all, a symbolic meaning, of a 
higher order, which is superimposed above the former while not contra-
dicting it in anyway, and which coincides with the initiatory principles 
common to all traditions, whether Oriental or Occidental. 
Originating at this point of view, it can be said that the one who truly 
possesses the ‘gift of languages’ is the one who speaks to each of his own 
languages, in the sense that he always expresses himself in a form ap-
propriate to the ways of man’s different languages: it is always the same 
thought, which, in and of itself, is independent of all expression; every 
time it is expressed in another language it becomes accessible to men 
who, without it, could never have known it; and this analogy is, moreo-
ver, strictly in accordance with the symbolism of the ‘gift of languages.’ 
The one who has reached this point is the one who has reached, 
through a direct and profound knowledge, the identical source of all tra-
ditional doctrines, who has found the truth that hides under the multi-
plicity and diversity of the external forms. The difference, indeed, is only 
in form and appearance; the essential substance is everywhere and al-
ways the same, because there is only a singular truth, and that, as the 
Initiate-Muslims still say, “the doctrine of Unity is unique;” but it takes a 
variety of forms to adapt to the mental conditions of this country, that 
country, of this era, of that era; and those who stop at the form see firstly 
the differences, while these differences dissipate for those who go be-
yond. Those who go beyond can then descend into form, but without 
being affected by it in anyway, without their profound knowledge beingrences, while these differences dissipate for those who go be-
yond. Those who go beyond can then descend into form, but without 
being affected by it in anyway, without their profound knowledge being

--- PAGE BREAK ---differences dissipate for those who go be-
yond. Those who go beyond can then descend into form, but without 
being affected by it in anyway, without their profound knowledge being

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
15 
modified in any manner; they can draw the logical conclusion of a prin-
ciple, and realize, preceding from above below, from the inside out (and 
it is in this true synthesis that is quite the opposite of a vulgar ‘syncre-
tism’), all the acclimations of the fundamental doctrine. In this manner, 
to use the same symbolism, they are no longer obliged to speak one par-
ticular language, they are capable of speaking all of them because they 
have realized the very principle of which all languages derive and adapt 
from. What we have designated as languages here are all the traditional 
forms, religious and otherwise, which are, in reality, only adaptations of 
the great primordial, universal Tradition, different trappings of the one 
truth. Those who have gone beyond all particular forms and have at-
tained universality, thus ‘knowing’ what others merely ‘believe,’ are nec-
essarily ‘Orthodox’ in the light of any formal tradition; and, at the same 
time, they are the only ones that can call themselves fully and effectively 
‘Catholic,’ in the strictly etymological sense of the word, while others 
can only be so virtually, by an aspiration that has not yet realized an 
object.  
Those who have gone beyond form are thereby freed from the limita-
tions inherent in the individual condition of ordinary humanity; that is 
why they can, as stated above, assume different individualities to suit all 
circumstances; these individualities, for them, really have no more im-
portance than clothes. They are, according to the Hindu tradition, supe-
rior when compared to ‘name’ and ‘form,’ which constitute the elements 
of individuality; the name is the expression of the individual essence it-
self, and one can understand this by what a change of name or title really 
means from the initiatic point of view. The same external formality is 
found to symbolize a change of state everywhere; and, even in the mo-
nastic orders, the raison d’être is in no way different from at the secular 
level, for here too the individuality must disappear to give way to a new 
being, and even when the symbolism does not exist it is still more fully 
understood in its deepest sense, despite still retaining a certain forceful-
ness. 
If one can understand these indications, one will understand at the 
same time why the true Rosicrucians could never form a ‘society’ in the 
modern and profane sense of the word: those who are beyond any form 
cannot shut oneself in the forms of an organization possessing written 
statues and regulations, definite meeting places, external signs of recog-
nition, all of which they do not necessitate. They can, no doubt, as can 
still be seen in the Orient, inspire visibly, and in a certain way invisibly, 
external organizations constituted temporarily for a particular and defi-
nite reason; but they themselves do not bind themselves to these organ-
izations, nor do they, except in quite exceptional cases, play an apparentns constituted temporarily for a particular and defi-
nite reason; but they themselves do not bind themselves to these organ-
izations, nor do they, except in quite exceptional cases, play an apparent

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16 
The Veil of Isis

role therein. What has been labelled as Rosicrucians in the West since 
the 14th century, and which has received other designations in other 
times and in other places (since the name here has only a purely symbolic 
meaning and must itself adapt to circumstances), is not an association 
whatsoever, it is the collectivity of Beings who have reached the same 
superior state that, when compared to inferior humanity, makes appar-
ent the degree of initiation, of which we have tried to indicate one of the 
essential aspects, and who thus possess the same internal character, 
which is sufficient enough for signs of recognition. This is why they have 
no meeting place other than the “Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is 
everywhere;” and this is also why they remain unknown to the laymen 
among whom they reside, precisely because their only distinctive marks 
are purely interior and can be perceived only by those who have attained 
the same spiritual development and marks, so that their influence is ex-
ercised by ways that are incomprehensible to the common man.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Compagnonnage and the Bohemians 
Le Compagnonnage et les Bohémeins, October 1928., so that their influence is ex-
ercised by ways that are incomprehensible to the common man.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Compagnonnage and the Bohemians 
Le Compagnonnage et les Bohémeins, October 1928.

In an article by Mr. G. Milcent, published in the journal Le Com-
pagnonnage in May 1926, and published again in the November 1927 is-
sue of Le Voile d’Isis, we noted the sentence: “What surprised me, and 
even caused some skepticism, was C. Bernet telling us that he presides at 
Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer, for the annual election of the King of the Bo-
hemians.” We have held the same opinion for a long time but did not 
wish to raise the question first; but now that is has been posed publicly, 
we have no reason not to comment and say a few words, especially since 
it may help to elucidate some points that are not without interest. 
Firstly, it is not a king whom the Bohemians elect, rather is it a queen, 
and furthermore this election is not repeated annually; what takes place 
annually is, with or without the election, the meeting of the Bohemians 
in the crypt of the church of Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer. Furthermore, it is 
quite possible that some who do not belong to the Bohemian race are 
admitted, by reason of their qualities or abilities, to attend this meeting 
and the rites fulfilled therein; but, as to “presiding over” it, it is quite 
another matter altogether, and the least we can say is that this is highly 
unlikely. As for the assertion in question first introduced in an interview 
published in L’Intransigeant long ago, we wish to simply believe that 
what it contains that is inaccurate should simply be blamed on the jour-
nalist, who, as often happens, will have exaggerated the matter in order 
to pique the curiosity of his audience, as ignorant as he is himself of the 
questions he is asking, and consequently unable to perceive his own er-
rors. So, we do not wish to insist on more than what is suited in regard 
to the claims; this is not the real interest of this case, but more of the 
general relations that may exist between the Bohemians and the Com-
pagnonic organizations. 
Mr. Milcent, in his article, continues to say that “the Bohemians prac-
tice the Jewish rite and that there may be links with the Foreign Stone-
cutters of the Duty of Liberty Compagnonnage.” The first part of this 
sentence seems to still contain an inaccuracy, or an equivocation at the 
least: it is true that the Queen of the Bohemians bears the name, or rather, 
the title of Sarah, which is also the given name of the Saint whom they 
recognize as their patroness and whose body resides in the crypt of thethe Queen of the Bohemians bears the name, or rather, 
the title of Sarah, which is also the given name of the Saint whom they 
recognize as their patroness and whose body resides in the crypt of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18 
The Veil of Isis, or rather, 
the title of Sarah, which is also the given name of the Saint whom they 
recognize as their patroness and whose body resides in the crypt of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18 
The Veil of Isis

Saintes-Maries; it is also true that this title, the feminine form of Sar, is 
Hebrew and means ‘princess;’ but is it enough for us to speak of a ‘Jewish 
rite?’ Judaism belongs to a people in which religion is closely bound up 
in race; but the Bohemians, whatever their origin actually is, have cer-
tainly nothing in common with the Jewish race; but, in spite of that, 
would there not also be reports of certain affinities of a more mysterious 
order? 
When one speaks of Bohemians, it is indispensable to make a distinc-
tion that is forgotten too often: there are in fact two kings of Bohemians 
who seem quite foreign to each other and treat each other as enemies; 
they do not have the same ethnic character, do not speak the same lan-
guage, and they do not perform the same professions. There are the East-
ern Bohemians, or the Zingaris, who are chiefly showmen and boiler-
smiths; and there are Southern Bohemians or Gitans who are called ‘Car-
aques’ in Languedoc and Provence, these are almost exclusively horse 
traders; it is this latter group alone who assemble in the Saintes-Maries. 
In a very curious study on The Bohemians of the Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer, 
the Marquis of Baroncelli-Javon indicates many traits that are in com-
mon between the Bohemians and the redskins of America, he also does 
not hesitate, because of these comparisons and also by their own inter-
pretations of their traditions, to attribute an Atlantean origin to them; 
this is only a hypothesis, but in any case it is worth mentioning. But here 
is something else that is unique and extraordinary that has not been seen 
anywhere: as there are two kinds of Bohemians, there are also two kinds 
of Jews, Ashkenazim and Sephardim, for which one can make analogous 
comparisons with regards to the differences in physical features, lan-
guage, aptitude, and which, too, do not always maintain the best rela-
tions, each willingly pretending to represent pure Judaism, whether in 
respect to race or that of tradition. There is even a striking similarity in 
regard to language: neither the Jews nor the Bohemians have, to tell the 
truth, a complete language which belongs to them in their own right, at 
least for the current usage; they use the languages of the regions they 
live in, through mingling certain words which have some significance for 
them, Hebrew for the Jews, and, for the Bohemians, words also coming 
from an ancestral language of which the last remnants remain in these 
words; this peculiarity can be explained by both being forced to live scat-
tered among strangers. What is more difficult to explain is that it turns 
out that the regions travelled by both the Eastern and Southern Bohemi-
ans correspond precisely to the same as those inhabited respectively by 
the Ashkenazim and the Sephardim; would this view perhaps be as “sim-
plistic” as being only a pure coincidence?uthern Bohemi-
ans correspond precisely to the same as those inhabited respectively by 
the Ashkenazim and the Sephardim; would this view perhaps be as “sim-
plistic” as being only a pure coincidence?

--- PAGE BREAK ---orrespond precisely to the same as those inhabited respectively by 
the Ashkenazim and the Sephardim; would this view perhaps be as “sim-
plistic” as being only a pure coincidence?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
19 
These notes lead us to think that, if there are no ethnic relations be-
tween the Bohemians and the Jews, there may be other relationships that 
we can qualitate traditionally. Now this brings us back to the subject of 
the article, of which we have departed only in appearance, the Com-
pagnonic organizations, of which the question of ethnicity does not arise, 
could they not, too, have relationships of the same order, either with the 
Jews, with the Bohemians, or with each other? For the moment, at least, 
we do not intend to explain this origin and the reason for these relation-
ships, but rather we will be content with calling attention to a few more 
specific details. Are the Compangnonnage not divided into several rival 
rites, and have they not often found themselves embroiled in more or less 
open hostility? Do they not have different programs according to differ-
ing rites, and with different points of attachment? Do they not, in a way, 
have a special language, the substance of which is formed by ordinary 
language, but is distinguished from the ordinary by the introduction of 
particular terms, just as in the case of the Jews and the Bohemians? Do 
we not use the term ‘jargon’ to designate the ordinary language used in 
some secret societies, but particularly in regard to the Companionships, 
and do not the Jews sometimes also give the same name to the language 
they speak? Furthermore, in some countries, are Bohemians not known 
as ‘passers,’ through which they are confused with peddlers, and who is, 
as we know also a designation that applies to some Compagnons? Fi-
nally, would not the legend of the ‘wandering Jew,’ like many others, be 
of a compagnonic origin? 
We could no doubt multiply the amount of these questions, but we 
believe that this is sufficient, and that research directed in this direction 
could enlighten certain enigmas. Perhaps we will return to this question, 
if necessary, and give some additional characteristics; but are the Com-
pagnons of today really all that interested in all that relates to their tra-
ditions?erhaps we will return to this question, 
if necessary, and give some additional characteristics; but are the Com-
pagnons of today really all that interested in all that relates to their tra-
ditions?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Secret Language of Dante and the 
‘Fedeli d’Amore’ 
Le Langage secret de Dante et des « Fidèles d’Amor »,  
February 1929.nterested in all that relates to their tra-
ditions?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Secret Language of Dante and the 
‘Fedeli d’Amore’ 
Le Langage secret de Dante et des « Fidèles d’Amor »,  
February 1929.

Under the title Il linguaggio segreto di Dante a dei fidele d’amore,6 Luigi 
Valli, to whom we are already indebted for several studies on the signif-
icance of Dante’s writings, has published a new work that is too im-
portant for us to pass by with no more than a mere bibliographical note. 
Its thesis may be briefly summarized as follows: the various ‘ladies’ cel-
ebrated by the poets attached to the mysterious organization of the Fedeli 
d’Amore, from Dante, Guido Cavalcanti, and their contemporaries, to 
Boccaccio and Petrarch, are not women who actually lived on this earth 
but are all, under different names, one and the same symbolic ‘Lady,’ who 
represents transcendent Intelligence (the Madonna Intelligenza of Dino 
Compagni) or divine Wisdom. In support of this thesis the author brings 
forward formidable documentation and a collection of arguments that 
must impress even the most skeptical; in particular he shows that those 
verses that seem most unintelligible from the literal point of view become 
perfectly clear with the hypothesis of a ‘jargon’ or unconventional lan-
guage the principal terms of which he claims to have interpreted; and he 
recalls other cases, notably that of the Persian Sufis, where a similar 
meaning has been concealed in this fashion under the guise of simple 
love poetry. It would not be feasible to summarize his whole argument, 
which is based on exact textual citations that support his views, and so 
we can only refer anyone interested in the subject to the book itself. 
In truth, what is involved has always seemed to us an obvious and 
incontestable fact, though one nevertheless needing to be firmly estab-
lished. Indeed, Valli foresees that his conclusions will be challenged by 
several kinds of adversary: firstly, the so-called ‘positivist’ criticism 
(which he is wrong to qualify as ‘traditional’ since it is, on the contrary, 
opposed to the traditional spirit, to which all initiatic interpretation is 
linked); secondly, the party spirit, whether Catholic or anti-Catholic,ify as ‘traditional’ since it is, on the contrary, 
opposed to the traditional spirit, to which all initiatic interpretation is 
linked); secondly, the party spirit, whether Catholic or anti-Catholic,

6 Roma: Bibliotecha di filosofia e Scienza, Casa éditrice ‘Optima’, 1928.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
21 
which will find no satisfaction at all in what he writes; and finally, ‘aes-
thetic’ criticism and ‘romantic rhetoric,’ which are fundamentally noth-
ing other than what one might call the ‘literary’ spirit.

We have here a 
group of prejudices that will always and inevitably stand opposed to the 
search for the profound meaning of certain works, though in the pres-
ence of such works those of good faith and open mind will readily see 
which side the truth is on.

For our part, the only objections we have to 
make concern certain interpretations that in no way affect the general 
thesis; moreover, the author has made no claim to provide a definitive 
solution to all the questions he raises and is the first to acknowledge that 
his work will require correction or amendment in many points of detail.

Valli’s principal shortcoming, whence stem most of the insufficiencies 
observed in his work, is – let us say it plainly – that he lacks the ‘initiatic’ 
mentality required to treat such a subject in depth.

His point of view is 
too exclusively that of a historian: it is not enough to ‘investigate history’ 
in order to solve certain problems; and, moreover, we are entitled to won-
der whether this does not really amount to interpreting medieval ideas 
with the modern mentality, a reproach the author quite rightly levels at 
the official critics.

Did the men of the Middle Ages ever ‘investigate his-
tory for its own sake?’ The above matter requires a more profound kind 
of understanding, and if one brings to them only a ‘profane’ spirit and 
intention, one can only accumulate materials reflecting an altogether dif-
ferent spirit; and we do not see that there could be much interest in his-
torical research if some doctrinal truth does not result from it.

It is truly regrettable that the author lacks certain traditional data and 
a direct and so to speak ‘technical’ knowledge of his subject-matter.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Did the men of the Middle Ages ever ‘investigate his-
tory for its own sake?’ The above matter requires a more profound kind 
of understanding, and if one brings to them only a ‘profane’ spirit and 
intention, one can only accumulate materials reflecting an altogether dif-
ferent spirit; and we do not see that there could be much interest in his-
torical research if some doctrinal truth does not result from it. It is truly regrettable that the author lacks certain traditional data and 
a direct and so to speak ‘technical’ knowledge of his subject-matter. This 
prevented him from recognizing the properly initiatic import of our 
study The Esoterism of Dante and explains why he did not understood 
how little it matters, from our point of view, whether such ‘discoveries’ 
be attributed to Rossetti, Aroux, or to anyone else, for we cite them only 
as ‘supports’ for considerations of quite another order: we are concerned 
with initiatic doctrine, not literary history. As regards Rosetti, we find 
rather strange the assertion that he was ‘Rosicrucian’ since the true 
brothers of the Rose-Cross (who were, by the way, not of ‘Gnostic de-
scent’) had disappeared from the Western world well before his time; and 
even if he were attached to some sort of pseudo-Rosicrucian organiza-
tion, of which there were so many, such an organization would certainly 
not have had any authentic tradition to impart to him. Moreover, Ro-
setti’s initial idea of reading a purely political meaning into everything 
quite clearly contradicts such a hypothesis. Valli has only a very super-
ficial and altogether ‘simplistic’ idea of Rosicrucianism, and he does not 
seem to have any inkling of the symbolism of the cross any more than

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22 
The Veil of Isisa very super-
ficial and altogether ‘simplistic’ idea of Rosicrucianism, and he does not 
seem to have any inkling of the symbolism of the cross any more than

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22 
The Veil of Isis

he seems to have understood the traditional significance of the heart, 
which refers to the intellect and not to feelings. Let us say on this last 
point that the cuore gentile of the ‘Fedèles d’Amour’ is the heart purified, 
that is, devoid of all that concerns worldly objects, and by this very fact 
made ready to receive interior illumination. It is remarkable that an iden-
tical doctrine is found in Taoism. 
Let us move on to some other points raised in the course of our read-
ing, for there are some rather unfortunate references that detract from 
this otherwise serious work. Thus, one might easily have found better 
authorities to cite on Gnosticism than G. R. S. Mead, on number symbol-
ism than Marc Saunier, and above all on Masonry than Léo Taxil! More-
over, Valli cites the last mentioned on a most elementary point, the sym-
bolic ages of the different grades, something that can be found anywhere. 
In the same place, following Rossetti, the author also cites the Recueil 
precieux de la Maçonnerie Adonhiramite; but the reference is made in an 
altogether unintelligible fashion which clearly demonstrates that he him-
self has no personal knowledge of the book in question. We have, besides, 
grave reservations concerning everything Valli says of Masonry, which 
he qualifies bizarrely as ‘ultra-modern;’ an organization may have ‘lost 
the spirit’ (or what is called in Arabic the barakah) through the intrusion 
of politics or otherwise, yet keep its symbolism intact even while no 
longer understanding it; but Valli himself seems not to have a very good 
grasp of the true role of symbolism nor a very clear sense of traditional 
filiation. When he speaks of the different ‘currents’ he confuses eso-
terism and exoterism and takes as sources of inspiration for the Fedeli 
d’Amore what only represent prior incursions into the profane world of 
an initiatic tradition from which these Fedeli d’Amore themselves pre-
ceded directly. Influences descend from the initiatic sphere into the pro-
fane world, but the inverse is not possible, for a river never returns to its 
source; that source is the ‘foundation of teaching’ so often in evidence in 
the poems studied here, and generally described as situated at the foot of 
a tree that is obviously none other than the ‘Tree of Life.’7 The symbolism 
of the ‘Terrestrial Paradise’ and of the ‘Celestial Jerusalem’ must find its 
application here. 
There are also some no less regrettable linguistic inaccuracies: thus 
the author qualifies as ‘human’ things that are on the contrary ‘supra-
human,’ as, moreover, is the case for anything of a truly traditional and 
initiatic order. Similarly, he commits the error of calling initiates of any‘human’ things that are on the contrary ‘supra-
human,’ as, moreover, is the case for anything of a truly traditional and 
initiatic order. Similarly, he commits the error of calling initiates of any

7 This tree, among the Fedeli d’Amore, is generally a pine, a beech, or a laurel; 
the ‘Tree of Life’ is often represented by evergreens.

--- PAGE BREAK ---its the error of calling initiates of any

7 This tree, among the Fedeli d’Amore, is generally a pine, a beech, or a laurel; 
the ‘Tree of Life’ is often represented by evergreens.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
23 
grade whatever ‘adepts,’8 whereas that term must be strictly reserved for 
the supreme degree. The misuse of this word is particular noteworthy 
because it constitutes, so to speak, a ‘hallmark:’ there are a certain num-
ber of mistakes that the ‘profane’ rarely fail to commit, and this is one of 
them. We should also call attention to the constant use of words such as 
‘sect’ and ‘sectarian’ to designate organizations that are initiatic and not 
religious, an entirely improper and most displeasing usage,9 which brings 
us directly to the gravest shortcoming we must point out in Valli’s work. 
This failing is Valli’s continual confusion of the ‘initiatic’ and the 
‘mystical’ points of view, and his assimilation of the matters in question 
into a ‘religious’ doctrine, whereas esoterism, even if it bases itself on 
religious forms (as is the case with the Sufis and the Fedeli d’Amore), 
really belongs to an entirely different order. A truly initiatic tradition 
cannot be ‘heterodox;’ to qualify it as such is to reverse the normal and 
hierarchical relationship between the interior and the exterior. Esoterism 
is not contrary to ‘orthodoxy,’ even orthodoxy construed simply in the 
religious sense; it is above or beyond the religious point of view, which 
is obviously not at all the same thing; and in fact the unjustified accusa-
tion of heresy was often nothing more than a convenient ruse for getting 
rid of people who might be problematic for altogether different reasons. 
Rossetti and Aroux were not wrong in thinking that in Dante’s works 
theological expressions must be interpreted ‘inversely;’ esoterism is not 
superimposed on exoterism, but neither is it opposed to it, for it is not on 
the same plane and gives to the same truths a deeper meaning by trans-
posing them to a higher order. It is of course true that Amor is the inverse 
of Roma,10 but we must not conclude from that, as some have wished to 
do, that it signifies the antithesis of Roma, but rather that Roma is only 
its reflection or visible image, necessarily inverted as is the image of annot conclude from that, as some have wished to 
do, that it signifies the antithesis of Roma, but rather that Roma is only 
its reflection or visible image, necessarily inverted as is the image of an

8 The Fedeli d’Amore were divided into seven degrees; these are the seven rungs 
of the initiatic ladder, corresponding to the seven planetary heavens and the 
seven liberal arts. The expressions ‘terzo cielo’ (heaven of Venus), ‘terzo loco’ 
(to be compared with the Masonic term ‘third apartment’), and ‘terzo grado’ 
indicate the third degree of the hierarchy in which the salute (or ‘salute’) was 
received, this rite taking place, it seems, at the feast of All Saints, as did others 
at Easter, around which the action of The Divine Comedy is centered. 
9 This is not at all the same thing, whatever some may think, as ‘jargon’ (gergo), 
which, as we have pointed out (Voile d’Isis, Oct. 1926, p652), was a technical term 
before passing into popular usage, where it took on a pejorative sense. Let us 
point out here also that we always take the word ‘profane’ in its technical sense, 
which of course implies nothing insulting. 
10 It is curious that if one writes this simple phrase, ‘In Italia è Roma’ [In Italy 
and Rome], and then reads it backward, it becomes ‘Amore ai Latini’ [Love to 
the Latins]: ‘chance’ is sometimes surprisingly ingenious!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24 
The Veil of Isisia è Roma’ [In Italy 
and Rome], and then reads it backward, it becomes ‘Amore ai Latini’ [Love to 
the Latins]: ‘chance’ is sometimes surprisingly ingenious!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24 
The Veil of Isis

object in the mirror – which gives us occasion to recall the per speculum 
in aenigmate of Saint Paul. Regarding Rossetti and Aroux and some res-
ervations we have about certain of their interpretations, we will add that 
one cannot say a method is ‘unacceptable because unverifiable’ without 
running the risk of falling into the prejudices of ‘positivist’ criticism, 
which would entail rejecting everything obtained by direct knowledge, 
especially and in particular all knowledge obtained through the regular 
transmission of a traditional teaching, which is in effect unverifiable… 
for the profane!11 
It is the more astonishing that Valli confuses esoterism with ‘hetero-
doxy’ in view of the fact that he has at least understood, far better than 
his predecessors, that the doctrine of the Fedeli d’Amore was in no way 
‘anti-Catholic’ (even being, like that of the Rosicrucians, rigorously 
‘catholic’ in the true sense of the word) and that it had nothing in com-
mon with the profane currents from which the Reformation was to come. 
Where then did he get the idea that the Church had revealed the deeper 
meaning of its ‘mysteries’ to the general populace? On the contrary, so 
little of this is taught by the Church that one comes to doubt, with good 
reason, whether she herself has retained any knowledge of it; and it is 
precisely in this ‘loss of spirit’ that the ‘corruption’ already denounced 
by Dante and his associates consisted,12 although the most elementary 
prudence dictated that when speaking of this ‘corruption’ they do not do 
so clearly. But one should not conclude from this that the use of a sym-
bolic terminology has no other raison d’être than the desire to conceal 
the true meaning of a doctrine; there are things that by their very nature 
cannot be expressed otherwise than in this form, and this side of the 
question, which is by far the most important, scarcely seems to have been 
recognized by the author. And there is yet a third aspect, intermediate so 
to speak, where prudence is indeed involved, but in the interest of the 
doctrine itself and no longer of its exponents. This aspect is more partic-
ularly related to the symbol of wine used by the Sufis, whose teaching, 
let us add in passing, cannot be qualified as ‘pantheistic’ except by a typ-nger of its exponents. This aspect is more partic-
ularly related to the symbol of wine used by the Sufis, whose teaching, 
let us add in passing, cannot be qualified as ‘pantheistic’ except by a typ-

11 It must be admitted that it is difficult to avoid the influence of the spirit of the 
times; thus, the qualification of certain Biblical books as ‘pseudo-solomonic’ and 
‘mystico-platonic’ seems to us an annoying concession to modern exegesis, that 
is to say to the same ‘positivist criticism’ against which the author justifiably 
takes his stand. 
12 The head of Medusa, which turns men to ‘stone’ (a word that plays a very 
important part in the language of the Fedeli d’Amore), represents the corruption 
of Wisdom; her hair (according to the Sufis symbolic of the divine mysteries) 
turns into serpents, naturally taken in the pejorative sense, for in its other sense 
the serpent is also a symbol of Wisdom itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---to the Sufis symbolic of the divine mysteries) 
turns into serpents, naturally taken in the pejorative sense, for in its other sense 
the serpent is also a symbol of Wisdom itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
25 
ical Western error. The allusions he makes to this symbol in no way es-
tablishes that ‘wine’ signifies ‘mystery,’ a secret or restricted doctrine, 
simply because yayin and sôd are equivalent numerically in Hebrew, or 
because in Islamic esoterism wine is the ‘drink of the elite,’ which the 
common man may not use with impunity.13 
But let us move on to the confusion of the ‘mystical’ with the ‘initi-
atic’ point of view, a confusion that is connected to the preceding one 
because it is the false assimilation of esoteric doctrines to mysticism 
(which the latter pertains to the religious domain) that leads to situating 
them on the same plane as exoterism and insisting on opposing them to 
it. We see very well what it is in the present case that could have pro-
voked this error: a ‘chivalric’ traditional always requires the preponder-
ance of a principle represented as feminine (Madonna)14 as well as the 
intervention of an affective element (Amore) in order to adapt to the na-
ture of the men to whom it is particularly addressed. The linking of such 
a traditional form with that represented by the Persian Sufis is altogether 
sound, but it should be added that these two are far from being the only 
cases where one encounters the cult of the ‘donna-Divinità,’ that is to 
say the feminine aspect of the Divinity: we also find it in India, where 
that aspect is designated as the Shakti, equivalent in certain respects to 
the Hebraic Shekinah; and it should be noted that the cult of the Shakti 
concerns above all the Kshatriyas. A ‘chivalric’ tradition is precisely 
nothing other than a traditional form appropriate to the Kshatriyas, and 
that is why it cannot constitute a path that is purely intellectual as is that 
of the Brahmins; the latter is the ‘dry way’ of the alchemists, whereas the 
former is the ‘moist way,’15 water symbolizing the feminine as fire does 
the masculine, the first corresponding to the emotivity and the second to 
the intellectuality that predominate respectively in the natures of theway,’15 water symbolizing the feminine as fire does 
the masculine, the first corresponding to the emotivity and the second to 
the intellectuality that predominate respectively in the natures of the

13 The proverbial expression ‘to drink like a Templar,’ generally taken in the 
most crudely literal sense, doubtless has this as its real origin since the ‘wine’ 
that the Templars drank was the same as that drunk by the Jewish Kabbalists 
and the Islamic Sufis. Similarly, the other expression, ‘to swear like a Templar,’ 
is only an allusion to the initiatic vow, robbed of its proper significance by pro-
fane incomprehension and malice. 
14 The ‘active Intellect,’ represented by Madonna, is the ‘celestial ray’ that con-
stitutes the link between God and man, and that leads man to God: it is the 
Hindu Buddhi. Nevertheless, one should beware of taking ‘Wisdom’ and ‘Intel-
ligence’ as strictly identical, for there are two complementary aspects to be dis-
tinguished here (Hokma and Binah in the Kabbalah). 
15 In another sense, and according to another correlation, these two ways might 
also be, respectively, that of initiates in general and that of mystics; but the latter 
way is ‘irregular’ and need not be envisaged by anyone holding strictly to the 
traditional norm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26 
The Veil of Isisof initiates in general and that of mystics; but the latter 
way is ‘irregular’ and need not be envisaged by anyone holding strictly to the 
traditional norm.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26 
The Veil of Isis

Kshatriyas and the Brahmins. This is why such a tradition may seem 
mystical from the outside even when it is really initiatic, so much so that 
one could even think that mysticism in the ordinary sense of the word is 
a sort of vestige of it, a ‘survival’ in a civilization such as that of the West, 
after every regular traditional organization has disappeared. 
The role of the feminine principle in certain traditional forms is no-
ticeable even in Catholic exoterism in the importance attributed to the 
cult of the Virgin. Valli seems astonished to find the Rosa Mystica figur-
ing in the litanies of the Virgin, but there are in these same litanies many 
other properly initiatic symbols, and what he does not seem to suspect is 
that their application is perfectly justified through the association of the 
Virgin with Wisdom and with the Shekinah.16 Apropos of this let us also 
note that Saint Bernard, whose connection with the Templars is well 
known, appears as a ‘knight of the Virgin;’ and he calls the Virgin ‘his 
Lady,’ the origin of the expression ‘Our Lady’ [Notre Dame] even having 
been attributed to him. She is also Madonna, and in one of her aspects is 
identified with Wisdom, hence the same Madonna of the Fedeli d’Amore, 
this being yet another correspondence Valli does not suspect, any more 
than he seems to suspect the reason why the month of May is conse-
crated to the Virgin. 
One thing out to have led Valli to see that the doctrines in question 
were not ‘mysticism’ at all: he himself acknowledges the almost exclu-
sive importance these doctrines attach to ‘knowledge,’ something totally 
foreign to the mystical point of view. He is mistaken, moreover, about 
the consequences to be drawn therefrom, for this emphasis is not a char-
acteristic peculiar to ‘gnosticism,’ but a general feature of all initiatic 
teaching, whatever form it may have taken; knowledge is always the sole 
aim, and all the rest but different means of attaining it. One must take 
care not to confuse ‘gnosis,’ which signifies ‘knowledge,’ with ‘gnosti-
cism,’ although the latter obviously takes its name from the former; be-
sides, the term ‘gnosticism’ is rather vague and seems in fact to have been 
applied indiscriminately to very different things.17sm,’ although the latter obviously takes its name from the former; be-
sides, the term ‘gnosticism’ is rather vague and seems in fact to have been 
applied indiscriminately to very different things.17

16 It should be noted that in certain cases the same symbols even represent sim-
ultaneously the Virgin and Christ. This is indeed an enigma worthy of being 
posed to the sagacity of our modern researchers, and its solution would result 
from a consideration of the links of the Shekinah with Metatron. 
17 Valli says that the ‘critics’ show little appreciation for the traditional theses of 
contemporary ‘gnostics;’ for once such ‘critics’ are in the right because these 
‘neo-gnostics’ have never received anything through any transmission whatso-
ever, and all that is involved is an attempt at a ‘reconstitution’ from documents, 
very fragmentary ones, that lie within reach of one and all. On this point one 
can believe the testimony of someone who has had occasion to observe these 
things closely enough to know the real story.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, that lie within reach of one and all. On this point one 
can believe the testimony of someone who has had occasion to observe these 
things closely enough to know the real story.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
27 
One must not allow oneself to be hindered by external forms, what-
ever they may be. The ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ were well able to go beyond these 
forms, as is attested by the fact that in one of the first tales of Boccaccio’s 
Decameron, Melchizedek affirms that, was between Judaism, Christian-
ity, and Islam, ‘no one knows which is the true faith.’ Valli was right to 
interpret this affirmation in the sense that ‘the true faith lies hidden un-
der the external aspects of the various beliefs,’ but what is most remark-
able here – and this he did not see – is that these words are put into the 
mouth of Melchizedek, who is precisely the representation of the single 
tradition concealed under all these outer forms, clearly indicated that cer-
tain individuals in the West at that time had retained a knowledge of the 
true ‘Center of the World.’ However that may be, an ‘affective’ language, 
such as that of the Fedeli d’Amore, is also an outer form by which one 
must not be fooled, for it may very well conceal something far more pro-
found; and the word amour in particular may, by virtue of an analogical 
transposition, signify something altogether different from the sentiment 
it ordinarily denotes. This deeper meaning of ‘love’ in connection with 
the doctrines of the Orders of Chivalry becomes clear enough if one con-
siders the following together: firstly, Saint John’s phrase, ‘God is Love;’ 
then the battle-cry of the Templars, ‘Vive Dieu, Saint Amour;’ and finally 
the last verse of The Divine Comedy, ‘L’amor che muove il Sole e l’altre 
stelle.’18 Another interesting point in this regard is the relationship es-
tablished between ‘love’ and ‘death’ in the symbolism of the Fedeli 
d’Amore, a twofold relationship, as the word death itself has a double 
meaning. One the one hand, there is a parallel and a sort of association 
of love with death, where the latter must be understood as ‘initiatic 
death;’ and this parallel seems to have endured in the current that, at the 
close of the Middle Ages, gave rise to the depictions of the ‘dance of 
death;’ on the other hand, there is also a point of view that establishes an 
antithesis between love and death, an antithesis that can be explained in 
part by the very formation of the words amour and mort: the root mor is 
common to both, and, in a-mor, is preceded by a very privative ‘a,’ as in 
the Sanskrit a-mara, a-mrita, so that ‘amour’ could be interpreted as a 
sort of hieroglyphic equivalent for ‘immortality.’ The ‘dead’ can in this 
sense be regarded, in a general way, as designating the profane, whereas 
the ’living,’ or those who have attained immortality, are the initiates; and 
here we should recall the expression ‘Land of the Living,’ synonymous 
with ‘Holy Land’ or ‘Land of the Saints,’ ‘Pure Land,’ and so forth; ande who have attained immortality, are the initiates; and 
here we should recall the expression ‘Land of the Living,’ synonymous 
with ‘Holy Land’ or ‘Land of the Saints,’ ‘Pure Land,’ and so forth; and

18 Concerning the Orders of Chivalry, let us say that the ‘Johannine Church’ 
denotes the totality of all those who were related in any such way to what was 
called in the Middle Ages the ‘Kingdom of Prester John,’ to which we have al-
luded in our study The King of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28 
The Veil of Isise related in any such way to what was 
called in the Middle Ages the ‘Kingdom of Prester John,’ to which we have al-
luded in our study The King of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28 
The Veil of Isis

the opposition that we have just indicated is, in this context, equivalent 
to the opposition of hell, which is the profane world, to the heavens, 
which represents the degrees of the initiatic hierarchy. 
As for the ‘true faith’ of which we spoke awhile ago, it is designated 
as the Fede Santa, an expression which, like the word Amore, applies at 
the same time to the initiatic organization itself. This Fede Santa, of which 
Dante was a Kadosch, is the faith of the Fedeli d’Amore; and it is also the 
Fede dei Santi – that is, the Emounah of the Kadosch, as we explained in 
The Esoterism of Dante. This designation of the initiates as ‘Saints,’ of 
which Kadosch is the Hebrew equivalent, is perfectly understandable if 
one considers the meaning of the ‘heavens’ just now indicated, since the 
heavens are in fact described as the abode of the saints. This must be seen 
in the context of many other analogous denomination, such as ‘Pure 
Ones,’ ‘Perfect Ones,’ Cathars, Sufis, Ikhwān aṣ-Ṣafāʾ, and so forth, which 
are all taken in the same sense, permitting us thereby to understand what 
the ‘Holy Land’ truly is.19 
This raises another point to which Valli alludes all too briefly: the 
secret significance of pilgrimage, which is related to the peregrinations 
of initiates whose itineraries in fact coincided most frequently with those 
of ordinary pilgrims, with whom they were thus easily confused, thus 
permitting them the better to conceal the true reasons for their journeys. 
Moreover, the very locations of pilgrimage sites such as the sanctuaries 
of antiquity have an esoteric value that should be taken into considera-
tion here, and this is something directly related to what we have called 
‘sacred geography’20 and which must also be considered together with 
what we have written on the subject of the Compagnons and the Bohe-
mians, a subject to which we shall perhaps return on another occasion. 
The question of the ‘Holy Land’ could also provide the key to the re-
lationship of Dante and the Fedeli d’Amore to the Templars, again a sub-
ject that receives very incomplete treatment in Valli’s book. Valli does 
not consider these relationships with the Templars, as well as with the 
Alchemists, to be an undeniable fact, and he points out some interesting 
correspondences, as, for example, that of the Templars’ nine-year proba-
tion with the symbolic age of nine years in the Vita Nuova – but there 
could have been many other things to choose. Thus, apropos of the Tem-
plars’ center on Cyprus, it would be interesting to examine the meaning 
of that island’s name, its connection with Venus and the ‘third heaven,’many other things to choose. Thus, apropos of the Tem-
plars’ center on Cyprus, it would be interesting to examine the meaning 
of that island’s name, its connection with Venus and the ‘third heaven,’

19 It is perhaps not without interest to note further that the initials F.S. can also 
be read as Fides Sapientia, an exact translation of the Pistis Sophia of the gnostics. 
20 On this subject Grillot de Givry has provided a study entitled ‘Les Foyers du 
mysticism populaire’ in Voile d’Isis, April 1920.

--- PAGE BREAK ---anslation of the Pistis Sophia of the gnostics. 
20 On this subject Grillot de Givry has provided a study entitled ‘Les Foyers du 
mysticism populaire’ in Voile d’Isis, April 1920.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
29 
and the symbolism of copper, from which it took its name, all subjects 
that we can only point to at the moment, without dwelling on them. 
Similarly, regarding the obligation imposed on the Fedeli d’Amore to 
employ the poetic form in their writings, there would be good reason to 
ask why poetry was called the ‘language of the gods’ by the ancients; 
why vates in Latin signified both the poet and the soothsayer or prophet 
(oracles, moreover, being rendered in verse); why verses were called car-
mina (charms, incantations, a word identical with the Sanskrit karma, 
understood in its technical sense of ‘ritual act’);21 and also why it is said 
of Solomon and other sages, particularly in the Islamic tradition, that 
they understood the ‘language of the birds,’ which, strange as it may 
seem, is only another name for the ‘language of the gods.’22 
Before concluding these remarks, we must still say a few words on 
the interpretation of The Divine Comedy that Valli has developed in other 
works and which he simply summarizes in the work we are now consid-
ering. The symmetries of the cross and of the eagle, on which the poem 
is based entirely, certainly explain a part of its meaning (in conformity, 
moreover, with the conclusion of De Monarchia); but there are in this 
poem many other things that cannot be completely explained in this way 
even if we limit ourselves to the use made of symbolic numbers, the au-
thor wrongly believing that he has found some single key sufficient to 
resolve all difficulties. Furthermore, he seems to regard these ‘structural 
connections’ as devices peculiar to Dante, whereas, on the contrary, 
there is something essentially traditional in this symbolic ‘architecture,’ 
which, although it did not perhaps play a part in the modes of expression 
customary among the Fedeli d’Amore properly speaking, nonetheless ex-
isted in organizations more or less closely allied to their own, and was 
closely bound to the very art of the builders.23 There seems to be an in-
tuition of these relationships, however, when he states that ‘a study of 
symbolism in the figurative arts’ could further the research in question. 
Moreover, here, as everywhere, one could discover many other points of 
comparison, sometimes quite unexpected ones, once all ‘aesthetic’ pre-
occupations were laid aside.24the research in question. 
Moreover, here, as everywhere, one could discover many other points of 
comparison, sometimes quite unexpected ones, once all ‘aesthetic’ pre-
occupations were laid aside.24

21 Rita in Sanskrit signifies what is in conformity with order, a meaning that the 
adverb rite has retained in Latin; the cosmic order is here represented by the law 
of rhythm. 
22 The same thing is also found in the Germanic legends. 
23 We recall the Masonic expression ‘fragment of architecture,’ which applies in 
the truest sense to the work of Dante. 
24 We are thinking especially of certain of the ideas contained in Pierre Piobb’s 
curious book Le Secret de Nostradamus, Paris, 1927.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30 
The Veil of Isis

If we have dwelt at such length on Valli’s book it is because it is one 
that truly deserves our attention, and if we have especially pointed out 
its omissions, it is because in this way we are able to indicate for him and 
for others new paths for research that may successfully complement the 
results already achieved. It seems that the time has come when the true 
significance of Dante’s work may at last be uncovered; if the interpreta-
tions of Rossetti and Aroux were not taken seriously in their own times, 
it is perhaps not because minds were much less prepared to receive them 
then they are today, but rather because it was foreseen that the secret 
must be kept for six centuries (the Chaldean Naros). Luigi Valli often 
speaks of these six centuries during which Dante was not understood, 
but evidently without seeing any particular meaning in that fact; and this 
again demonstrates the need, in studies of this kind, for a knowledge of 
‘cyclical laws,’ something the modern West has so completely forgotten.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ar meaning in that fact; and this 
again demonstrates the need, in studies of this kind, for a knowledge of 
‘cyclical laws,’ something the modern West has so completely forgotten.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Thunderstones 
Les Pierres de Foudre, May 1929. 
In his article devoted to the Tarot in the special issue of Voile d’Isis, Mr. 
Auriger, referencing the sixteenth Arcanum, wrote this sentence: “It 
seems that there exists a relationship between the hails of stone that sur-
round the Lightning Tower and the word beith-el, the House of God, of 
which the Semites designated as the aeroliths of lightning stones.” This 
link is suggested by the name of ‘House of God’ given to the Arcana in 
question which is indeed the literal translation of the Hebrew beith-el; 
but it seems to us that there exists some confusion between several dif-
fering things, and that a clarification of the issue may be of some interest. 
Firstly, it is undoubted that the symbolic role of aeroliths or stones 
falling from the heavens is very important, because these are the same 
‘black stones’ that are mentioned in so many different traditions, from 
the figure of Cybele, or the ‘Great Goddess,’ to the black stone enshrined 
in the Kaʿabah in Mecca, which is also related to the story of Abraham. 
In Rome as well, there was the lapis niger, not to mention the sacred 
shields of the Salians that were said to have been carved from a meteorite 
in the time of Numa.25 These ‘black stones’ can certainly be classified in 
the category of ‘baetylus,’ which is to say stones considered as ‘dwellings 
of the divine,’ or, in other words, as supports of certain ‘spiritual influ-
ences;’ but did all the baetylus have this origin? We do not think, and, in 
particular, we have seen no evidence that this may have been with the 
case with the rock which Jacob, according to the account of Genesis, gave 
the name of Beith-el, a name applied to the very place he had rested his 
head on while having his vision.ave been with the 
case with the rock which Jacob, according to the account of Genesis, gave 
the name of Beith-el, a name applied to the very place he had rested his 
head on while having his vision.

25 Mr. Ossendowski reported the story of a ‘black stone,’ once sent by the ‘King 
of the World’ to the Dalai-Lama, then transported to Ourga in Mongolia, where 
it disappeared one hundred years ago: not knowing what the stone was, the 
Dalai-Lama tried to explain certain phenomena, such as the appearance of char-
acters on the surface of the stone, assuming from this that it was a kind of slate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32 
The Veil of Isisi-Lama tried to explain certain phenomena, such as the appearance of char-
acters on the surface of the stone, assuming from this that it was a kind of slate.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32 
The Veil of Isis

The ‘baetylus,’ strictly speaking, is the representation of the Ompha-
los, which is to say, a symbol of the ‘Center of the World,’ which is nat-
urally identified with the ‘divine interior.’26 This stone could have taken 
a variety of forms, including that of a pillar; this is why Jacob says: “And 
this stone, which I have set for a pillar, shall be the house of God;” and 
among the Celtic peoples some menhirs, if not all, had the same meaning. 
The Omphalos could also be represented by a conical or ovoid stone, such 
as the ‘black stone’ of Cybele; the cone evokes the sacred mountain, a 
symbol of the ‘Pole’ or the ‘Axis Mundi;’ as for the ovoid form, it relates 
directly to a very important symbol, that of the ‘World Egg.’ In any case, 
the ‘baetylus’ was a ‘prophetic stone,’ a ‘talking stone,’ which is to say, 
a stone that made oracles, or with which oracles were made, thanks to 
the ‘spiritual influences’ of which it was the support; the example of the 
Omphalos of Delphi is very characteristic in this respect. The ‘baetylus’ 
are therefore essentially sacred stones, but not necessarily of a celestial 
origin; however, it is perhaps true that, symbolically at the least, this idea 
is true in a certain way. What makes us think this is so is their relation 
to the mysterious luz of the Hebraic tradition, this relation is certain in 
the case of the ‘black stones,’ which are actually meteorites, but it should 
not be limited to this one case, since it is stated in Genesis, when speak-
ing about the Beith-el of Jacob, that the first name of this place was pre-
cisely the same, Luz. We may even recall at this point that the Grail had 
been, it was said, to have been carved from a stone fallen from the heav-
ens, between all these there are very close ties, but we will not ponder 
on it anymore, for these considerations may lead us astray from our sub-
ject.27 
Indeed, whether they are ‘baetylus’ in general, or ‘black stones’ in the 
specific, neither have anything in common with the ‘thunderstones;’ it is 
especially on this point that we recall a serious confusion in the sentence 
quoted at the very beginning, which can be explained quite easily. One 
is certainly tempted to suppose that the ‘thunderbolts’ or ‘thunderstones’ 
must be stones that fall from the sky, aeroliths, and yet it is not so; one 
could never guess what they are without have learned from the peasants 
who have preserved the memory of it through the oral tradition. In fact, 
by their very nature, these same peasants have committed an error of 
interpretation, showing the true nature of tradition escapes them when 
they believe that these stones to have fallen with the lightning, or thatature, these same peasants have committed an error of 
interpretation, showing the true nature of tradition escapes them when 
they believe that these stones to have fallen with the lightning, or that

26 This designation of the ‘divine interior,’ known as mishkan in Hebrew, was 
also later attributed to the Tabernacle: as it indicates itself, it is the seat of the 
Shekinah. 
27 There have been ample considerations on the issue of luz, as well as on the 
Omphalos, in our study on The King of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---indicates itself, it is the seat of the 
Shekinah. 
27 There have been ample considerations on the issue of luz, as well as on the 
Omphalos, in our study on The King of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
33 
they are the lightning themselves. They say that the thunder falls in two 
manners, ‘of fire’ or ‘of stone;’ the first case is when it burns, while in 
the second it breaks; but they know very well of the “thunderstones,” and 
they are only in mistaken in attributing to them, because of their name, 
a celestial origin which they do not have and never had. 
The truth is that the ‘thunderstones’ are stones that symbolize light-
ning; they are nothing more than the prehistoric flint axes of the ‘World 
Egg,’ just as the fossilized sea urchin is the material figuration of the 
‘serpent’s egg.’ The stone axe is the stone that breaks and splits, and this 
is why it represents lightning; this symbolism harkens back to an ex-
tremely remote era, and it explains the existence of certain axes, labelled 
by archaeologists as ‘votive axes,’ ritual objects that never had any prac-
tical usage as weapons or instruments. 
This brings us quite naturally to recall a point that has already been 
treated: the stone axe of Parashurama and the stone hammer of Thor are 
one and the same weapon, and we will add that this weapon is the sym-
bol of lightning.28 We also see that this symbolism of the ‘thunderstones’ 
is of a Hyperborean origin, which is to say that it is related to the oldest 
of the traditions of present humanity, to that which is really the primal 
tradition of the present Manvantara.29 
It should be noted, moreover, the very important role that lightning 
plays in Tibetan symbolism, the vajra, which represents it, is one of the 
principal insignias of the dignitaries of Lamaism.30 At the same time, the 
vajra symbolizes the masculine principle of the universal manifestation, 
and thus lightning is associated with the idea of a ‘divine paternity,’ an 
association which is found just as clearly in Western antiquity, since 
lightning is the main attribute of Zeus Pater or Ju-piter, the ‘father of the 
gods and men,’ who besides blasts the Titans and the Giants with thun-
derbolts, just as Thor and Parashurama destroy their equivalents with 
their respective weapons of stone.31, the ‘father of the 
gods and men,’ who besides blasts the Titans and the Giants with thun-
derbolts, just as Thor and Parashurama destroy their equivalents with 
their respective weapons of stone.31

28 See the article by P. Genty on Thor and Parashurama, in the Voile d’Isis of 
December 1928. 
29 Let us note in this connection that some, by a peculiar confusion, speak of a 
“Hyperborean Atlantis;” Hyperborea and Atlantis are two distinct regions, as 
much as North and West are two different cardinal points, and as a starting point 
for one tradition, the first is well before the second. We think it is all the more 
necessary to draw attention to this fact that those who make this confusion 
would attribute this error to us, but it goes without saying that we have never 
done this, and that we do not even see, in all that we have written, what could 
give the slightest credence for such an interpretation. 
30 Vajra is the Sanskrit term for lightning; the Tibetan form of the word is dorje. 
31 It is interesting to note here that the thunderbolts of Jupiter are forged by 
Vulcan, which establishes a certain relationship between the ‘celestial fire’ and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34 
The Veil of Isisis interesting to note here that the thunderbolts of Jupiter are forged by 
Vulcan, which establishes a certain relationship between the ‘celestial fire’ and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34 
The Veil of Isis

There is even, in relation to this connection, even in the modern West 
itself, another link that is quite unique: Leibnitz, in his Monadology, says 
that “all the created monads are born, so to speak, by continuous fulgu-
rations of Divinity from moment to moment;” thus, in this way, through 
the traditional points we have just recalled, lightning (fulgur) is linked to 
the idea of the production of beings. It is likely that the academic com-
mentators have never noticed this, nor does it have exactly the same 
meaning as that of the great Tibetan Lamas; but who, then, in modern 
Masonry, could boast of actually possessing the mysterious power, one 
in its essence, though double in its apparently contrary effects, of which 
this attribute is the sign? We do not think that we are going too far in 
saying that in what remains of the Western initiatic organizations, no 
one has even a remote idea of what this is about; the symbol remains, but 
when the ‘spirit’ has withdrawn, it is nothing but an empty form; is it 
necessary to maintain, despite everything, the hope that a day will come 
when this form is revitalized, where it will once again respond to the 
reality of its original raison d’être and which alone gives it its true initiatic 
character?ng, the hope that a day will come 
when this form is revitalized, where it will once again respond to the 
reality of its original raison d’être and which alone gives it its true initiatic 
character?

the ‘underground fire,’ a note which is not established in cases where it is a 
question of stone weapons; the ‘underground fire,’ in fact, was in direct relation 
with the metallurgic symbolism, especially in the Kabiric mysteries: Vulcan also 
forges the weapons of heroes. It should be added that there is another version 
according to which the Mjolnir or the hammer of Thor would be metallic and 
would have been forged by the dwarves, who are attached to the same order of 
symbolic entities as the Kabiris, the Cyclops, the Yakshas, etc. Also note, regard-
ing the fire, that the chariot of Thor was dragged by two rams, and that in India, 
the ram is the mount of Agni.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Triple Druidic Precinct 
La triple enceinte druidique, June 1929.

Mr. Paul Le Cour reported, in the Atlantis (July-August 1928), a curious 
symbol traced on a Druidic stone discovered around 1800 in Suèvres 
(Loir-et-Cher), which had previously been studied by the president of the 
Society of Natural History and Anthropology of Loir-et-Cher, Mr. E.-C. 
Florance. Florance believes that the location where this stone was found 
could have been the annual meeting place of the Druids, situated, accord-
ing to Caesar, on the borders of the Carnutes’ land.32 His attention was 
drawn to the fact that the same symbol was found on a seal of a Gallo-
Roman occultist, found around 1870 in Villefranche-sur-Cher (Loir-et-
Cher); and he suggested that what the symbol could represent was a tri-
ple sacred precinct. This symbol is indeed formed of three concentric 
squares, interconnected by four lines at right angles (fig. 1).and he suggested that what the symbol could represent was a tri-
ple sacred precinct. This symbol is indeed formed of three concentric 
squares, interconnected by four lines at right angles (fig. 1).

Fig. 1 
At the time when the article in the Atlantis appeared, it was pointed 
out to Mr. Florance that the same symbol had been engraved on a large 
stone base of a buttress on the church of Sainte-Gemme (Loir-et-Cher), a 
stone that seems to have an origin preceding the construction of the 
church, which could even have its origin in Druidism. Furthermore, it is 
certain that like many other Celtic symbols, and particularly of this 
wheel, this figure remained in use up to the Middle Ages, since Mr. Char-

32 Caesar says: in finibus Carnutum; Florance’s interpretation seems a little 
doubtful, as fines does not always signify borders, but often designates the land 
itself. On the other hand, it does not seem that there has been anything found in 
Suèvres that is reminiscent of the Omphalos, which, in the Mediolanon or the 
Medionemeton of Gaul, was, according to the customs of the Celtic peoples to be 
represented by a menhir.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36 
The Veil of Isis

bonneau-Lassay reported it among the ‘graffiti’ in the dungeon of Chi-
non,33 together with another figure that is just as ancient, formed of eight 
rays and circumscribed by a square (fig. 2), which is on the ‘baetylus’ of 
Kermaria studied by M. J. Loth34 and to which we have had occasion to 
reference elsewhere.35 Mr. Le Cour indicated that the triple-square sym-
bol is also found in Rome, in the cloister of San Paolo, dating from the 
thirteenth century, and furthermore it was known in antiquity by those 
besides the Celts, as he has pointed to it several times at the Acropolis in 
Athens, on the tiles of the Parthenon, and on those of the Erechtheion.nd furthermore it was known in antiquity by those 
besides the Celts, as he has pointed to it several times at the Acropolis in 
Athens, on the tiles of the Parthenon, and on those of the Erechtheion.

Fig. 2 
The interpretation of the symbol in question as representing a triple 
precinct appears to be correct; and Mr. Le Cour, in this regard, establishes 
a connection with what Plato says, who, speaking of the metropolis of 
the Atlanteans, describes the palace of Poseidon as being built in the cen-
ter of three concentric enclosures connected to each other by canals, 
which indeed forms a figure similar to the one in question, but circular 
in place of a square. 
Now, what can the significance of these three precincts be? Our im-
mediate thought was that it should be three degrees of initiation, so that 
these would have been in some way representative of the structure of the 
Druidic hierarchy; and the fact that this same figure is found elsewhere 
than among the Celts would indicate that there were, in other traditional 
forms, hierarchies built on the same model, which is perfectly ordinary. 
The division of initiation into three grades is, furthermore, the most fre-
quent, and we could say, the most fundamental; all others represent, gen-
erally, only subdivisions or more or less complicated developments. 
What gave us this notion is the awareness of documents which, in some 
Masonic systems of high ranks, describe precisely these grades as many

33 Le Cœur rayonnant du donjon de Chinon. 
34 L’Omphalos chez les Celtes, in the Revue des Études anciennes, July-September 
1915. 
35 The King of the World, ch. 9; L’Omphalos, symbols du Centre, in Regnabit, June 
1926.

--- PAGE BREAK ---. 
34 L’Omphalos chez les Celtes, in the Revue des Études anciennes, July-September 
1915. 
35 The King of the World, ch. 9; L’Omphalos, symbols du Centre, in Regnabit, June 
1926.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
37 
successive precincts drawn around a central point;36 certainly, these doc-
uments are incomparably less old than the monuments in question, but 
we can nonetheless find an echo of tradition, and in any case, these pro-
vided us with a starting point for interesting connections. 
It must be noted that the explanation which we propose is in no way 
incompatible with certain other explanations, such as that given by Mr. 
Le Cour, and which would bring the three precincts back to the three 
circles of existence recognized by the Celtic tradition; these three circles, 
which are found in another form in Christianity, are also the same as the 
‘three worlds’ of the Hindu tradition. Therein, the celestial circles are 
sometimes represented as so many concentric enclosures surrounding 
the Meru, which is to say the sacred Mountain which symbolizes the 
‘Pole,’ or the ‘Axis Mundi,’ and this again is a remarkable agreement. Far 
from excluding each other, the two explanations harmonize perfectly, 
and one could even say that they coincide in a certain sense, because, if 
it is a question of initiation, its degrees correspond to as many states of 
beings which are described, in all traditions, as so many different worlds, 
for it must be understood that ‘localization’ has only a purely symbolic 
character. We have already explained, when speaking of Dante, that the 
heavens are properly ‘spiritual hierarchies,’ which is to say, degrees of 
initiation;37 and it goes without saying that they relate at the same time 
to the degrees of universal existence, because, as we stated then,38 by 
virtue of the constitutive analogy of Macrocosm and Microcosm, the in-
itiatic process rigorously reproduces the cosmogonic process. We will 
add that, in general, the characteristic of any true truly initiatic interpre-
tation is to never be exclusionary, but, on the contrary, includes within 
itself, synthetically, all possible interpretations; it is, moreover, why sym-
bolism, with its multiple and superimposed meanings, is the normal 
means of expression of all true initiatic teaching.  
With this same explanation, the meaning of the four lines arrange in 
the form of a cross and connecting the three precincts becomes immedi-
ately clear: they are channels through which the teaching of the tradi-
tional doctrine is communicated from above, below, from the supreme 
rank which is the depository, and is distributed hierarchically to other 
degrees. The central portion of the figure thus corresponds to the ‘foun-
tain of teaching’ of which Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amor’ speak,39 and theository, and is distributed hierarchically to other 
degrees. The central portion of the figure thus corresponds to the ‘foun-
tain of teaching’ of which Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amor’ speak,39 and the

36 Mr. Le Cour notes that the central point is marked on most of the figures he 
saw at the Acropolis in Athens. 
37 The Esoterism of Dante, ch. 2. 
38 Ibid., ch. 6. 
39 See our article in the Voile d’Isis of February 1929.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38 
The Veil of Isis

cruciform arrangement of the four channels identifies with the four riv-
ers of Pardes. 
Relating to this connection, it should be noted that there is, between 
the two circular and square shapes of the figure of the three precincts, 
an important nuance to observe which relate respectively to their derived 
symbolism. In the first case, the center of the figure would then be the 
source of the doctrine, while the second would relate more to the ‘reser-
voir,’ the spiritual authority that has a role of conservation; but, of 
course, the symbolism of the ‘fountain of teaching’ applies to both 
cases.40

Fig. 3 
From the point of view of numerical symbolism, it must be noted that 
all three squares form the duodenary. Arranged otherwise (Fig. 3), these 
three squares, to which are added four crosswise lines constitute the fig-
ure according to which the ancient astrologers inscribed the Zodiac; fur-
thermore, this figure was regarded as that of the celestial Jerusalem with 
its twelve gates, three on each side, and there is an evident connection 
with the meaning we have just given for the square form. No doubt there 
are many more similarities to consider, but we believe that these few 
notes, however incomplete, will shed some light on the mysterious ques-
tion of the triple Druidic precinct.orm. No doubt there 
are many more similarities to consider, but we believe that these few 
notes, however incomplete, will shed some light on the mysterious ques-
tion of the triple Druidic precinct.

40 The other figure that we have produced above (fig. 2) is often also in the cir-
cular form: it is then one of the most common varieties of the wheel, and this 
wheel with eight spokes is in some respects identical to the eight-petalled lotus, 
more particular to Oriental traditions, just as the six-rayed wheel is equivalent 
to the lily, which has six petals (see our articles on Le Chrisme et le Cœur dans 
les anciennes marques corporatives and on L’idée du Centre dans les traditions an-
tiques, in Regnabit, November 1925 and May 1926.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---see our articles on Le Chrisme et le Cœur dans 
les anciennes marques corporatives and on L’idée du Centre dans les traditions an-
tiques, in Regnabit, November 1925 and May 1926.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Aspects of the Symbolism of Janus 
Quelques aspects du symbolisme de Janus, July 1929. 
We have made many references and allusions in our works to the sym-
bolism of Janus; to completely explain this symbolism, with its complex 
and multiplicity of meanings, and to point out all the links with a large 
number of similar figurations which we meet in other traditions, would 
require a whole volume, which we may write someday. Until then, it 
seemed to us interesting to gather some notes concerning certain aspects 
of the symbolism in question, and to more completely, than we have able 
been to do so as of yet, consider the links established sometimes between 
Janus and Christ, which may seem strange at first glance, but is none the 
less perfectly justified. 
Indeed, a curious record expressly representing Christ as Janus was 
published a few years ago by Mr. Charbonneau-Lassay in Regnabit,41 and 
we commented on it ourselves in the same journal.42 It is a cartouche 
illustrated on a detached page of a fifteenth century church manuscript 
found in Luchon, which completes the leaf of the January issue of the 
opening calendar of the book. At the top of the inner medallion is the 
IHS monogram surmounted by a heart; the rest of the medallion is occu-
pied by a bust of Janus Bifrons, with both a masculine and a feminine 
face, as is depicted quite frequently; he wears a crown on his head, and 
holds in one hand a scepter and in the other a key. 
Mr. Charbonneau-Lassay wrote on the Roman monuments: 
Janus is shown, as on the cartouche of Luchon, with a crown on 
his head and the scepter in his right hand, because he is King; he 
holds in the other hand a key which opens and closes the ages; 
that is why, by an extension of this idea, the Romans dedicated the 
gates of homes and cities to him… Christ too, like the ancient Ja-
nus, carries the royal scepter to which he is granted by his Father 
in Heaven and his ancestors here below; and his other hand holds 
the key of the eternal secrets, the key tinged with his blood which 
opened to humanity the lost door of Life. This is why, in the fourthHeaven and his ancestors here below; and his other hand holds 
the key of the eternal secrets, the key tinged with his blood which 
opened to humanity the lost door of Life. This is why, in the fourth

41 Un ancien emblème du mois de janvier (May 1925). 
42 A propos de quelques symbols hermético-religieux (December 1925).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40 
The Veil of Isisof Life. This is why, in the fourth

41 Un ancien emblème du mois de janvier (May 1925). 
42 A propos de quelques symbols hermético-religieux (December 1925).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40 
The Veil of Isis

of the great antiphons before Christmas, the sacred liturgy ac-
claims him thus: “O Clavis David, et Sceptrum domus Israel!... Thou 
art, O Christ, long awaited, the Key of David and the Scepter of 
the House of Israel, who opens, and no man shuts, who shuts and 
no man opens.43 
The most common interpretation of the two faces of Janus is in regard 
to them as respectively representing the past and the future; this inter-
pretation, though accurate from a certain point of view, is very incom-
plete. This is why, in a large number of figurations, the two faces are that 
of a young and old man; such is not the case in the emblem of Luchon, 
which an examination reveals that it is the androgynous Janus, or Janus-
Jana;44 and it is scarcely necessary to point out the close relationship of 
this form with certain Hermetic symbols such as the Rebis.45 
From the point of view where the symbolism of Janus is related to 
time, it is necessary to make a very important note: between the past that 
is no more, and the future that is not yet, the true face of Janus, he who 
looks at the present is, it is said, neither of which we can see. This third 
face, indeed, is invisible because the present, in its temporal manifesta-
tion, is only an elusive moment;46 but when we rise above the conditions 
of this transitory and contingent manifestation, the present conditions, 
on the contrary, all is reality. The third face of Janus corresponds, in an-
other symbolism, that of the Hindu tradition, to the frontal eye of Shiva, 
which is also invisible since it is not represented by any corporeal organ, 
and which represents the ‘sense of the eternity.’ It is said that one look 
of this third eye reduces everything to ashes, which is to say, it destroys 
all manifestation; but when succession is transmuted into simultaneity, 
all things remain in the ‘eternal present,’ so that apparent destruction is, 
in reality, only a ‘transformation,’ in the most strictly etymological sense 
of the word. 
By this respect, it is easy to understand already that Janus really rep-
resents Him who is not only the ‘Master of the triple time’ (a designation 
which is also applied to Shiva in the Hindu doctrine),47 but also, andis easy to understand already that Janus really rep-
resents Him who is not only the ‘Master of the triple time’ (a designation 
which is also applied to Shiva in the Hindu doctrine),47 but also, and

43 Roman Breviary, office of December 20. 
44 The name of Diana, the lunar goddess, is just another form of Jana, Janus’ 
feminine aspect.  
45 The only difference is that these symbols are generally Sol-Luna, in various 
forms, while it seems that Janus-Jana is rather Lunus-Luna, his head often being 
surmounted by the crescent. 
46 It is for this reason that certain languages, such as Hebrew and Arabic, do not 
have a verbal form that corresponds to the present. 
47 The trident (trishula), an attribute of Shiva, is the symbol of the triple time 
(trikala).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch as Hebrew and Arabic, do not 
have a verbal form that corresponds to the present. 
47 The trident (trishula), an attribute of Shiva, is the symbol of the triple time 
(trikala).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
41 
above all, the ‘Lord of Eternity.’ “Christ,” Mr. Charbonneau-Lassay 
writes, “in this respect, dominates the past and the future; Coeternal with 
the Father, he is like him the ‘Ancient of Days:’ ‘In the beginning was the 
word,’ says Saint John. He is also the Father and the Master of the cen-
turies to come: Jesu pater futuri sæculi, the Roman church repeats daily, 
and Himself proclaiming the beginning and end of everything: ‘I am the 
Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end.’ He is the ‘Lord of 
Eternity.’” 
It is quite obvious, indeed, that the ‘Master of time’ cannot himself be 
subject to time, which has its origin in him just as, according to the teach-
ings of Aristotle, the first motor of all things or the principle of universal 
motion is necessarily motionless. It is the Eternal Word that the Biblical 
texts often refer to as the ‘Ancient of Days,’ the Father of ages or cycles 
of existence (this is the proper and primeval meaning of the Latin word 
sæculum, as well as the Greek aion and the Hebrew olam which it serves 
to translate); and it should be noted that the Hindu tradition gives it the 
name of Purana-Purusha, whose meaning is strictly equal. 
Let us now return to the figuration we have taken as a starting point 
for these remarks: we see, as has been noted, the scepter and the key in 
the hands of Janus, as well as the crown (which can be regarded as a 
symbol of power and elevation in the most general sense, in the spiritual 
as well as in the temporal order, and which here seems to refer to this 
twofold meaning), the scepter is the emblem of the royal power, and the 
key, for its role, is that of the sacerdotal power. It should be noted that 
the scepter is on the left of the figure, on the side of the masculine face, 
and the key is on the right, on the side of the feminine face; according to 
the symbolism employed by the Hebrew Kabbalah, the right and the left 
respectively correspond to two divine attributes: Mercy (Hesed) and Jus-
tice (Din), which are manifestly suited to Christ, and more so when one 
considers his role as Judge of the living and the dead. The Arabs, making 
a similar distinction in the divine attributes and their corresponding 
names, say ‘Beauty’ (Jamāl) and ‘Majesty’ (Jalāl); and one can even bet-
ter see, with these final designations, that these aspects are represented 
each by a feminine and masculine face.48 In short, the key and the scepter, 
substituted here for a set of two keys which is perhaps a more common 
insignia of Janus, only makes even more clear one of the meanings of 
this emblem, which is that of a double power proceeding from a single 
principle: sacerdotal power and royal power, united, according to thef Janus, only makes even more clear one of the meanings of 
this emblem, which is that of a double power proceeding from a single 
principle: sacerdotal power and royal power, united, according to the

48 In The King of the World, we explain in more detail the symbolism of the right 
and the left, of the ‘hand of righteousness’ and the ‘blessing hand,’ which is also 
indicated by several Fathers of the Church, especially by Saint Augustine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42 
The Veil of Isisnd the left, of the ‘hand of righteousness’ and the ‘blessing hand,’ which is also 
indicated by several Fathers of the Church, especially by Saint Augustine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42 
The Veil of Isis

Judeo-Christian tradition, in the person of Melchizedek, who is, as Saint 
Paul says, “made unto like the Son of God.”49 
We have just said that Janus, most commonly, carries two keys; these 
keys are that of the two solsticial doors, Janua Cœli and Janua Inferni, 
corresponding respectively to the winter solstice and the summer sol-
stice, which is to say to the two most extreme points of the race of the 
sun in the annual cycle, for Janus, as ‘Master of time,’ is the Janitor who 
opens and closes this cycle. Furthermore, he was also the god of initiation 
into the mysteries: initiatio derives from in-ine, ‘to enter’ (which is also 
related to the symbolism of the ‘gate’), and, according to Cicero, the name 
of Janus has the same root as the verb ire, ‘go;’ this root, moreover, is 
found in Sanskrit with the same meaning as in Latin, and in this language 
it has among its derivatives yana, ‘way,’ whose form is very similar to 
the name of Janus. “I am the Way,” says Christ;50 should we see here the 
possibility of another link? What we have said seems to be a way to jus-
tify it; and it would be the greatest mistake, when it comes to symbolism, 
not to take into consideration certain verbal similarities, the reasons for 
which are often very deep, although unfortunately they often escape 
modern philologists, who are ignorant all of that can legitimately be 
called ‘sacred science.’ 
Be that as it may, as Janus was considered the god of initiation, his 
two keys, one of gold and the other of silver, were those of ‘grand mys-
teries’ and ‘minor mysteries;’ to use another equivalent language, the sil-
ver key is that of the ‘terrestrial paradise’ and the golden key is that of 
the ‘celestial paradise.’ These same keys were one of the attributes of the 
Sovereign Pontificate, to whom the function of ‘hierophant’ was essen-
tially attached; like the boat which was also a symbol of Janus,51 these 
remained among the principal emblems of the Papacy; and the evangeli-
cal words relating to the ‘power of the keys’ are in perfect accord with 
the ancient traditions, all of which derive from the great primordial Tra-
dition. Furthermore, there is a rather direct relation between the meaning 
just indicated and that according to which the golden key represents the 
spiritual power and the key of silver the temporal power (the latter beingre is a rather direct relation between the meaning 
just indicated and that according to which the golden key represents the 
spiritual power and the key of silver the temporal power (the latter being

49 Epistle to the Hebrews, VII, 3. 
50 In the far Eastern tradition, the word Tao, whose literal meaning is also ‘Way,’ 
serves as a designation of the supreme principle; and the ideographic character 
that represents it is formed by signs of the head and feat, which are equivalent 
to the alpha and the omega. 
51 This boat of Janus only moved in two directions, either forwards or back-
wards, which corresponds to the two faces of Janus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---which are equivalent 
to the alpha and the omega. 
51 This boat of Janus only moved in two directions, either forwards or back-
wards, which corresponds to the two faces of Janus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
43 
sometimes replaced by the scepter as we have seen):52 Dante, in fact, as-
signs to the Emperor and the Pope the duty of leading humanity respec-
tively to the ‘terrestrial paradise’ and the ‘celestial paradise.’53 
Furthermore, by virtue of a certain astronomical symbolism which 
seems to have been common to all ancient people, there are also very 
close links between the two meanings of the keys of Janus and the two 
solsticial gates or the ‘grand mysteries’ and ‘minor mysteries.’54 This 
symbolism to which we allude is that of the zodiacal cycle, and it is not 
without reason that this cycle, with its two ascending and descending 
halves which each have their respective starting points at the two sol-
stices of winter and summer, is affixed on the gates of so many medieval 
churches.55 Here we see another meaning of the two faces of Janus: he is 
the ‘Master of the two ways’ to which give access to the solsticial doors, 
these two ways of right and left (for here we find the same symbolism as 
given above) which the Pythagoreans represented by the letter Y,56 and 
it is included in an exoteric form in the myth of Hercules, between Virtue 
and Vice. These are the same two ways that the Hindu tradition, desig-
nate as the ‘way of the gods’ (deva-yana) and the ‘way of the ancestors’ 
(pitri-yana); and Ganesha, whose symbolism has many links with that of 
Janus, is also the ‘Master of two ways,’ by an immediate consequence of 
his character as the ‘Lord of Knowledge,’ which brings us again back to 
the idea of initiation into the mysteries. Finally, these two ways are also, 
in a sense, like the doors to which one reaches the heavens and hell;57Lord of Knowledge,’ which brings us again back to 
the idea of initiation into the mysteries. Finally, these two ways are also, 
in a sense, like the doors to which one reaches the heavens and hell;57

52 The scepter and the key are also related symbolically to the ‘Axis Mundi.’ 
53 De Monarchia, III, 16. – We give the explanation of this passage of Dante in 
our latest work, Spiritual Authority and Temporal Power. 
54 We must remember in passing, although we have already pointed this out on 
several occasions, that Janus still had another function; he was the god of the 
guilds of craftsmen or the Collegia fabrorum, who celebrated in his honor the 
two solsticial feasts in the winter and summer. Subsequently, this custom was 
maintained in the corporations of builders; but, within Christianity, these sol-
sticial feasts became identified with the two Saint Johns of winter and summer 
(hence the expression ‘Lodge of Saint Jean’ which has been preserved in modern 
Masonry); this is an example of the adaptation of pre-Christian symbols often 
misunderstood or misinterpreted by the moderns. 
55 This is clearly related to what we indicated in the preceding note with respect 
to the traditions preserved by the corporations of builders. 
56 This ancient symbol has been maintained until quite recently: we find it in the 
brand of the printer Nicolas du Chemin, designed by Jean Cousin, in Geoffroy 
Tory’s Le Champ fleuri (Paris, 1529), where it is named as the ‘Pythagorean let-
ter,’ and also, at the Louvre, on various pieces of furniture of the Renaissance. 
57 In the symbols of the Renaissance that we have just mentioned, the two paths 
are, in this regard, designated respectively as via arcta and via lata, the ‘narrow 
way’ and the ‘wide way.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44 
The Veil of Isisance that we have just mentioned, the two paths 
are, in this regard, designated respectively as via arcta and via lata, the ‘narrow 
way’ and the ‘wide way.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44 
The Veil of Isis

and it can be noticed that the two sides to which they correspond, the 
right and the left, are those to where the chosen and the damned are 
distributed in representations of the Last Judgement, which, also, by a 
very significant coincidence, are also frequently found on the church 
gates, and not in any other part of the building.58 These representations, 
as well as those of the Zodiac, we believe, show something quite funda-
mental in the conceptions of the cathedral builders, who proposed to give 
their works a ‘pantacular’ character, in the truest sense of the word,59 
which is to say, to make their work as a kind of synthetic summary of 
the Universe.60

58 It sometimes seems that what is reported on the right is, in some cases, on the 
left in others, and vice versa; it happens, furthermore, that this contradiction is 
only apparent, for we must always seek in what connection we take the right 
and the left; when the contradiction is real, it can be explained by certain rather 
complex ‘cyclical’ conceptions, which influence the correspondences envisaged. 
We only mention this so as to not conceal a problem that must be taken into 
account when correctly interpreting a large number of symbols. 
59 One must write ‘pantacle’ (paniaculum, literally ‘small all’), and not ‘pentacle’ 
as it is done so often: this orthographic error has made some to believe that this 
word had a relation with the number 5 and had to be taken as a synonym for 
‘pentagram.’ 
60 This conception is, furthermore, involved in some way to the very plan of the 
cathedral; but we cannot, for the moment at the least, undertake to justify this 
assertion as it would lead us too far astray.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Guardians of the Holy Land 
Les Gardiens de la Terre sainte, August 1929.for the moment at the least, undertake to justify this 
assertion as it would lead us too far astray.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Guardians of the Holy Land 
Les Gardiens de la Terre sainte, August 1929.

Among the attributes of the chivalric orders, and more particularly of the 
Templars, which is the best known, but not the best understood in gen-
eral, is that as the ‘guardians of the Holy Land.’ Certainly, if we adhere 
to the outermost meaning, we find an immediate explanation in the con-
nection that exists between the origin of the Orders in the Crusaders, 
because, for Christians as it is for Jews, it seems that the ‘Holy Land’ 
means nothing but Palestine. However, the issue becomes more complex 
when one realizes that a variety of Oriental organizations, whose initiatic 
character is a certainty, such as the Assassins and the Druze, have also 
taken as their title ‘guardians of the Holy Land.’ Here, indeed, is the re-
alization that it can no longer simply be Palestine; and it is also remark-
able that these organizations have quite a number of features in common 
with the Western chivalric orders, so much so that some of them even 
have been historically connected. What then is to be really understood 
as the ‘Holy Land,’ and in what way is the role as ‘guardian’ attached to 
a certain kind of initiation, which may be called a ‘chivalric’ initiation, in 
giving this term a more general meaning than is usually done, but which 
is justified through the variety of forms of which legitimize it? 
We have already shown elsewhere, but in particular in our study of 
The King of the World, that the expression ‘Holy Land’ has a number of 
synonyms: ‘Pure Land,’ ‘Land of the Saints,’ ‘Land of the Blessed,’ ‘Land 
of the Living,’ and ‘Land of Immortality,’ that these equivalent designa-
tions occur in the traditions of all people, and that they always apply 
essentially to a spiritual center whose location in a given region can, de-
pending on the case, be understood literally, symbolically, or a mix of the 
two. Each ‘Holy Land’ is still designated by expressions such as the ‘Cen-
ter of the World’ or the ‘Heart of the World,’ and this requires some ex-
planation, as these uniform designations, although applied in a variety of 
ways, could easily lead to some confusion. 
If we consider, for example, the Hebraic tradition, we see that in the 
Sefer Yetzirah there is spoken of the ‘Holy Palace,’ or the ‘Inner Palace,’ 
which is the true ‘Center of the World’ in the cosmogonic sense of the 
term; and we also see that this ‘Holy Palace’ has its image in the humanis spoken of the ‘Holy Palace,’ or the ‘Inner Palace,’ 
which is the true ‘Center of the World’ in the cosmogonic sense of the 
term; and we also see that this ‘Holy Palace’ has its image in the human

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46 
The Veil of Isisner Palace,’ 
which is the true ‘Center of the World’ in the cosmogonic sense of the 
term; and we also see that this ‘Holy Palace’ has its image in the human

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46 
The Veil of Isis

world in the Shekinah, which is the ‘real presence’ of Divinity.61 For the 
people of Israel, this residence of Shekinah was the Tabernacle (Mishkan), 
which for this reason was considered by them to be the ‘Heart of the 
World,’ because it was in fact the spiritual center of its own tradition. 
This center, furthermore, was not at first a fixed location; when it comes 
to nomadic peoples the spiritual center must move with him, while re-
maining always the same during his displacement. “The residence of the 
Shekinah,” Mr. Vulliaud says, “had no fixity until the day when the Tem-
ple was built, for which David had prepared the gold, the silver, and all 
that was necessary to complete the work.62 The Tabernacle of the Saint-
hood of Jehovah, the residence of the Shekinah, is the Sacred of Sacreds 
which is the heart of the Temple, which is itself the center of Zion (Jeru-
salem), as the Holy Zion is the center of the Land of Israel, as Israel is the 
center of the world.”63 We can notice here that there is a series of exten-
sions gradually attributed to the idea of the center in the applications 
which are made successively, so that the name of ‘Center of the World’ 
or ‘Heart of the World’ is finally extended to the entire Land of Israel, as 
it is considered the ‘Holy Land;’ and it must be added that, in the same 
respect, it also receives, among other designations, that of ‘Land of the 
Living.’ It is spoken of as ‘the Land of the Living including seven lands,’ 
and Mr. Vulliaud observes that “this earth is Canaan in which there were 
seven peoples,”64 which is literally correct, although a symbolic interpre-
tation exists. This expression ‘Land of the Living’ is synonymous with 
‘immortality,’ and the Catholic liturgy applies it to the celestial residence 
of the promised, which was indeed represented by the Promised Land, 
since by entering Israel they were to see the end of tribulations. From 
another point of view, the Land of Israel, as a spiritual center, was an 
image of Heaven, for, according to the Jewish tradition, “all that the Is-
raelites do on Earth is accomplished according to what is happening in 
the celestial world.”65 
What is said here of the Israelites can be said alike of all people that 
possess a truly orthodox tradition; and, in fact, the people of Israel are 
not the only ones that have coopted their country to be the ‘Heart of thee Israelites can be said alike of all people that 
possess a truly orthodox tradition; and, in fact, the people of Israel are 
not the only ones that have coopted their country to be the ‘Heart of the

61 See our articles on Le Cœur du Monde in the Hebraic tradition and La Terre 
sainte et le Cœur du Monde, in the journal Regnabit, July-August and September-
October 1926. 
62 It is worth noting that the expressions that are used here that evoke the ma-
terials used in the construction of the Temple, considered in its ideal meaning, 
mirror that of the ‘Great Work’ of the Hermeticists.  
63 La Kabbale juive, t. I, p. 509. 
64 Ibid., t. II, p. 116. 
65 Ibid., t. I. p. 501.

--- PAGE BREAK ---mple, considered in its ideal meaning, 
mirror that of the ‘Great Work’ of the Hermeticists.  
63 La Kabbale juive, t. I, p. 509. 
64 Ibid., t. II, p. 116. 
65 Ibid., t. I. p. 501.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
47 
World,’ and who have regarded it as an image of Heaven, two ideas 
which do not contradict one another in reality. The use of the same sym-
bolism is found among other people who also possessed a ‘Holy Land,’ 
which is to say a country where a spiritual center was established that 
had a role comparable to that of the Temple of Jerusalem for the He-
brews. In this respect, the ‘Holy Land,’ as well as the Omphalos, was al-
ways the visible image of the ‘Center of the World,’ for the people living 
in the regions where it was located.66 
The symbolism of which is a question that is particularly found 
among the ancient Egyptians; in fact, according to Plutarch, “the Egyp-
tians give to their country the name of chemia,67 and they compare it to 
a heart.”68 The reason given by Plutarch is rather strange: “This country 
is hot and humid indeed, including the southern portions of the inhabited 
earth, extended to the South, as in the body of man the heat of the heart 
extends to the left,” because of this “the Egyptians consider the East to 
be the face of the world, the North as the right, and the South as the left.69 
These are only rather superficial similarities, and the true reason must 
be quite different since the same comparison of the heart has been ap-
plied equally to any land to which a sacred and ‘central’ character, in the 
spiritual sense, has been applied, no matter the geographical location. 
Furthermore, according to the report of Plutarch himself, the heart, 
which represented Egypt, also represented the Heavens: “The Egyp-
tians,” he writes, “depict the Heavens, which cannot age because of their 
eternality, as a heart resting on a flame which feeds its ardor.”70 While 
the heart is the hieroglyph of both Egypt and that of Heaven, it is also 
represented as a vase, which is then the same as that of the ‘Holy Grail’ 
in the legends of the Western Middle Ages. The conclusion to be drawn 
from these considerations is that there are as many specific ‘Holy Lands’ 
as there are ordinary traditional forms, since they represent the spiritualWestern Middle Ages. The conclusion to be drawn 
from these considerations is that there are as many specific ‘Holy Lands’ 
as there are ordinary traditional forms, since they represent the spiritual

66 See our article on the Thunderstones, in the Voile d’Isis of May 1929. 
67 Kemi, in the Egyptian language, means ‘black earth,’ a designation whose 
equivalent is also found in other peoples; the word alchemy is derived from this 
(al being only the article in Arabic) which originally designated the Hermetic 
science, which is to say, the sacerdotal science of Egypt. 
68 Isis et Osiris, 33; translated by Mario Meunier, p. 116. 
69 Ibid., 32, p. 112. In India, the opposite is true where the South is designated as 
the ‘side on the right’ (dakshina); but, in spite of appearances, it amounts to the 
same thing, as it is to say the side we have on our right when we turn to the 
East, and it is easy to imagine the left side of the world as extending to the right 
of him who imagines it, and conversely, as it takes place for the two people 
facing one another. 
70 Ibid., 10, p. 49. – It will be noted that the symbol, with the meaning given 
herein, is similar to that of the phoenix.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48 
The Veil of Isise two people 
facing one another. 
70 Ibid., 10, p. 49. – It will be noted that the symbol, with the meaning given 
herein, is similar to that of the phoenix.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48 
The Veil of Isis

centers that correspond respectively to these different forms; but, if the 
same symbolism applies uniformly to all these ‘Holy Lands,’ it is because 
these spiritual centers all have an analogous constitution, often even in 
their precise details, because they are so many images of the same unique 
and supreme center, which alone really is the ‘Center of the World,’ but 
whose attributes they take as a participant in its nature through direct 
communication, in which traditional orthodoxy resides, and as the actual 
representative, in a more or less external way, for certain times and 
places. In other words, there exists a ‘Holy Land’ par excellence, of which 
is the prototype of all the others, a spiritual center to which all the others 
are subordinated as to the seat of the primordial tradition, of which all 
traditions are derived by adaptation to such or such defined conditions 
defined by a people or a time. This ‘Holy Land’ par excellence, is the 
‘supreme land,’ following the meaning of the Sanskrit term Paradesha, 
which the Chaldeans named Pardes, and in the West as paradis; it is in-
deed the ‘terrestrial Paradise,’ which is the starting point of all tradition, 
having in its center the sole source from which flow the four rivers flow-
ing towards the cardinal points, and which is also the ‘residency of im-
mortality,’ as is readily apparent from the first chapters of Genesis.71 
We cannot think of reviewing here all the questions concerning the 
Supreme Center, which we have already treated elsewhere more or less 
completely: its preservation in a fluctuating manner according to the pe-
riods of the cycle, that is, from the ‘Terrestrial Paradise’ to the ‘Celestial 
Jerusalem’ which represents the two most extreme phases; the multiple 
names under which it is designated, such as Tula, Luz, Salem, Agartha; 
the various symbols that appear, such as the mountain, the cave, the is-
land, and many others, or in an immediate relation, with the symbolism 
of the ‘Pole’ or the ‘Axis Mundi.’ To add to these figurations, we may 
also point out the city, the citadel, the temple, or the palace, according to 
the aspect under which it is especially contemplated; and this is where 
we will recall, together with the Temple of Solomon, which is more di-
rectly related to the subject, the triple precinct of which we have spokenhich it is especially contemplated; and this is where 
we will recall, together with the Temple of Solomon, which is more di-
rectly related to the subject, the triple precinct of which we have spoken

71 This is why the ‘fountain of teaching’ is also the ‘fountain of youth’ (fons 
juventutis), because whoever drinks there is free from temporal condition; it is 
also located at the foot of the ‘Tree of Life’ (see our study on The Secret Language 
of Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amor’ in the Voile d’Isis of February 1929) and its wa-
ters are identified, naturally, as the ‘elixir of longevity’ by the Hermeticists (the 
idea of ‘longevity’ here having the same meaning as in the Oriental traditions), 
or the ‘drink of immortality,’ which is everywhere under a variety of names.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he Hermeticists (the 
idea of ‘longevity’ here having the same meaning as in the Oriental traditions), 
or the ‘drink of immortality,’ which is everywhere under a variety of names.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
49 
recently as representing the initiatic hierarchy of certain traditional cen-
ters,72 and also the mysterious labyrinth, which, in a more complex form, 
is related to a similar conception with the difference of an emphasis on a 
‘journey’ towards the hidden center.73 
We must now add that the symbolism of the ‘Holy Land’ has a double 
meaning: whether it is related to the Supreme Center or to a subordinate 
center, but also, by an association that is quite natural, the tradition that 
emanates from it or is preserved therein, which is to say, in the first case, 
the primordial tradition, and, in the second, a particular traditional 
form.74 This double meaning is also present very clearly in the symbolism 
of the ‘Holy Grail’ which is at the same time a vase (grasale) and a book 
(gradale or graduale); this last aspect clearly indicates the tradition while 
the other concerns it in a more direct manner, the state corresponding to 
the effective possession of this tradition, which is to say the ‘Edenic state’ 
if it is the primordial tradition; and whoever has reached this state is 
thereby integrated into the Pardes, so that one can say that his dwelling 
is now in the ‘Center of the World.’75 It is not without reason that we 
have displayed the close similarity of these two symbolisms, because 
when we speak of the ‘chivalry of the Holy Grail’ or the ‘guardians of 
the Holy Land,’ what we must hear by these two expressions is exactlyyed the close similarity of these two symbolisms, because 
when we speak of the ‘chivalry of the Holy Grail’ or the ‘guardians of 
the Holy Land,’ what we must hear by these two expressions is exactly

72 See our article on The Triple Druidic Precinct in the Voile d’Isis of June 1929; 
we have pointed out in detail the relation of this symbol, in its two circular and 
square forms, the connection with the symbolism of the ‘Terrestrial Paradise’ 
and the ‘Celestial Jerusalem.’ 
73 The Cretan labyrinth was the palace of Minos, whose name is identical to that 
of Manu, thus designating the primordial lawgiver. Moreover, one can under-
stand, by what has been said here, the reason why the route of the labyrinth was 
traced on the flaggings of some churches in the Middle Ages, which was re-
garded as replacing the pilgrimage to the Holy Land for those who could not 
accomplish it; it must be remembered that pilgrimage is precisely one of the 
faces of initiation, so that a ‘pilgrimage to the Holy Land,’ is, in the esoteric 
sense, the same as the ‘search for the Lost Word’ or the ‘quest for the Holy 
Grail.’ 
74 Analogously, from the cosmogonic point of view, the ‘Center of the World’ is 
the original point from which the Creator Word is uttered, and it is also the 
Word itself. 
75 It is important to remember, in this respect, that in all traditions, places essen-
tially symbolize states. Furthermore, we will remark that there is an obvious 
kinship between the symbolism of the vase or cup and that of the fountain men-
tioned above; we have also seen that among the Egyptians the vase was the hi-
eroglyph of the heart, the vital center of being. Finally, let us recall what we 
have said on other occasions about wine as a substitute for the Vedic soma and 
as a symbol of a hidden doctrine; in all this, in one form or another, it is always 
the ‘drink of immortality’ and the restoration of the ‘primordial state.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50 
The Veil of Isisas a symbol of a hidden doctrine; in all this, in one form or another, it is always 
the ‘drink of immortality’ and the restoration of the ‘primordial state.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50 
The Veil of Isis

the same thing; what remains for us to explain is the functions of these 
‘guardians,’ a function that was particularly attributed to the Templars.76 
To fully understand what it is, we must first distinguish between the 
holders of the tradition, whose function is to preserve and transmit it, 
and those who receive only to a degree, a communication, or we might 
say, somebody that takes part in tradition. Regarding the first, deposito-
ries and dispensers of the doctrine stand at the source, which is naturally 
near the very center; from there, the doctrine is communicated and dis-
tributed hierarchically according to the various initiatic stages, according 
to the currents represented by the four rivers of the Pardes, or, if we wish 
to resume from the figuration which we have studied recently, by the 
channels which, going from the interior to the exterior, connect together 
the successive precincts which correspond to these varying degrees. All 
those who participate in the tradition have therefore not reached the 
same degree and do not fulfill the same function; it would even be nec-
essary to make a distinction between two things, which, although gener-
ally corresponding in a certain way, are not strictly united, for it can 
happen that a man is intellectually qualified to attain the highest degrees, 
but is not fit to perform all the functions in the initiatic organization. 
Here, it is only the functions that we must consider; from this point of 
view, we will say that the ‘guardians’ stand at the borders of the spiritual 
center, taken in its widest sense, or at the last precinct, the one by which 
the center is at the same time separated and connected from the ‘outside 
world.’ Therefore, these ‘guardians’ have a dual function: on the one 
hand, they are properly the defenders of the ‘Holy Land,’ in the sense 
that they forbid access to those who do not possess the qualifications 
required to enter into it, and they constitute what we have called an 
‘outer cover,’ which is to say, they hide it from profane eyes; on the other 
hand, they also ensure regular relations with the outside, as we will ex-
plain later. 
It is obvious that the role of the defender is, to speak the language of 
the Hindu tradition, a function of Kshatriyas; and, precisely, any ‘chival-
ric’ initiation is essentially adapted to the proper nature of the men who 
belong to the warrior caste, which is to say the Kshatriyas. From this 
comes the special character of this initiation, the particular symbolism 
which it makes use of, and in particular, the intervention of an affective 
element, very explicitly designated by the term ‘Love.’ We have alreadyracter of this initiation, the particular symbolism 
which it makes use of, and in particular, the intervention of an affective 
element, very explicitly designated by the term ‘Love.’ We have already

76 Saint-Yves d’Alveydre uses, to designate the ‘guardians’ of the Supreme Cen-
ter, the expression ‘Templars of Agartha;’ the considerations we present here 
will show the accuracy of this term, of which he himself may not have grasped 
the entirety of its meaning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he expression ‘Templars of Agartha;’ the considerations we present here 
will show the accuracy of this term, of which he himself may not have grasped 
the entirety of its meaning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
51 
explained it sufficiently that we do not have to go any further than this.77 
But, in the case of the Templars, there is something more to consider: 
although their initiation was essentially ‘chivalric,’ as it suited their na-
ture and function, they had a dual character, at both the military and 
religious levels; and it must be so if they were, as we have many reasons 
to think, among the ‘guardians’ of the Supreme Center, where spiritual 
authority and temporal power are united in their common principle, and 
which communicates the mark of this meeting to all which is directly 
attached to it. In the Western world, where the spiritual takes the specif-
ically religious form, the true ‘guardians of the Holy Land,’ as long as 
they had an existence that was ‘official,’ they were to be knights, but 
knights who were monks at the same time; and indeed, that is what the 
Templars were. 
This brings us directly to the second role of the ‘guardians’ of the 
Supreme Center, a role which consisted, as stated earlier, in ensuring 
certain external relations, and above all we will add, in maintaining the 
link between the primordial tradition and secondary derived traditions. 
For this to be so, there must be, for each traditional form, one or more 
organizations constituted in this model, in all manifestations, composed 
of men with the consciousness of what is beyond all forms, which is to 
say, from the unique doctrine which is the source and essence of all the 
others, and which is nothing less than the primordial tradition. In the 
world of the Judeo-Christian tradition, such an organization should nat-
urally take as a symbol the Temple of Solomon; having long since ceased 
to exist materially, could at that time have only an ideal meaning, as be-
ing an image of the Supreme Center, as well as any subordinate spiritual 
center; the very etymology of the name of Jerusalem indicates quite 
clearly that it is but a visible image of the mysterious Salem of Melchize-
dek. If such was the character of the Knights Templar, they must, to fulfill 
the role assigned to them which concerns a specific fixed tradition, that 
of the Occident, remain attached externally to the form of this tradition; 
but at the same time, the inner consciousness of true doctrinal unity 
should enable them to communicate with other representatives of other 
traditions:78 this explains their relations with certain Oriental organiza-
tions, and naturally, with those that play a role similar to their own. 
Furthermore, one can understand, under these conditions, that the 
destruction of the order of the Temple caused for the West the rupturenaturally, with those that play a role similar to their own. 
Furthermore, one can understand, under these conditions, that the 
destruction of the order of the Temple caused for the West the rupture

77 See The Secret Language of Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amor,’ in the Voile d’Isis, 
February 1929. 
78 This refers to what has been symbolically called the ‘gift of languages;’ on this 
subject, we will refer to our article in the special issue of Voile d’Isis consecrated 
to the Rosicrucians.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

52 
The Veil of Isisolically called the ‘gift of languages;’ on this 
subject, we will refer to our article in the special issue of Voile d’Isis consecrated 
to the Rosicrucians.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

52 
The Veil of Isis

of the regular relations with the ‘Center of the World’ and it is indeed in 
the fourteenth century that this rupture first occurred, and which has 
been progressively accentuated until our time. However, this is not to 
say that every link was broken at one fell swoop; for quite a long time, 
relations could be maintained to a certain extent, but only in a hidden 
manner, through organizations such as the Fede Santa or the ‘Fedeli 
d’Amor,’ such as the ‘Massenie du Saint-Graal,’ and no doubt many oth-
ers, all heirs to the spirit of the order of the Temple, and for the most part 
attached to it by a more or less direct filiation. Those who preserved this 
living spirit and those who inspired these organizations without ever 
constituting themselves into any definite group, were those who were 
called, by an essentially symbolic name, the Rosicrucians; but a day came 
when these Rosicrucians themselves had to retire from the West, whose 
conditions had become such that their action could no longer be exer-
cised, and, it is said, they then retired to the Orient, absorbed somehow 
in towards the Supreme Center of which they were an emanation. For 
the Western world, there is no longer any ‘Holy Land’ to maintain since 
the path that leads to it is now is completely lost; how long will this sit-
uation last, and should it even be hoped that communication will ever be 
restored? This is a question that is not for us to answer; besides that we 
do not wish to risk any prophesying, the solution depends only on the 
West itself, because it is by returning to normal conditions and by recov-
ering the spirit of its own tradition, if it still has some, he will be able to 
see the path to the ‘Center of the World’ open once more.

--- PAGE BREAK ---urning to normal conditions and by recov-
ering the spirit of its own tradition, if it still has some, he will be able to 
see the path to the ‘Center of the World’ open once more.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Atlantis and Hyperborea 
Atlantide et Hyperborée, October 1929. 
In Atlantis (June 1929), Mr. Paul Le Cour brings up the note in our article 
in the previous May issue (The Thunderstones, p. 348), in which we af-
firm the distinction of Hyperborea and Atlantis, against those who would 
confuse the two and who speak of a ‘Hyperborean Atlantis.’ Truth be 
told, although Mr. Le Cour does indeed hold this notion, we do not think 
only of him when writing this note; it is also found in Herman Wirth, 
author of an important book on the origins of mankind (Der Aufgang der 
Menscheit) recently published in Germany, which constantly uses the 
term ‘North Atlantic’ to designate the region that was the origin of the 
primordial tradition. On the other hand, Mr. Le Cour is indeed the only 
one, to our knowledge at the least, who has given us an affirmation of 
the existence of a ‘Hyperborean Atlantis;’ if we had not named it in this 
respect, it is because people’s questions matter very little to us, and the 
only thing that concerned us was to warn our readers against a false in-
terpretation, wherever they might come from. We wonder how Mr. Le 
Cour interpreted us; we ask ourselves now more than ever, because now 
he is telling us that the North Pole, at the time of its origin, “was not that 
of today, but a neighboring region, it seems to be Iceland and Greenland;” 
how did he come up with this? We are absolutely certain to never have 
written a single word about this, to have never made even the slightest 
allusion to this issue, incidentally which is secondary to our point of 
view, of a possible pole displacement from the beginning of our Manvan-
tara;79 it is even more so because of this that we have never specified this 
in relation to the original issue, because, for a variety of reason, it is ra-
ther difficult to define in relation to present-day lands. 
Mr. Le Cour also says that, “in spite of our Hinduism, we agree that 
the origin of traditions is Western;” we do not agree with this, on the 
contrary, because we say that it is of a polar origin, and the pole, as we 
know, is not more Western than Eastern; we continue in our thinking 
that, as we said in the note referred to, North and West are two differente say that it is of a polar origin, and the pole, as we 
know, is not more Western than Eastern; we continue in our thinking 
that, as we said in the note referred to, North and West are two different

79 This question seems to be related to that of the inclination of the earth’s axis, 
an inclination which, according to some traditional data, would not have existed 
at the origin, but is a consequence of what is designated in the Western language 
as the ‘fall of man.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54 
The Veil of Isising to some traditional data, would not have existed 
at the origin, but is a consequence of what is designated in the Western language 
as the ‘fall of man.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54 
The Veil of Isis

cardinal directions. It is only at a time that is distant from the origin that 
the seat of the primordial tradition, transferred to other regions, could 
become either Western or Eastern, Western in some periods and Eastern 
for others, in any case, surely recently it is Eastern and already well be-
fore the beginning of the so-called ‘historical’ times (because they are the 
only times accessible to the investigations of ‘profane’ history). Further-
more, it is notable that it is not “in spite of our Hinduism” (Mr. Le Cour, 
in using this word, probably does not believe it to be entirely accurate), 
but on the contrary it is because of ‘our Hinduism’ that we regard the 
origin of traditions as Nordic, and even more exactly as polar, since this 
is expressly stated in the Vedas, as well as in other sacred books.80 The 
land where the sun circled the horizon without going to sleep was in fact 
much closer to the pole, if it is not the pole itself; it is also said that, later, 
the representatives of the tradition moved to a region where the longest 
day was double the shortest day, but this already relates to a later phase, 
which, geographically, had obviously nothing to do with Hyperborea. 
It may be that Mr. Le Cour is right in distinguishing between southern 
Atlantis and northern Atlantis, although they should never have been 
originally distinguished; but it is none the less true that northern Atlantis 
was not hyperborean. What complicates the question greatly, we very 
readily admit, is that the same designations have been applied in the 
course of time to very different regions, and not only to the successive 
locations of the primordial center of tradition, but also to secondary cen-
ters that proceeded more or less directly. We have pointed out this diffi-
culty in our study on The King of the World, where, precisely on the very 
page which Mr. Le Cour references (p. 115), we write this: “We must first 
distinguish between the Atlantic Thule (the place of origin of the Toltecs, 
which was likely located in northern Atlantis) and the Hyperborean 
Thule; and it is the latter which, in reality, represents the first and highest 
center for the whole of the present Manvantara; it was it which was the 
‘sacred island’ par excellence, and its location was literally polar. All the 
other ‘sacred islands,’ which are designated everywhere by names of 
identical signification, were only images of this one; and this applies even 
to the spiritual center of the Atlantean tradition, which governs only a 
secondary historical cycle subordinate to that of the Manvantara.”81 Andwere only images of this one; and this applies even 
to the spiritual center of the Atlantean tradition, which governs only a 
secondary historical cycle subordinate to that of the Manvantara.”81 And

80 Those who would like to have specific references in this respect can find them 
in B. G. Tilak’s remarkable book The Arctic Home in the Vedas, which, unfortu-
nately, seems to be largely unknown in Europe, probably because its author was 
an un-Westernized Hindu. 
81 With regard to the Atlantean Thule, we believe it interesting to reproduce here 
a piece of information which we noticed in a geographical chronicle in the Jour-
nal des Débats (January 22, 1929), on the Indians of the Isthmus of Panama, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---to reproduce here 
a piece of information which we noticed in a geographical chronicle in the Jour-
nal des Débats (January 22, 1929), on the Indians of the Isthmus of Panama, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
55 
we added in a note: “A great difficulty to determine the junction point of 
the Atlantean tradition with the Hyperborean tradition, this is due to 
certain substitutions of names which can lead to confusion, but the ques-
tion, in spite of everything, may not be entirely unsolvable.” 
Speaking of this ‘junction point’ we thought first of all of Druidism; 
and here it is precisely that, concerning Druidism, we find again in At-
lantis (July-August 1929) another note which proves how difficult it is to 
understand. With respect to our June article on the ‘triple precinct,’ Mr. 
Le Cour writes: “It is restricting the scope of this symbol to only make it 
a druidic symbol; it is likely that it is older and radiates beyond the dru-
idic world.” But we are far from restricting it merely as a druidic symbol, 
in this article, after noting, according to the work of Mr. Le Cour himself, 
examples from Italy and Greece, we said (p. 397): “the fact that this same 
figure is found elsewhere than among the Celts would indicate that there 
were, in other traditional forms, hierarchies built on the same model, 
which is perfectly ordinary.” As for the question of anteriority, it would 
first be necessary to know at what precise time Druidism originates, and 
it is probable that it goes back much farther than one believes usually, 
especially as the Druids were the possessors of a tradition of which a 
notable part was incontestably of a hyperborean origin. 
We will take this opportunity to make another remark which is im-
portant: we say ‘Hyperborea’ to conform to the usage that has prevailed 
since the time of the Greeks; but the usage of this word shows that even 
at this ‘classical’ time, it had already lost the meaning of its primitive 
designation. Indeed, it would be sufficient to say ‘Borea,’ a word strictly 
synonymous to the Sanskrit Varaha, or rather, when it comes to a land, 
to its female derivative Varahi: it is the ‘land of the wild boar,’ which also 
became the ‘land of the bear’ at one time, during the period of Kshatriyas 
dominance that Parashurama ended.82a land, 
to its female derivative Varahi: it is the ‘land of the wild boar,’ which also 
became the ‘land of the bear’ at one time, during the period of Kshatriyas 
dominance that Parashurama ended.82

whose importance clearly escaped the author of this article: “In 1925, a large part 
of the Kuna Indians rose up and deposed the Panamanian police who lived on 
their territory and founded the independent republic of Tule, whose flag is a 
swastika on an orange background with a red border. This republic still exists 
today.” This seems to indicate that there is much more to the traditions of an-
cient America than one might be tempted to believe. 
82 This name of Varahi applies to the ‘holy land’ equated symbolically to a cer-
tain aspect of the Shakti of Vishnu, which is considered especially in the third 
avatara; there is a lot to say on this subject, and maybe we will return to it 
someday. This same name has never been able to designate Europe as Saint-Yves 
d’Alveydre seems to have believed; furthermore, we would have perhaps seen a 
little clearer on these questions about the West, if Fabre d’Olivet and those who 
followed him had not inextricably mixed the story of Parashurama and that of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56 
The Veil of Isisittle clearer on these questions about the West, if Fabre d’Olivet and those who 
followed him had not inextricably mixed the story of Parashurama and that of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56 
The Veil of Isis

To conclude this necessary explanation, we have yet to say a few 
words on three or four questions which Mr. Le Cour incidentally men-
tions in his two notes; firstly, there is an allusion to the swastika, of which 
he says that “we make as the sign of the pole.” Without affixing the least 
animosity, we will here pray that Mr. Le Cour does not affix his case to 
ours, for we finally we must say things as they are: we consider him to 
be a ‘researcher’ (which is not to lessen his merit), which offers explana-
tions according to his personal views, which sometimes are a bit adven-
turous, and this is his right since he is not attached to any tradition cur-
rently alive and is not in possession of any data received by direct trans-
mission; we could say, in other words, that he does archaeology while 
we do initiatic science, and there are two points of view for the two, even 
when they touch on the same subjects, that cannot coincide in anyway. 
We do not ‘make’ the swastika the sign of the pole; we say that it is, and 
always has been, that this is its true traditional meaning, which is quite 
different; it is a fact to which neither Mr. Le Cour nor ourselves can 
change. Mr. Le Cour, who obviously can only make more or less hypo-
thetical interpretations, claims that the swastika “is only a symbol refer-
ring to an ideal without elevation;”83 this is his way of seeing things, but 
it is nothing more, and we are all the less disposed to discuss it, which, 
after all, represents a mere sentimental appreciation; ‘elevated’ or not, an 
‘ideal’ is for us something rather hollow, and, in truth, it is much more 
‘positive,’ and we would say so willingly had this word not been abused. 
Mr. Le Cour, on the other hand, does not seem satisfied with the note 
we have given (in the June issue, p. 430) when speaking of the article by 
one of his collaborators who was anxious to see opposition between East 
and West, which showed quite clearly, vis-à-vis the Orient, a deplorable 
exclusivism.84 He writes some astonishing things about this: “Mr. René 
Guénon, who is a pure logician, cannot seek, both in the East and in the 
West, other than the purely intellectual side of things, as his writings 
prove; he again shows it by stating that Agni is self-sufficient (see Reg-
nabit, April 1926) and he ignores the Aor-Agni duality, which we oftene purely intellectual side of things, as his writings 
prove; he again shows it by stating that Agni is self-sufficient (see Reg-
nabit, April 1926) and he ignores the Aor-Agni duality, which we often

Ramachandra, which is to say, the sixth and seventh avataras, which are distinct 
in all respects. 
83 We wish to assume that in writing these words Mr. Le Cour had in view the 
modern and non-traditional interpretations of the swastika, such as those con-
ceived of by the German ‘racists,’ for example, who claimed to seize this emblem, 
affixing to it the baroque and insignificant designation of hakenkreuz or ‘hooked 
cross.’ 
84 Mr. Le Cour reproaches us for having said in this link that his collaborator 
“certainly does not have the gift of languages,” and he finds that “this is an un-
fortunate statement;” alas, he simply confuses the ‘gift of languages’ with lin-
guistic knowledge; what is at stake has absolutely nothing to do with erudition.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
57 
return to because it is the cornerstone of the building of the manifested 
world.” Despite our indifference to what has been written about us, we 
cannot say that we are a ‘pure logician,’ whereas we do not consider logic 
and dialectic only as mere instruments of exposition, sometimes used in 
this respect, but of an entirely external character, and without any inter-
est in themselves; we repeat ourselves only once more that anything 
other than the initiatic point of view, and everything else, which is to say 
all that is ‘profane’ knowledge is entirely devoid of value in our eyes.

If 
it is true that we often speak of a ‘pure intellectuality,’ it is because this 
expression has a very different meaning for us than for Mr.

Le Cour, who 
seems to confuse ‘intelligence’ with ‘reason,’ and who considers on the 
one hand, an ‘aesthetic intuition,’ whereas there is no other true intuition 
than ‘intellectual intuition’ of a supra-rational order; that is something 
more formidable than anyone who obviously does not have the slightest 
suspicion of what ‘metaphysical realization’ may be, and who is probably 
thinking that we are only a type of theoretician, which proves once again 
that he has misread our writings, which oddly appear to irritate him.

As 
for the history of Aor-Agni, which we do not “ignore” at all, it would be 
good to conclude once and for all with these reveries, which Mr.

Le Cour 
does not have a stake in: if ‘Agni is self-sufficient unto himself,’ it is for 
this reason that this term, in Sanskrit, designates fire in all aspects, with-
out any exception, and those who claim the contrary prove simply by 
this their total ignorance of the Hindu tradition.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As 
for the history of Aor-Agni, which we do not “ignore” at all, it would be 
good to conclude once and for all with these reveries, which Mr. Le Cour 
does not have a stake in: if ‘Agni is self-sufficient unto himself,’ it is for 
this reason that this term, in Sanskrit, designates fire in all aspects, with-
out any exception, and those who claim the contrary prove simply by 
this their total ignorance of the Hindu tradition. We did not say anything 
else in the note of our article in Regnabit, which we believe necessary to 
reproduce here, verbatim: “Knowing that the readers of Regnabit are 
aware of the theories of a teaching whose work, though very interesting 
and highly estimable in some respects, calls for some reservations, we 
must say here that we cannot accept the use of the terms Aor and Agni 
to designate the two complementary aspects of fire (light and heat). In-
deed, the first of these two words is Hebrew, while the second is Sanskrit, 
and we cannot thus associate terms borrowed from different traditions, 
whatever the actual concordances that exist between them, and even in 
the innate identity that hides under the diversity of their forms; we must 
not confuse ‘syncretism’ with a real synthesis. Furthermore, if Aor is ex-
clusively light, Agni is the igneous principle in its entirety (the Latin ignis 
being the same word), so both as light and as heat, the restriction of this 
term to the designation of heat is quite arbitrary and unjustified.” It is 
scarcely necessary to say that, in writing this note, we have not thought 
in the least bit of Mr. Le Cour; we thought only of the Hieron of Paray-
le-Monial, to whom the invention of this odd verbal association is at-
tributed. We feel that we do not have to ignore a whimsy from the some-
what fertile imagination of Mr. de Sarachaga, which is therefore entirely

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58 
The Veil of Isisation is at-
tributed. We feel that we do not have to ignore a whimsy from the some-
what fertile imagination of Mr. de Sarachaga, which is therefore entirely

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58 
The Veil of Isis

devoid of authority and not of any value from the traditional point of 
view, to which we maintain strictly.85 
Finally, Mr. Le Cour takes advantage of the situation to assert anew 
the anti-metaphysical and anti-initiatic theory of Western ‘individual-
ism,’ which, after all, is his affair and binds him; he adds, with a sort of 
pride that shows there is, in reality, very little individual contingencies 
present: “We maintain our point of view because we are the ancestors in 
the domain of knowledge.” This pretension is really quite extraordinary; 
does Mr. Le Cour really think that he is so old? Not only are modern 
Westerners the ancestors of no one, but they are not even legitimate de-
scendants because they have lost the key to their own tradition; it is not 
that ‘in the Orient there has been deviation,’ whatever those ignorant of 
Oriental doctrines may say. The ‘ancestors,’ to use Mr. Le Cour’s words, 
are the effective holders of the primordial tradition; there can be no oth-
ers, and at the present time they certainly do not exist in the West.

85 It is the same Mr. De Sarachaga who wrote zwadisca in place of swastika; one 
of his disciples, who commented one day on this, assured us that he must have 
his reasons for writing it thus; this is a justification that is a little too simple!

--- PAGE BREAK ---swastika; one 
of his disciples, who commented one day on this, assured us that he must have 
his reasons for writing it thus; this is a justification that is a little too simple!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Concerning the Masons of the Middle Ages 
A propos des Constructeurs du moyen âge, November 1929. 
An article by Mr. Armand Bédarride, published last May in the respective 
issue of Symbolisme, which we have previously alluded to in our review 
column, seems to us to be an opportunity to reflect on some useful notes. 
This article, entitled The Ideas of our Forerunners, deals with the construc-
tion corporations of the Middle Ages that are considered to have trans-
mitted something of their spirit and traditions down to modern Masonry. 
It should first be point out on this note that the distinction between 
‘operative Masonry’ and ‘speculative Masonry’ seems to us to be inter-
preted in a totally different sense than is ordinarily attributed to it. In-
deed, it is often that the ‘operative’ Masons were only mere workers and 
craftsmen, nothing more, nothing less, and that the symbolism with more 
or less profound meanings would only have come later, as a result of the 
introduction of different artisans outside the art of building that were 
introduced into the corporate organizations. This is not the opinion of 
Mr. Bédarride, who cites a large number of examples, notably in religious 
monuments of figures whose symbolic character is incontestable; in par-
ticular, he speaks of the two columns on the Würzburg cathedral, “which 
prove,” he says, “that the fourteenth century Masons built a philosophi-
cal symbolism,” which is true, provided, that you understand this in the 
sense of ‘hermetic philosophy,’ and not in the ordinary sense that would 
be profane philosophy, which, furthermore, has never made the slightest 
use of any symbolism. We can multiply the examples indefinitely; the 
very plan of the cathedrals is eminently symbols, as we have already re-
marked on other occasions; and it must be added that among the symbols 
used in the Middle Ages, besides those which the modern Masons have 
kept the memory of while hardly understanding the meaning, there are 
many others of which they have not the slightest idea.86ols 
used in the Middle Ages, besides those which the modern Masons have 
kept the memory of while hardly understanding the meaning, there are 
many others of which they have not the slightest idea.86

86 We have recently had occasion to raise attention to, at the cathedral of Stras-
bourg and on other buildings of Alsace, a rather large number of marks of stone-
cutters, dating from various times between the twelfth and the beginning of the 
seventeenth century; among these marks, there are some very curious ones, and 
we have especially noticed the swastika, to which Mr. Bédarride alludes to, in 
one of the turrets of the steeples of Strasbourg.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60 
The Veil of Isissome very curious ones, and 
we have especially noticed the swastika, to which Mr. Bédarride alludes to, in 
one of the turrets of the steeples of Strasbourg.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60 
The Veil of Isis

In our opinion, it is necessary, to counter the current opinion, and to 
consider ‘speculative Masonry’ as, in many respects, a degeneration of 
‘operative Masonry.’ The latter, indeed, was really complete in its order, 
possessing both the theory and the corresponding practice, and its des-
ignations may, in this regard, be understood as an allusion to the ‘oper-
ations’ of ‘sacred art,’ whose construction according to traditional rules 
was one of the operations. As for ‘speculative Masonry,’ which came into 
being at a time when the Mason corporations were in full decay, its name 
indicates quite clearly that it is confined to pure and simple ‘speculation,’ 
which is to say, a theory without realization; certainly, it would be odd 
to look at it as ‘progress.’ If even there had been just a diminution, the 
evil would not be as great as it really is; but, as we have already said 
several times, there was also a real deviation at the beginning of the 
eighteenth century, during the formation of the Great Lodge of England, 
which was the starting point for all modern Masonry. We shall not press 
further for the moment, but we wish to point out that, if we really wish 
to understand the spirit of the Masons of the Middle Ages, these obser-
vations are absolutely essential; otherwise, one would only have a false 
idea, or at the least, a very incomplete one. 
Another idea that is no less important to rectify is that the use of 
symbolism would have simply been imposed due to reasons of prudence. 
That these reasons have sometimes existed we do not dispute, but this is 
only the outermost and least interesting part of the question; we said it 
about Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amor’,87 and we will reiterate it once more 
with regard to the corporations of Masons, all the more so because there 
have been close links between all these organizations, apparently so dif-
ferent in character, but all of them participating in the same knowledge 
of tradition.88 Symbolism is the normal mode of expression for 
knowledge of this order; this is its true raison d’être, and this, in all times 
and in all countries, even in cases where there was no need to conceal 
anything, and simply because it consists of things which, by their very 
nature, cannot be expressed otherwise than in this form. 
The mistake which we often find in this respect, and of which we find 
to a certain extent as an echo in the article of Mr. Bédarride, seems to 
have two principal reasons, the first of which is that, generally speaking, 
it is difficult to imagine what Catholicism was in the Middle Ages. It 
should not be forgotten that, just as there is a Muslim esoterism, there 
was also at that time a Catholic esoterism, we mean an esoterism that 
takes its base and its point of support in the symbols and rites of thergotten that, just as there is a Muslim esoterism, there 
was also at that time a Catholic esoterism, we mean an esoterism that 
takes its base and its point of support in the symbols and rites of the

87 See the Voile d’Isis of February 1929. 
88 The Compagnons of the ‘Rite of Solomon’ have preserved the memory of their 
connection to the Order of the Temple to this day.

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the

87 See the Voile d’Isis of February 1929. 
88 The Compagnons of the ‘Rite of Solomon’ have preserved the memory of their 
connection to the Order of the Temple to this day.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
61 
Catholic religion, superimposing upon it without opposing it in any man-
ner; and there is no doubt that certain religious orders were far from 
being foreign to this esoterism. If the tendency of most modern Catholics 
is to deny the existence of these things, it only proves that they are not 
better informed in this respect than the rest of their contemporaries. 
The second reason for the error that we have pointed out is that they 
imagine that what is hidden under the symbols are almost exclusively 
social or political conceptions;89 in reality, it is far more than this. The 
conceptions of this order could not have, in the eyes of those who pos-
sessed certain knowledge, an altogether secondary importance, which is 
that of a possible application among many others; we will even add that 
wherever this assumption has come to assume too great a place and be-
come predominant, they have invariably been a cause of degeneration 
and deviation.90 Is this not precisely the reason why modern Masonry 
has lost the understanding of what it still retains of the old symbolism 
and traditions of which, in spite of all its insufficiencies, it seems to be, 
the sole heir in the Western world today? If we object to, as proof of the 
social concerns of the Masons, satirical figures that are more or less li-
centious that is sometimes encountered in their works, the reason is very 
simple: these figures are primarily intended to baffle the laymen, who 
stop at the external appearances and do not seek what lies deeper. There 
is something here that is far from being unique to the Masons; certain 
writers, such as Boccaccio, Rabelais especially, and many others, have 
taken the same mask and used the same processes. It must be believed 
that this scheme has been successful, since, even today, and perhaps es-
pecially today, the laymen still are fooled. 
If we wish to reach the bottom of things, we must see in the symbol-
ism of the Masons the expression of certain traditional sciences, related 
to what we can, in a general way, denotate by the name of ‘hermeticism.’ 
Only, we should not believe, because we are speaking of ‘sciences,’ that 
it is something comparable to secular science which is known only to 
almost all moderns; it seems that an assimilation of this sort has been 
made in the mind of Mr. Bédarride, who speaks of “the changing form of 
the positive knowledge of science,” which applies properly and exclu-
sively to secular science, and who, taking literally what is purely sym-
bolic images, believes in discovering ‘evolutionary’ and even ‘transform-
ative’ ideas, ideas which are in absolute contradiction with all traditionalce, and who, taking literally what is purely sym-
bolic images, believes in discovering ‘evolutionary’ and even ‘transform-
ative’ ideas, ideas which are in absolute contradiction with all traditional

89 This view is largely that of Aroux and Rossetti as far as Dante’s interpretation 
is concerned and is also found in many passages of The History of Magic by Eli-
phas Lévi. 
90 The example of some Muslim organizations, in which political concerns have 
stifled the original spirituality, is very clear in this respect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62 
The Veil of Isis

data. In many of our works we have developed at length the essential 
distinction between sacred, or traditional, science and secular science; we 
cannot think of reproducing all these considerations here, but at the least 
we have seen fit to draw attention once more to this important point. 
We shall add but a few words to conclude: it is not without reason 
that Janus, among the Romans, was both the god of initiation into the 
mysteries and the god of the guilds of artisans; it is not sound reason 
either that the Masons of the Middle Ages kept the same two solsticial 
feasts of the same Janus, that became the two Saint Johns of the winter 
and the summer; and when we learn of Saint John’s connection with the 
esoteric side of Christianity, does it not immediately appear that, under 
another adaption required by circumstances and by the ‘cyclical laws,’ it 
is the same initiation into the mysteries that it once was?

--- PAGE BREAK ---, does it not immediately appear that, under 
another adaption required by circumstances and by the ‘cyclical laws,’ it 
is the same initiation into the mysteries that it once was?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A New Book on the Order 
of the Elect Priests 
Un nouveau livre sur l'Ordre des Elus Coens, 
December 1929. 
Mr. R. Le Forestier, who specializes in the historical studies of secret, ma-
sonic, and other such organizations of the second half of the eighteenth 
century, published an important volume a few months ago about Occult-
ist Freemasonry in the Eighteenth Century and the Order of the Elus Coens. 
This title calls for a slight reservation, because the word ‘occultist,’ which 
seems to have never been used before Eliphas Lévi, appears to be an 
anachronism; perhaps it would have been better to find another term, 
this is not a mere question of words, because what was properly called 
‘occultism’ is really a product of the nineteenth century. 
The work is divided into three sections: the first deals with the ‘doc-
trines and practices of the Elus Coens;’ the second, relations between ‘the 
Elus Coens and the occultist tradition’ (the word ‘esoteric’ would cer-
tainly have been the most appropriate here); the third, with the ‘founding 
and history of the Order.’ All which is properly historical is very well 
written and supported by a very serious study of the documents that the 
author had at his disposal, and we cannot recommend reading it enough. 
From this point of view, there is very little to regret, but a few shortcom-
ings become apparent in regard to the biography of Martinez de 
Pasqually, of which there are some dim points; the Voile d’Isis will soon 
publish new documents that may help to elucidate them. 
The first part is an excellent overview of the content of the Treatise 
on the Reintegration of Beings, a rather confusing book, written in an im-
proper style which is sometimes unintelligible, and which, furthermore, 
remained unfinished; it was not easy to draw a coherent statement from 
it, and we must praise Mr. Le Forestier for succeeding in this. There re-
mains, however, a certain ambiguity as to the nature of the ‘operations’ 
of the Elus Coens: were they actually ‘theurgic’ or only ‘magic?’ The au-
thor does not seem to perceive that these are two essentially different 
things which are not of the same order; it is possible that this confusion 
existed among the Coens themselves, whose initiation always seemed toto perceive that these are two essentially different 
things which are not of the same order; it is possible that this confusion 
existed among the Coens themselves, whose initiation always seemed to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64 
The Veil of Isisy different 
things which are not of the same order; it is possible that this confusion 
existed among the Coens themselves, whose initiation always seemed to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64 
The Veil of Isis

have remained rather incomplete in many respects, but it would be ben-
eficial to have pointed this out. We would gladly say that it appears to be 
rituals of ‘ceremonial magic’ with theurgic pretensions, which opens the 
door to many illusions; and the importance attributed to mere ‘phenom-
enal’ manifestations, for what Martinez called the ‘passes’ were nothing 
more than this, proves that the domain of illusions was never surpassed. 
What is more sad in this story, in our opinion, is that the founder of the 
Elus Coens may have thought himself in possession of transcendent 
knowledge, where as it was only knowledge that, although real, was still 
only of a secondary order. There must have been, for these reasons, a 
certain confusion between the ‘initiatic’ point of view and the ‘mystic’ 
point of view, because the doctrines he expresses always have a religious 
form, whereas his ‘operations’ have no such character; it is unfortunate 
that Mr. Le Forestier seems to accept this confusion and does not have a 
clear enough idea of the distinction of the two points of view in question. 
Furthermore, it should be noted that what Martinez calls ‘reintegration’ 
does not exceed the possibilities of the individual human being; this point 
is very clearly established by the author, but it would have been neces-
sary to draw from it some very important consequences as to the limits 
of the teachings which the leader of the Elus Coens could distribute to 
his disciples, and, consequently, of the ‘realization’ which he could lead 
them. 
The second portion is the least satisfactory, and Mr. Le Forestier, per-
haps in spite of himself, has not been able to free himself from a certain 
spirit that we can describe as ‘rationalist,’ and this must be due to his 
university education. Some similarities between various traditional doc-
trines does not necessarily imply borrowing or direct influence; wher-
ever the same truths are expressed, it is natural that such similarities ex-
ist; and this applies in particular to the science of numbers, whose mean-
ings are by no means a human invention or an arbitrary conception. We 
will say the same for astrology; these are cosmic laws which do not de-
pend on us, and we do not see why everything connected to them should 
be borrowed from the Chaldeans, as if they had a monopoly on this 
knowledge; the same holds true of angelology, which is closely con-
nected with it, and it is not possible, unless one accepts all the prejudices 
of modern ‘criticism,’ to look upon it as having been ignored by the He-
brews until the time of Babylon’s captivity. Let us add that Mr. Le For-
estier does not seem to have a perfectly correct notion of Kabbalah, 
whose name simply means ‘tradition’ in the most general sense, but 
which he equates with a certain particular state of the teachings in the 
written wordings of such or such teachings, so that it happens that “Kab-ly means ‘tradition’ in the most general sense, but 
which he equates with a certain particular state of the teachings in the 
written wordings of such or such teachings, so that it happens that “Kab-

--- PAGE BREAK ---in the most general sense, but 
which he equates with a certain particular state of the teachings in the 
written wordings of such or such teachings, so that it happens that “Kab-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
65 
balah was born in southern France and northern Spain” and dates its or-
igins to the thirteenth century; here again, the ‘critical’ mind, which is 
unaware of any form of oral transmission, has gone too far. Let us finally 
note here a last point: the word Pardes (which is, as we explained in other 
circumstances, the Sanskrit Paradesha, ‘supreme land,’ and not a Persian 
word meaning ‘animal park’, which does not seem to us to have a pro-
found meaning despite the link with the Cherubim of Ezekiel) does not 
designate a mere ‘mystical speculation,’ but rather the obtaining of a cer-
tain state, which is the restoration of the ‘primordial’ or ‘Edenic state,’ 
which shares a close similarity with the ‘reintegration’ envisaged by 
Martinez.91 
All these reservations made, it is quite certain that the form of which 
Martinez has taken as his teachings is of a strictly Jewish inspiration, 
which moreover does not imply that he himself was of a Jewish origin 
(this is one of the points which has not been sufficiently clarified so far) 
nor that he was insincerely Christian. Mr. Le Forestier is right to speak 
of ‘Esoteric Christianity’ in this connection, but we do not see why con-
ceptions of this order would be denied the right to call themselves au-
thentically Christian; to maintain the modern ideas of an exclusively and 
narrowly exoteric religion is to deny to Christianity any really profound 
meaning, and it is also to disregard all that there was in the Middle Ages, 
and of which, precisely, we find as a reflection, perhaps weakened, in 
organizations like that of the Elus Coens.92 We know well what hinders 
our contemporaries here: it is their tendency to reduce everything to a 
question of ‘historicity,’ a preoccupation that seems to be common now 
to the partisans and opponents of Christianity, although the opponents 
are certainly the first to have brought the debate to this level. Let us say 
it very clearly, if Christ were to be considered only as a historical figure, 
he would be largely uninteresting; the consideration of the Christ-prin-
ciple has an entirely different importance; and, furthermore, one doesrist were to be considered only as a historical figure, 
he would be largely uninteresting; the consideration of the Christ-prin-
ciple has an entirely different importance; and, furthermore, one does

91 In this link, we have noted a rather amusing misunderstanding in one of Will-
ermoz’s letters to the Baron of Turkeim published by Mr. Émile Dermenghem 
as a result of Sleepers: Willermoz protests against the assertion that the book of 
Errors and Truths of Saint Martin “came from the Parthes;” what he mistook as 
the name of a people, who in fact had nothing to do with this, was evidently the 
word Pardes, which was probably quite unknown to him. As for the Baron of 
Turkeim speaking on the subject “of the Pardes, a classical work of the Kabba-
lists,” we think that what he was dealing with in reality must be the work enti-
tled Pardes Rimonim. 
92 Instead of ‘Esoteric Christianity,’ it would be better to say ‘Christian eso-
terism,’ which is to say, it takes its base in Christianity, but it marks that what 
is involved does not belong to the religious field; the same naturally applies to 
Muslim esoterism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66 
The Veil of Isist takes its base in Christianity, but it marks that what 
is involved does not belong to the religious field; the same naturally applies to 
Muslim esoterism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66 
The Veil of Isis

not exclude the other, because, as we have already said often, the histor-
ical facts themselves have a symbolic value and express the principles in 
their own way and in their own order; for the moment we cannot press 
on this point further, which seems quite clear to us. 
The third portion is devoted to the history of the Order of the Elus 
Coens, whose actual existence was rather brief, the exposition of which 
one can learn of the various ranks, which seems to have never been fully 
completed and developed, any more than those of the famous ‘opera-
tions.’ It may not be correct to label it as ‘Scottish,’ as Mr. Le Forestier 
does, all systems of high Masonic ranks without exception, or to see, as 
it were, a mere mask in the Masonic character given by Martinez to the 
Elus Coens; but a comprehensive discussion of these issues may drag us 
too far astray.93 We only wish to draw attention to, in a more specific 
way, the name of ‘Réau-Cross’ given by Martinez to the highest ranks of 
his ‘regime,’ as it was then called, and in which Mr. Le Forestier only 
wishes to see an imitation, or even counterfeiting, of the ‘Rose-Cross;’ 
for us, this is something else. In the mind of Martinez, the ‘Réau-Cross’ 
was to be, on the contrary, the true ‘Rose-Cross,’ while the rank which 
bore the latter name in ordinary Masonry was only ‘apocryphal,’ follow-
ing the expression he uses often; but where does this strange name of 
‘Réau-Cross’ come from, and what does it mean? According to Martinez, 
the true name of Adam was “Roux in the vernacular and Réau in He-
brew,” meaning the “Man-God who was very strong in wisdom, virtue, 
and power,” an interpretation which, at first sight at the least, seems 
quite fanciful. The truth is that Adam literally means ‘red;’ adamah is red 
clay, and damah is blood, which is also red; Edom, a name given to Esau, 
also has the meaning of ‘red;’ and this red color is most often taken as a 
symbol of strength or power, which partly justifies Martinez’s explana-
tion. As for the form of Réau, it certainly has nothing to do with Hebrew; 
but we think that it must be seen as a phonetic assimilation with the 
word roeh, ‘seer,’ which was the first designation for the prophets, and 
whose meaning is quite comparable to that of the Sanskrit rishi; this sort 
of phonetic symbolism is not exceptional, as we have indicated on a va-
riety of occasions,94 and it would hardly be surprising that Martinez hase comparable to that of the Sanskrit rishi; this sort 
of phonetic symbolism is not exceptional, as we have indicated on a va-
riety of occasions,94 and it would hardly be surprising that Martinez has

93 With regard to the various systems of high grades, we are a little surprised to 
see attributed to the ‘Council of Emperors of the Orient and the Occident’ the 
‘aristocracy of birth and money,’ whose founder seems to have been the ‘Master 
Pirlet, tailor of clothes,’ as documents of the time state: as badly informed as 
Thory was on certain points, he certainly did not invent this piece of information 
(Acta Latomorum, vol. I, p.79). 
94 Mr. Le Forestier also points out another example in Martinez himself: it is the 
link he establishes, by a kind of anagram, between ‘Noachites’ and ‘Chinese.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---m, vol. I, p.79). 
94 Mr. Le Forestier also points out another example in Martinez himself: it is the 
link he establishes, by a kind of anagram, between ‘Noachites’ and ‘Chinese.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
67 
used it here to refer to one of the principal characters inherent in the 
‘Edenic state,’ and, consequently, to signify the possession of this state. 
If this is true, the expression ‘Réau-Cross,’ by the addition of the ‘Re-
storer’ Cross to this first name of Réau, indicates the ‘minor restored in 
his prerogatives,’ to speak the language of the Treatise on the Reintegra-
tion of Beings, which is to say the ‘restored man,’ who is indeed the ‘sec-
ond Adam’ of Saint Paul, and who is also the true ‘Rosicrucian.’95 Indeed, 
it is not an imitation of the term ‘Rose-Cross,’ it would have been much 
easier to simply appropriate it as many others have done, but it is one of 
the many interpretations or adaptations to which it can legitimately give 
rise, which, of course, does not mean that Martinez’s claims as to the real 
effects of his “ordination of the Réau-Cross” were fully justified. 
To finish this all too brief examination, let us mention one last point: 
Mr. Le Forestier is quite right in seeing in the expression ‘glorious form,’ 
which is frequently used by Martinez, and where ‘glorious’ is in a way 
synonymous with ‘luminous,’ an allusion to the Shekinah (which some 
old Masonic rituals, by an odd deformation, call the Stekenna);96 but it is 
exactly the same with that of the ‘glorious body,’ which is commonplace 
in Christianity, even exoterically, ever since Saint Paul: “Sown in corrup-
tion, resurrected in glory…,” and also of the designation from the ‘light 
of glory’ in which, according to the most orthodox theology, the ‘beatific 
vision’ takes place. This shows that there is no opposition between ex-
oterism and esoterism; there is only a superposition of the latter on the 
former, esoterism giving, to the truths expressed that are veiled by ex-
oterism, the fullness of their superior and profound meaning.nd esoterism; there is only a superposition of the latter on the 
former, esoterism giving, to the truths expressed that are veiled by ex-
oterism, the fullness of their superior and profound meaning.

95 The cross is itself the symbol of the ‘Universal Man,’ and we can say that it 
represents the very form of man brought back to his original center, from which 
he was separated by the ‘Fall,’ or, according to the vernacular of Martinez, by 
‘prevarication.’ 
96 The word ‘glory,’ applied to the triangle bearing the Tetragammaton and sur-
rounded by rays, which appears in the churches as well as in the Lodges, is in-
deed one of the designations of the Shekinah, as we have explained in The King 
of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

About the ‘Lyonnais Rose-Cross’ 
À propos des « Rose-Croix Lyonnais », January 1930.deed one of the designations of the Shekinah, as we have explained in The King 
of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

About the ‘Lyonnais Rose-Cross’ 
À propos des « Rose-Croix Lyonnais », January 1930.

The number of studies on Martinez de Pasqually and his disciples are 
increasing at this moment in a curious way: after the book of Mr. Le For-
estier, of which we spoke of last month, Mr. Paul Vulliaud, in turn, has 
published a volume entitled The Lyonnais Rose-Cross in the Eighteenth 
Century.97 This title does not seem to us to be justified, because, to tell 
the truth, if we put aside the introduction there is no inquiry into the 
Rose-Cross in the book; would it not have been inspired by the famous 
name of ‘Réau-Cross,’ of which Mr. Vulliaud, was not preoccupied in 
seeking an explanation? It is possible; the use of this term does not imply 
any historical connection between the Rosicrucians proper and the Elus 
Coens, and in any case, there is no reason to include under the same 
name organizations such as the Strict Observance and the Rectified Scot-
tish Regime, which, in their spirit and in their form, certainly had no 
Rosicrucian character. We will go even further: in the Mason rites where 
there is a ‘Rose-Cross rank,’ this one symbol has only been borrowed 
from the Rosicrucians, and to qualify its possessors as ‘of the Rose-
Cross,’ without further explanations, would be a rather unfortunate 
equivocation; there is something of the same sort in the title used by Mr. 
Vulliaud. For him, other words still, such as ‘illuminated’ for example, do 
not seem to have a very precise meaning either; these appear quite hap-
hazardly and capable of substituting one another, which can only create 
confusion in the mind of the reader, who will already have enough trou-
ble recognizing himself in the multitude of the Rites and Orders existing 
at the time in question. However, we do not wish to believe that Mr. 
Vulliaud himself has not recognized this, and we prefer to see in this 
incorrect use of technical vocabulary, an almost obligatory consequence 
of the ‘profane’ attitude that he likes to put on display, which was not 
without causing us some shock, because, until now, we had met many 
people attaching a kind of glory to the ‘profane’ in the academic and ‘of-
ficial’ circles, which, we believed, Mr. Vulliaud has no more esteem for 
these types than we ourselves have.e had met many 
people attaching a kind of glory to the ‘profane’ in the academic and ‘of-
ficial’ circles, which, we believed, Mr. Vulliaud has no more esteem for 
these types than we ourselves have.

97 “Bibliothèque des Initiations modernes”, E. Nourry, editor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d ‘of-
ficial’ circles, which, we believed, Mr. Vulliaud has no more esteem for 
these types than we ourselves have.

97 “Bibliothèque des Initiations modernes”, E. Nourry, editor.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
69 
This attitude has yet another consequence: it is that Mr. Vulliaud has 
thought it necessary to adopt, almost constantly, an ironic tone which is 
rather embarrassing and which risks giving the impression of a partiality 
that a historian should carefully avoid. Already in Vulliaud’s Joseph de 
Maistre Franc-Maçon we have been given the same impression; would it 
be so difficult for a non-Mason (we will not say a ‘layman’) to approach 
questions of this order without using controversial language that should 
be left specifically to anti-Masonic publications? To our knowledge, only 
Mr. Forestier is an exception; and we regret not finding another excep-
tion in Mr. Vulliaud, since his regular studies have had more serenity. 
All this, of course, does not detract from the value or interest of the 
many documents published by Mr. Vulliaud, although some of them are 
not so completely unpublished as he believes;98 and we cannot help but 
wonder that he has devoted a chapter to ‘Sleepers’ without even men-
tioning that it has already appeared, precisely under the same title, a 
work by Mr. Emile Dermenghem. However, we believe that the extracts 
of the ‘initiatic notebooks’ transcribed by Louis-Claude de Saint-Martin 
are actually unpublished; the strange nature of these notebooks raises 
many questions that have not been clarified. We once had the oppor-
tunity to see some of these documents; the bizarre and unintelligible 
scribbles which they are filled with gave us a very clear impression that 
the ‘unknown agent’ who was the author was nothing more than a som-
nambulist (we do not say a ‘medium’ because it would be a serious anach-
ronism); they would therefore simply represent the experiments of the 
same kind as the ‘Sleepers,’ which greatly diminishes their ‘initiatic’ im-
pact. In any case, what is certain is that it has absolutely nothing to do 
with the Elus Coens; who, by the way, had already ceased to exist as an 
organization; and we will add that there is nothing directly related to the 
Rectified Scottish Regime, although it is frequently referred to as the 
‘Lodge of the Beneficence.’ The truth is that Willermoz and other mem-
bers of this Lodge, who were interested in magnetism, had to form be-
tween them a sort of ‘study group,’ as is said today, to which they had 
given the somewhat ambitious title of ‘Society of the Initiates;’ this title, 
which does appear in the documents, cannot be explained otherwise, by 
showing very clearly, that the use of the word ‘society,’ shows that the 
group in question, although composed of Masons, had in itself no Ma-
sonic character. Even now, it often happens that Masons form, for any 
purpose, what is called a ‘fraternal group,’ whose meetings are devoid of 
any ritual form; the ‘Society of the Initiates’ must not have been anythingnow, it often happens that Masons form, for any 
purpose, what is called a ‘fraternal group,’ whose meetings are devoid of 
any ritual form; the ‘Society of the Initiates’ must not have been anything

98 The five ‘Instructions’ to the Elus Coens reproduced in chapter 9 have already 
been published in 1914 in the France Antimaçonnique: let us judge each accord-
ing to his own merits.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70 
The Veil of Isisto the Elus Coens reproduced in chapter 9 have already 
been published in 1914 in the France Antimaçonnique: let us judge each accord-
ing to his own merits.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70 
The Veil of Isis

other than this; such is at least the only plausible solution to this rather 
unclear question. 
We think that the documents that related to the Elus Coens are of 
another significance which is of the initiatic point of view, in spite of the 
gaps of this type that have always existed in the teachings of Martinez of 
which we have mentioned in our last article. Mr. Vulliaud is quite right 
to insist that those who wish to make Martinez a Kabbalist are in error; 
of what is involved that is undeniably Judaic does not imply any 
knowledge of what is properly termed as Kabbalah, which is often used 
incorrectly. On the other hand, the bad orthography and defective char-
acter of Martinez, which Mr. Vulliaud emphasizes a little too compla-
cently, proves nothing against the reality of his knowledge of a certain 
order; we must not confuse profane instruction with initiatic knowledge; 
an initiate of a supreme order (which Martinez was certainly not) can 
even be illiterate, and this is seen quite often in the Orient. It seems, fur-
thermore, that Mr. Vulliaud was pleased to present the enigmatic and 
complex character of Martinez in the worst light; Mr. Le Forestier has 
certainly been much more impartial; and even after this, there are still 
many points to be elucidated. 
These persistent obscurities show the difficulty in these studies on 
things which sometimes seem to have been confused intentionally; 
therefore, we should be grateful for Mr. Vulliaud for his contribution and, 
although he does not make any definitive conclusions, his work at least 
provides some new material that is, as a whole, very interesting.99 Also, 
since this work is sure to have a sequel, we hope that Mr. Vulliaud does 
not make his readers wait too long, who will certainly find many more 
curious and attention worthy notes, and perhaps even a starting point of 
reflection that the author, confining himself in the role of a historian, 
does not wish to express himself.y find many more 
curious and attention worthy notes, and perhaps even a starting point of 
reflection that the author, confining himself in the role of a historian, 
does not wish to express himself.

99 Let us note in passing a historical error that is too large to simply be the effect 
of a lapse in concentration: Mr. Vulliaud writes that “Albéric Thomas, opposed 
to Papus, founded the Rite of Misraïm with others” (note from p. 42); this Rite 
was founded in Italy around 1805 and was introduced to France in 1814 by the 
Bédarride brothers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Symbolism of Weaving 
Le Symbolisme du Tissage, February 1930.2); this Rite 
was founded in Italy around 1805 and was introduced to France in 1814 by the 
Bédarride brothers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Symbolism of Weaving 
Le Symbolisme du Tissage, February 1930.

In the Oriental doctrines, traditional books are frequently referred to by 
terms which, when taken in their literal sense, relate to weaving. 
Thereby, in Sanskrit, sutra properly means ‘thread’ (this word is identical 
to the Latin sutura, consisting of the same root, with the meaning of ‘to 
sew,’ being also in both languages): a book can be formed by a set of 
sutras, as a fabric is formed by an assembly of threads;100 tantra also has 
the meaning of ‘thread’ and that of ‘fabric,’ and more specifically the 
‘warp’ of a fabric.101 Similarly, in Chinese, king is the ‘warp’ of a fabric, 
and wei is its ‘weft;’ the first of these words designates at the same time 
a fundamental book, while the second designates its commentaries. This 
distinction of the ‘warp’ and ‘weft’ in the set of traditional scriptures 
corresponds, according to Hindu terminology, to that of the Shruti, which 
is the fruit of direct inspiration, and of the Smriti, which is the product 
of reflection exercising on the data of the Shruti. 
To fully understand the meaning of the symbolism, it must first be 
noted that the warp, formed of threads stretched over the craft, repre-
sents the immutable and principal element, while the threads of the weft 
passing between those of the warp by the seesawing of the shuttle, rep-
resents the variable and contingent element, which is to say the applica-
tions of the principle to particular conditions. Moreover, if we consider 
a thread of the warp and a thread of the weft, we immediately perceive 
that their union forms the symbol of the cross, of which they are respec-
tively the vertical line and the horizontal line; and every point of fabric, 
thus being the meeting point of two wires perpendicular to each other is 
thereby the center of the cross. Now, according to the general symbolism 
of the cross, the vertical line represents that which unites all the states 
of being or all the degrees of existence, while the horizontal represents 
the development of one of these states or of these degrees. If we relate 
this to what we said earlier, we can say that the horizontal direction willees of existence, while the horizontal represents 
the development of one of these states or of these degrees. If we relate 
this to what we said earlier, we can say that the horizontal direction will

100 It is curious to note that the Arabic word surat, which designates the chapters 
of the Quʾran, is composed of exactly the same elements as the Sanskrit sutra; 
this word has the similar meaning of ‘rank’ or ‘row,’ and its derivation is un-
known. 
101 The root tan in this word expresses primarily the idea of extension.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72 
The Veil of Isisis word has the similar meaning of ‘rank’ or ‘row,’ and its derivation is un-
known. 
101 The root tan in this word expresses primarily the idea of extension.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72 
The Veil of Isis

be, for example, the human state, and the vertical sense which is trans-
cendent with respect to this state; this transcendent character is indeed 
that of the Shruti, which is essentially ‘non-human,’ whereas the Smriti 
includes the applications to degrees of the human order and is the prod-
uct of the exercise of human faculties. 
We can add here another remark which will bring to light out the 
concordance of various symbolisms more closely related to each other 
than might be supposed at first glance: in a somewhat different aspect 
from that which we have just considered, the vertical line represents the 
active or masculine principle (Purusha), and the horizontal line the pas-
sive or feminine principle (Prakriti), every manifestation being produced 
by the influence of the ‘non-acting’ from the first to the second. Or, from 
another point of view, the Shruti is equated to direct light, represented 
by the Sun, and the Smriti is the reflected light, represented by the Moon; 
but, at the same time, the Sun and the Moon, in almost every tradition, 
also symbolize respectively the masculine principle and the feminine 
principle of universal manifestation.102 
To return to the symbolism of weaving, it is not applied exclusively 
to traditional scriptures; it is also used to represent the world, or more 
exactly, the set of all the words, which is to say the states or degrees, in 
definite multitude, that constitute universal existence. Thus, in the Upan-
ishads, the Supreme Brahma is designated as “what the world is woven 
on, by warp and weft,” or by other similar formulas.103 The warp and the 
weft naturally have, here again, the same respective meanings which we 
have just defined; and, moreover, there is all the more connection be-
tween these two applications that the Universe itself, in certain tradi-
tions, is sometimes symbolized by a book: we will only remind ourselves 
of the Liber Mundi of the Rose-Cross, and also the well-known symbol of 
the ‘Book of Life,’ which would give rise to some very interesting re-
marks, but it deviates a little too much from our subject so we cannot 
consider formulating them just now.104 
Another form of this same symbolism, which is also found in the 
Hindu tradition, is the image of the spider weavings its web, an imagine 
which is all the more proper as the spiders forms the web from its ownorm of this same symbolism, which is also found in the 
Hindu tradition, is the image of the spider weavings its web, an imagine 
which is all the more proper as the spiders forms the web from its own

102 For further developments on the reports of Shruti and Smriti, we will refer to 
what we have said in Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta, and in 
Spiritual Authority and Temporal Power. 
103 Mundaka Upanishad, Mundaka 2, Khanda 2, shruti 5; Brihad-Aranyaka Upan-
ishad, Adhyay 3, Brahama 8, shrutis 7 and 8. 
104 In particular, there is a very interesting relationship between this symbol of 
the ‘Book of Life’ and that of the ‘Tree of Life;’ perhaps we will return to this 
some other time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---In particular, there is a very interesting relationship between this symbol of 
the ‘Book of Life’ and that of the ‘Tree of Life;’ perhaps we will return to this 
some other time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
73 
substance.105 Due to the circular shape of the web, which is also the blue-
print of the cosmogonic spheroid, the warp is represented here by the 
wires radiating around the center, and the weft by the lines arranged in 
concentric circumferences.106 To return from this back to the ordinary 
image of weaving, one has only to consider the center as indefinitely dis-
tant, so that the rays become parallel, in the vertical direction, while the 
concentric circumferences become perpendicular to these rays, which is 
to say horizontal. 
The warp, according to what we have said above, are the principles 
which connect all the worlds or states to each other, each of its children 
connecting at corresponding points in different states; the weft is the sets 
of events that occur in each of the worlds, and each thread of this frame 
is thus the unfolding of events in a given world. We can also take up here 
the symbolism of the book, and say that all the events, envisaged in the 
simultaneity of the ‘timeless,’ are thus inscribed in this book, each of 
which is, so to speak, a character identifying itself at a single point on 
the fabric. 
From another point of view, it can be said again that the manifestation 
of a being in a certain state of existence is, like any event, determined by 
the meeting of a thread of the warp with a thread of the weft. Each thread 
of the chain is then a being envisaged in its essential nature, which, as a 
direct projection of the principal ‘Self,’ makes the link of all its states, 
maintaining its own unity through their indefinite multiplicity. In this 
case, the thread of the weft that the thread of the warp encounters at a 
certain point corresponds to a definite state of existence, and their inter-
section determines the relations of this being in its manifestation in this 
state, with the cosmic environment. For example, the individual nature 
of a human being is the result of the meeting of these two children; in 
other words, it will always be necessary to distinguish two kinds of ele-
ments, which must be reported respectively in the vertical sense and the 
horizontal sense: the first expresses what belongs to the being, whereas 
the second comes from the conditions of the environment. 
Let us add that the threads of which the ‘cloth of the world’ is formed 
are still designated, in another equivocation, as ‘the hair of Shiva.’ One 
could say that these are, in a way, the manifested Universe’s ‘lines of 
force,’ and that the ‘directions of space’ are their representation in the 
corporeal order. It is easy to see how many different applications of these 
considerations are likely; but we wished to indicate here the essentialrections of space’ are their representation in the 
corporeal order. It is easy to see how many different applications of these 
considerations are likely; but we wished to indicate here the essential

105 Shankaracharya’s commentary on the Brahma-Sutras, Adhyaya 2, Pada 1, su-
tra 25. 
106 The spider standing in the center, gives the image of the Sun surrounded by 
its rays; it can thus be taken as a figure of the ‘Heart of the World.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74 
The Veil of Isis

meanings of the symbolism of weaving, which is, we believe, largely un-
known in the West.107

107 There are, however, traces of a similar symbolism in Greco-Latin antiquity, 
especially in the myth of the Parques; but this myth seems to refer only to the 
threads of the weft, and its ‘fatal’ character can indeed be explained by the ab-
sence of the idea of the warp, which is to say by the fact that being is envisaged 
only in its individual state, without any intervention of its transcendent personal 
principle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Atma-Gita 
Âtmâ-Gîtâ, March 1930.s to say by the fact that being is envisaged 
only in its individual state, without any intervention of its transcendent personal 
principle.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Atma-Gita 
Âtmâ-Gîtâ, March 1930.

In our most recent work we have alluded to an interior sense of the Bha-
gavad-Gita, which, when considered from that point of view, takes the 
name of Atma-Gita;108 as we have been asked for further explanations on 
this subject, we thought it would not be without interest to share them 
here. 
The Bhagavad-Gita, which is, as we know, a detached installment 
from the Mahabharata,109 has been so often translated into Western lan-
guages that it should be well known to everyone; but this is not so, be-
cause, to tell the truth, none of these translations show a real understand-
ing. The title itself is generally rendered somewhat inaccurately as the 
‘Song of the Happy’ because in reality Bhagavat’s principal meaning is 
that of the ‘glorious’ and ‘venerable;’ a meaning of ‘happiness’ also ex-
ists, but in a very secondary way, and besides, it is not appropriate 
enough for the case in question.110 Indeed, Bhagavat is an epithet that 
applies to all divine aspects, and also to beings who are considered par-
ticularly worth of worship;111 the idea of happiness, which is, in fact, es-
sentially individual and human, is not necessarily contained in it. No 
wonder this particular epithet is given to Krishna, who is not really a 
venerable person, but who, as the eighth avatara of Vishnu, truly corre-
sponds to a divine aspect; but there is still something more profound 
here.epithet is given to Krishna, who is not really a 
venerable person, but who, as the eighth avatara of Vishnu, truly corre-
sponds to a divine aspect; but there is still something more profound 
here.

108 Spiritual Authority and Temporal Power, p. 79, note 1. 
109 We can recall that the two Itihasas, which is, the Ramayana and the Maha-
bharata, belong to the Smriti, thus having the character of traditional writings, 
are more than simple ‘epic poems,’ in the secular and ‘literary’ sense which 
Westerners usually see. 
110 There is a certain kinship which can be confusing, between the roots bhaj 
and bhuj: the latter, whose primitive meaning is that of ‘to eat,’ expresses above 
all the ideas of enjoyment, possession, and happiness; by contrast, primarily and 
in the derivatives, as bhaga and especially bhakti, the predominant ideas are 
those of a veneration, adoration, respect, devotion, or attachment. 
111 The Buddhists naturally give this title to Buddha, and the Jains give it to their 
Tirtankaras.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76 
The Veil of Isisveneration, adoration, respect, devotion, or attachment. 
111 The Buddhists naturally give this title to Buddha, and the Jains give it to their 
Tirtankaras.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76 
The Veil of Isis

To understand this, it must be remembered that the two points of 
view of Vaishnaivist and Shaivist, which correspond to two great paths 
suitable to beings of different natures, each take, as a support to rise to 
the supreme principle, one of the two divine aspects, complementary in 
some aspects, to which they owe their respective designations, and trans-
pose this aspect in such a way that it identifies with the same principle, 
envisaged without any restriction and beyond any determination or 
specification whatsoever. This is why the Shaivists designate the su-
preme principle as Mahadeva or Maheshwara, which is properly equiva-
lent to Shiva, while the Vaishnavists refer to it by the names of Vishnu, 
such as Narayana or Bhagavat, the latter being mostly employed by a 
certain branch which bears the name of Bhagavatas for this reason. There 
is in all this no element of contradiction: the names are multiples as the 
paths to which they relate, but these paths, more or less directly, all lead 
to the same goal; the Hindu doctrine knows nothing of the sort similar 
to Western exclusivism, for which one and the same way should equally 
suit all beings, without taking into account the differences in nature that 
exist between them. 
Now, it will be easy to understand that Bhagavat, being identified 
with the Supreme Principle, is none other than the unconditioned Atma; 
and this is true in all cases, whether this Atma is considered in the ‘mac-
roscomic’ order or in the ‘microscomic’ order, according to whether one 
wishes to apply this to different points of view; we obviously cannot 
think of reproducing all the developments that we have already given 
elsewhere on this subject.112 What interests us most directly here is the 
application that we can label as ‘microcosmic,’ which is to say the one 
that is made according to each being considered in particular: in this re-
spect, Krishna and Arjuna respectively represent the ‘Self’ and the ‘me,’ 
the personality and the individuality, which are unconditioned Atma and 
jivatma. The teaching given by Krishna to Arjuna is, from this point of 
view, the intellectual, supra-rational intuition by which the ‘Self’ is com-
municated to the ‘me’ when it is ‘qualified’ and prepared in such a way 
that this communication can be effectively established. 
It should be noted, because this is of great importance, that Krishna 
and Arjuna are represented as mounted on the same chariot; this chariot 
is the ‘vehicle’ of being considered in its state of manifestation; and, 
while Arjuna fights, Krishna leads the chariot to battle, that is to say 
without himself being engaged in the action. Indeed, the battle in ques-
tion symbolizes the action, in a general way, in a form appropriate to the 
nature and function of the Kshatriyas, to whom the book is intendedbeing engaged in the action. Indeed, the battle in ques-
tion symbolizes the action, in a general way, in a form appropriate to the 
nature and function of the Kshatriyas, to whom the book is intended

112 We will mainly refer back to, for this and for what follows, to the considera-
tions we have set out in Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hom the book is intended

112 We will mainly refer back to, for this and for what follows, to the considera-
tions we have set out in Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
77 
for;113 the field of battle (Kshetra) is the field of action in which the indi-
vidual develops his possibilities; and this action in no way affects the 
principal, permanent, and immutable being, but concerns only the indi-
vidual ‘living soul’ (jivatma). The two who are mounted on the same 
chariot are therefore the same as the two birds spoken of in the Upani-
shads: “Two birds, inseparably united companions reside on the same 
tree; one eats the fruit of the tree, the other looks on without eating.”114 
Here too, with a different symbolism to represent the action, the first of 
these two birds is jivatma, and the second is the unconditioned Atma; it 
is the same for the “two who entered the cave,” which is mentioned in 
another text;115 and, if these two are always closely united, it is because 
they are really only one in the light of absolute reality, for jivatma is 
distinguished from Atma only in an illusory mode. 
There is also, to express this union, and precisely in a direct relation 
with the Atma-Gita, a term which is particularly remarkable: it is that of 
Naranarayana. We know that Narayana, ‘he who walks (or is carried) on 
the waters,’ is a name of Vishnu, applied by transposition to Paramatma 
or the Supreme Principle, as has been said above; the waters here repre-
sent the formal or individual possibilities.116 Furthermore, nara or nri is 
the man. The individual being as belonging to the human species; and it 
is necessary to notice the close relation which exists between this word 
and that of nara which designates the waters;117 however this may lead 
us to stray too far from our subject. Thus, Nara and Narayana are respec-
tively the individual and the Universal, the ‘me’ and the ‘Self,’ the mani-
fested state of being and its unmanifested principle; and they are of an 
indissoluble union in the whole of Naranarayana, of which it is some-
times spoken of as two ascetics dwelling upon the Himalayas, which re-
minds us especially of the last of the texts of the Upanishads which we 
mentioned a moment ago, in which the “two who entered the cave” aren of as two ascetics dwelling upon the Himalayas, which re-
minds us especially of the last of the texts of the Upanishads which we 
mentioned a moment ago, in which the “two who entered the cave” are

113 It should be noted that this meaning is also exactly that of the Islamic con-
ception of the ‘holy war’ (jihad); the social and external application is here only 
secondary and what shows this well is that it constitutes only the ‘lesser holy 
war’ (jihad al-asghar), while the ‘greater holy war’ (jihad al-akbar) is of a purely 
interior and spiritual order. 
114 Mundaka Upanishad, Mundaka 3, Khanda 1, shruti 1; Shvetashvatara Upani-
shad, Adhyaya 4, shruti 6. 
115 Katha Upanishad, Adhyaya 1, Valli 3, shruti 1. – The ‘cavern’ is none other 
than the cavity of the heart, which represents the place of the union of the indi-
vidual with the Universal, or of the ‘me’ with the ‘Self.’ 
116 In the Christian tradition, Christ’s walking on water has a meaning that re-
lates exactly to this same symbolism. 
117 Perhaps, among the Greeks, the name of Nereus and the Nereids, the water 
nymphs, is not unrelated to the Sanskrit nara.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

78 
The Veil of Isisexactly to this same symbolism. 
117 Perhaps, among the Greeks, the name of Nereus and the Nereids, the water 
nymphs, is not unrelated to the Sanskrit nara.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

78 
The Veil of Isis

simultaneously designated as “dwelling on the highest peak.”118 It is also 
said that in this same ensemble, Nara is Arjuna, and Narayana is Krishna; 
it is the two who are mounted on the same chariot, and it is always, under 
one term or another, and whatever the symbolic forms employed, 
jivatma and Paramatma. 
These indications will make it possible to understand what the inner 
meaning of the Bhagavad-Gita is, and all other meanings are in fact only 
more or less contingent applications. This is particularly true of the social 
meaning, in which the functions of contemplation and action, respec-
tively relating to the supra-individual and the individual, are considered 
to be those of the Brahmin and the Kshatriya.119 It is said that the Brah-
min is the type of fixed or immutable beings (sthavara), and that the 
Kshatriya is the type of moving or changeable beings (jangama);120 it is 
easy to see the analogy between these two classes of beings on one hand, 
and the immutable personality and the individuality that is subject to 
change on the other hand; and this immediately establishes the link be-
tween this meaning and the preceding one. We can also see that where 
the Kshatriya is specifically mentioned, the latter, because of the action 
of its own function, can be taken to symbolize the individuality in what-
ever form, which is necessarily also engaged in the action by the very 
conditions of its existence, while the Brahman, because of its function of 
contemplation or pure knowledge, represents the higher states of be-
ing;121 and thus one could say that every being has within him the Brah-
min and the Kshatriya, but with predominance of one or the other of the 
two natures, according to his tendencies which bear him principally on 
the side of contemplation or on the side of action. This shows that the 
scope of the teaching contained within the Bhagavad-Gita is far from be-
ing limited to the Kshatriyas, understood literally, although the form in 
which this teaching is exposed suits them particularly; and, if Western-
ers, in whom the nature of Kshatriya manifests much more frequently 
than that of the Brahmin, returned to the understanding of traditional 
ideas, such a form is undoubtedly also that which would be the most im-
mediately accessible to them.ests much more frequently 
than that of the Brahmin, returned to the understanding of traditional 
ideas, such a form is undoubtedly also that which would be the most im-
mediately accessible to them.

118 This is an indication of the symbolic relationship between the cave and the 
mountain, to which we have had occasion to refer to in The King of the World. 
119 This point of view is the one we developed especially in Spiritual Authority 
and Temporal Power. 
120 This set of beings is sometimes referred to in the compound as sthava-
rajangama. 
121 This is why the Brahman is referred to as a Deva on earth, the Devas corre-
sponding to supra-individual or informal (though still manifest) states; this des-
ignation, which is rigorously correct, seems to have never been understood by 
Westerners.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Greater Holy War 
La Grande Guerre sainte, May 1930.ill manifest) states; this des-
ignation, which is rigorously correct, seems to have never been understood by 
Westerners.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Greater Holy War 
La Grande Guerre sainte, May 1930.

In our last article, we mentioned, while referencing the Bhagavad-Gita, 
the symbolic significance of war, and we pointed out that this conception 
is found not only in Hindu doctrine, but also in Islamic doctrine, which 
is the real meaning of jihad or ‘holy war.’ 
In a very general way, it can be said that the essential raison d’être of 
war, from whatever point of view and in any field, is to put an end to 
disorder and restore order; it is, in other words, the unification of a mul-
tiplicity, by means that belong to the world of multiplicity itself; it is in 
this capacity, and only in this capacity, that war can be considered just. 
Moreover, disorder is, in a sense, inherent in every manifestation within 
itself, since manifestation, outside of its principle, therefore as a nonuni-
fied multiplicity, is only an indefinite series of breaks in equilibrium. 
War, understood as we have just presented, and not limited to an exclu-
sively human sense, therefore represents the cosmic process of reinte-
gration of the manifested into the unity of principal; and this is why, 
from the point of view of the manifested itself, this reintegration appears 
as destruction, as we can see very clearly by certain aspects of the sym-
bolism of Shiva in the Hindu doctrine.  
If we say that war itself is still disorder, it is true in a certain relation, 
by the very fact that it is accomplished in the world of manifestation and 
multiplicity; but it is a disorder which is destined to compensate for an-
other disorder, and, as the doctrines of the far East teach, it is the sum of 
all the disorders, or all the imbalances, which constitute the total disor-
der. Order, moreover, appears only if we rise above multiplicity, if we 
cease to consider each thing in isolation in order to consider all things in 
unity. This is the point of view of reality, because multiplicity, out of 
principal, has only an illusory existence; but this illusion, with the inher-
ent disorder of it, subsists as long as it has not arrived in a fully effective 
manner (and not as a mere theoretical conception), from this point of 
view of the ‘unity of existence’ (wahdat al-wujud) in all modes and de-
grees of universal manifestation. 
From what we have just established, the very purpose of war is the 
establishment of peace, because peace is nothing but order, balance, orjud) in all modes and de-
grees of universal manifestation. 
From what we have just established, the very purpose of war is the 
establishment of peace, because peace is nothing but order, balance, or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80 
The Veil of Isisal manifestation. 
From what we have just established, the very purpose of war is the 
establishment of peace, because peace is nothing but order, balance, or

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80 
The Veil of Isis

harmony, these three terms being more or less synonymous and desig-
nating all, in somewhat different aspects, the reflection of unity in mul-
tiplicity itself when related to this principle. Indeed, multiplicity, then, is 
never really destroyed, but it is ‘transformed;’ and when all things are 
brought back to unity, this unity appears in all things, which, far from 
ceasing to exist, on the contrary, acquire the fullness of reality. It is then 
that the two complementary points of view of ‘unity in multiplicity’ and 
‘multiplicity in unity’ (al-waḥdah fīl-kathrah waʾl-kathrah fī al-waḥdah) 
are united at the central point of all manifestation, which is the ‘divine 
place’ (al-maqām al-ilāhī) where all the contrasts and oppositions are re-
solved. For one who has reaching this point, there are no more opposites, 
therefore no more disorder; it is the very place of order, of balance, of 
harmony, of peace, while outside of this place, and for one who has a 
tendency towards it without having arrived yet, it is the state of war as 
we have defined it, since the oppositions, in which the disorder resides, 
are not yet definitely overcome. All traditional doctrines are in complete 
agreement, whatever form these ideas may be expressed in; and all be-
stow the same importance to the symbolism of the central point, which 
is the ‘pole’ around which the revolutions of the manifested universe are 
completed. 
Even taken within its external and social sense, the just war, directed 
against those who would disturb the order and aim to bring them back, 
appears essentially as a function of ‘justice,’ which is to say, in short, as 
a balancing function, whatever the secondary and transient appearances 
may be; but this is only the ‘lesser holy war,’ which is only an image of 
the other, of the ‘greater holy war,’ which is of a purely interior and spir-
itual order. Here we can apply what we have said many times about the 
symbolic values of historical facts, which can be considered as repre-
sentative, according to their mode, of realities of a higher order. 
The ‘greater holy war’ is the struggle of man against the enemies he 
carries within himself, which is to say against all the elements which, in 
him, are contrary to order and unity. It is not, however, to destroy these 
elements, which, like all that exists, also have their reason for being and 
their place as a whole; it is rather, as we said earlier, to ‘transform’ them 
by bringing them back to unity, by reabsorbing them in some way. Man 
must tend first and foremost to realize unity within himself, in all that 
constitutes himself, according to all the modalities of his human mani-
festation: unity of thought, unity of action, and also, which is perhaps 
the most difficult, unity between thought and action. It is important to 
note that, as far as action is concerned, what is essentially true is inten-
tion (niyyah), for it is this alone which depends entirely on man himself,between thought and action. It is important to 
note that, as far as action is concerned, what is essentially true is inten-
tion (niyyah), for it is this alone which depends entirely on man himself,

--- PAGE BREAK ---action. It is important to 
note that, as far as action is concerned, what is essentially true is inten-
tion (niyyah), for it is this alone which depends entirely on man himself,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
81 
without being affected or modified by external contingencies as are al-
ways the results of the action. Unity in intention and a constant will im-
merged within the invariable and immutable center are represented sym-
bolically by ritual orientation (qiblah), terrestrial spiritual centers being 
visible images of the true and unique center of all manifestation, which 
has elsewhere its direct reflection in all the worlds, at the central point 
of each of them, and also in all beings, where this central point is figura-
tively designated as the heart, because of its effective correspondence 
within the corporeal organism. 
For the one who has succeeded in perfectly realizing unity with itself, 
all opposition having ceased, the state of war also ceases by this very fact, 
because there is only absolute order, according to the total point of view 
which is beyond all particular points of view. To such a being, nothing 
can harm him henceforth, for there is no longer any enemies for him, 
neither in him nor out of him; the unity carried on inside, is also at the 
same time outside, or rather there is neither inside nor outside, this still 
being only one of those oppositions which have now been erased from 
his view (the gaze of Shiva’s third eye according to the Hindu tradition). 
Established definitively within the center of all things, this one is to him-
self his own law, because his will is one with the universal Will; he has 
obtained the ‘great peace,’ which is truly the ‘divine presence’ (As-Sa-
kinah, identical to the name of Shekinah in Hebrew Kabbalah); being 
identified, by his own unification, with the principal unity itself, he sees 
unity in all things and all things in unity, in the absolute simultaneity of 
the ‘eternal present.’rew Kabbalah); being 
identified, by his own unification, with the principal unity itself, he sees 
unity in all things and all things in unity, in the absolute simultaneity of 
the ‘eternal present.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---identified, by his own unification, with the principal unity itself, he sees 
unity in all things and all things in unity, in the absolute simultaneity of 
the ‘eternal present.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Regarding Pilgrimages 
A propos des pèlerinages, June 1930. 
The recent republication, in the Voile d’Isis, of the remarkable article by 
Mr. Grillot de Givry on the pilgrimage sites brings us back to the question 
to which we have previously alluded to, and which Mr. Clavelle recalls 
in his introduction of the article. 
Let us first note that the Latin word peregrinus, from which ‘pilgrim’ 
derives, can mean both ‘traveler’ and ‘stranger.’ This simple note already 
gives rise to some rather curious comparisons: indeed, on the one hand, 
among the Compagnons, there are some who describe themselves as 
‘passers-by’ and other as ‘strangers,’ which corresponds precisely to the 
two meanings of peregrinus (which are also found in the Hebrew ger-
shon); furthermore, in Masonry, alike in modern and ‘speculative’ Ma-
sonry, the symbolic tests of initiation are called ‘journeys.’ Moreover, in 
many different traditions, the different initiatic stages are described fre-
quently as the stages of a journey; sometimes it is a regular trip, some-
times it is a navigation, as we have occasion to point out previously. This 
symbolism of travel is perhaps more widely used than that of war, of 
which we spoke in our last article; the one and the other, moreover, are 
not without presenting between them a certain relation, which has even 
sometimes translated outwards into historicity; we are thinking in par-
ticular here of the close link that existed in the Middle Ages between the 
pilgrimages to the Holy Land and the Crusades. Let us add that, even in 
the most ordinary religious language, earthly life, considered as a period 
of hardship, is often assimilated to a journey, and even more expressly 
qualified as a pilgrimage to the celestial world, the goal of this pilgrimage 
being also symbolically identified with the ‘Holy Land’ of the ‘Land of 
the Living.’122 
The state of ‘wandering,’ so to speak, or of migration, is, in general, a 
state of ‘probation;’ and here again we can notice that this is indeed the 
character of such organizations such as the Compagnonnage. Further-
more, what is true in this respect for individuals can be true, in sometion;’ and here again we can notice that this is indeed the 
character of such organizations such as the Compagnonnage. Further-
more, what is true in this respect for individuals can be true, in some

122 Regarding the symbolism of the ‘Holy Land,’ we will return to our study on 
The King of the World, and also to our article in the special edition of the Voile 
d’Isis devoted to the Templars.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he symbolism of the ‘Holy Land,’ we will return to our study on 
The King of the World, and also to our article in the special edition of the Voile 
d’Isis devoted to the Templars.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
83 
cases at least, for people taken collectively: a very clear example is that 
of the Hebrews wandering for forty years in the desert before reaching 
the promised land. We must also make a distinction here, because this 
state, which is essentially transitory, must not be confused with the no-
madic state that is normal to certain peoples: even when the Hebrews 
arrived at the Promised Land, and until the time of David and Solomon, 
this nomadism did not have the same character as their pilgrimage in the 
desert.123 There is even reason to consider a third state of ‘wandering,’ 
which may be more properly described by the word ‘tribulation:’ it is 
that of the Jews after their dispersion, and also in all similarity to the 
Jews, the Bohemians; but this would bring us too far astray, and we will 
only say that this case also applies to communities and individuals. We 
can see how complex these things are and how many distinctions can be 
made among men presenting themselves externally under the same ap-
pearances, which are confused with pilgrims in the ordinary sense of the 
word, especially since it is still necessary to add that: it sometimes hap-
pens that insiders, who have reached the goal, even ‘followers,’ repeat, 
for special reasons, the same appearance as ‘travelers.’ 
But let us return to the pilgrims: we know that their distinguishing 
marks were the shells (named as Saint James) and the staff; the latter, 
which also has a close relation to the compagnonnic cane, is naturally an 
attribute of the traveler, but it has many other meanings, and perhaps we 
will devote a special study to this question one day. As for the shell, in 
certain regions it was called ‘creusille,’ and this word is similar to that of 
‘crucible,’ which brings us back to the idea of tests, envisaged more par-
ticularly according to an alchemic symbolism, and understood in the 
sense of ‘purification,’ the Katharsis of the Pythagoreans, which was pre-
cisely the preparatory phase of initiation.124 
The shell being viewed especially as an attribute of Saint James, we 
are then led to make a remark about the pilgrimage of Santiago de Com-
postela. The routes formerly followed by pilgrims are often called, even 
today, ‘paths of Saint James;’ but this expression has at the same time an 
entirely different application: the ‘path of Saint James,’ indeed, in the 
language of the peasants, it is also the Milky Way; and this may seem 
less unexpected if one observes that Compostela, etymologically, is noth-
ing less than the ‘starry field.’ Here we stumble across another idea, thatants, it is also the Milky Way; and this may seem 
less unexpected if one observes that Compostela, etymologically, is noth-
ing less than the ‘starry field.’ Here we stumble across another idea, that

123 The distinction of nomadic peoples (pastoralists) and sedentary farms, which 
goes back to the very origins of terrestrial humanity is of great importance for 
the understanding of essential characters of different traditional forms. 
124 We can refer here to what we have said in The King of the World about the 
designation of the initiates, in various traditions, by terms referring to the idea 
of ‘purity.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84 
The Veil of Isisere to what we have said in The King of the World about the 
designation of the initiates, in various traditions, by terms referring to the idea 
of ‘purity.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

84 
The Veil of Isis

of ‘celestial journeys,’ incidentally correlated with terrestrial journeys; 
this is still a point on which it is not possible for us to press at present, 
and we will only indicate that we can sense by this a certain correspond-
ence between the geographical situation of the pilgrimage sites and the 
actual order of the celestial sphere; here, ‘sacred geography’ to which we 
have alluded previously will thus be integrated into a true ‘sacred cos-
mography.’ 
Still speaking of the pilgrimage routes, it should be remembered that 
Mr. Joseph Bédier had the merit to recognize the link between the sanc-
tuaries that marked the steps and the formation of the chansons de geste. 
It seems to us that this fact can be generalized, and one could say the 
same thing with regards to the propagation of a multitude of legends 
whose real initiatic scope is unfortunately almost always unknown to 
moderns. Due to the plurality of their meanings, stories of this kind could 
be addressed to both pilgrims and… others; each one understood them 
according to the measure of his own intellectual capacity, and only some 
of them penetrated the deep essence of it, as it happens with all initiatic 
teachings. It should also be noted that, however diverse the people who 
roamed the roads, including the peddlers and even the beggars, there is 
established between them, for reasons no doubt rather difficult to define, 
a certain solidarity translating into the common adoption of a special 
conventional language, ‘slang of the Shell’ or the ‘language of the pil-
grims.’ Interestingly, Mr. Léon Daudet pointed out in one of his recent 
books that many words and phrases belonging to this language are found 
at Villon and at Rabelais;125 and at the latter, he also indicates, which is 
worthy of note from the same point of view, that for several years, “he 
wandered through Poitou, a province that at that time was celebrated for 
the mysteries and the jokes that were performed there and also by the 
legends that ran there; in Pantagruel, we find traces of these legends, 
these jokes, and a number of terms belonging to the Poitevins.”126 If we 
quote this last sentence, it is because, besides mentioning these legends 
of which we spoke a moment ago, it raises yet another question in con-
nection with what is at stake here, that of the origins of theater: this, 
firstly, was one part essentially ambulant, and on the other hand veiled 
in a religious character, at least in regards to external forms, religious 
character, which is to be compared with that of the pilgrims and people 
who adopted these appearances. What is most important about this fact 
is that it is not peculiar to Europe within the Middle Ages; the history of 
theater in ancient Greece is quite similar, and similar examples can be 
found in most of the Oriental countries.his fact 
is that it is not peculiar to Europe within the Middle Ages; the history of 
theater in ancient Greece is quite similar, and similar examples can be 
found in most of the Oriental countries.

125 Les Horreurs de la Guerre, pp. 145, 147, and 167. 
126 Ibid., p. 173.

--- PAGE BREAK ---in ancient Greece is quite similar, and similar examples can be 
found in most of the Oriental countries.

125 Les Horreurs de la Guerre, pp. 145, 147, and 167. 
126 Ibid., p. 173.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
85 
But we must limit ourselves, and we will consider only one final point 
regarding the expression ‘noble travelers’ that is applied to the initiates, 
or at least to some of them, precisely because of their journeys. Regarding 
this subject, Mr. Oscar Milosz wrote the following:  
“‘Noble travelers’ is the secret name for the initiates of antiquity, 
transmitted via oral tradition to those of the Middle Ages and 
modern times. It was last uttered in public on May 30, 1786, in 
Paris during a sitting of the Parliament devoted to the interroga-
tion of a famous defendant (Cagliostro), a victim of the pamphlet-
eer Théveneau de Morande. The journeys of the initiates were dis-
tinguished from ordinary study trips only by the fact that their 
itinerary coincided rigorously under the appearance of an adven-
turous race, with the most aspirations and secrets of the adepts. 
The most illustrious examples of these pilgrimages are offered to 
us by Democritus, who was initiated into the secrets of alchemy 
by the Egyptian priests and the magician Ostanes, as for the Asi-
atic doctrines from his stays in Persia, and according to some his-
torians, in India; Thales, matured in the temples of Egypt and 
Chaldea; Pythagoras, who visited all the countries known to the 
ancients (and most likely India and China) and whose stay in Per-
sia was marked by the conversations there with the magician 
Zaratas, in Gaul by his collaboration with the Druids, finishing in 
Italy with his speeches to the Assembly of the Ancients of Croton. 
Adding to these examples, Paracelsus’ travels should be added to 
France, Austria, Germany, Spain and Portugal, England, Holland, 
Denmark, Sweden, Hungary, Poland, Lithuania, Wallachia, Carni-
ola, Dalmatia, Russia, and Turkey, as well as Nicholas Flamel’s 
travels to Spain where Maistres Canches taught him to decipher 
the famous hieroglyphic figures of the Jewish book of Abraham. 
The poet Robert Browning has defined the secret nature of these 
scientific pilgrimages in a singularly rich stanza of intuition: ‘I see 
my way as birds their trackless way; In some time – his good time 
– I shall arrive; He guides me and the bird.’ Wilhelm Meister’s 
years of travel also have the same initiatic meaning.”127  
We wished to reproduce this passage in its entirety, despite its length, 
because of the interesting examples it contains; no doubt we can find 
many more known or less known examples, but these are particularly 
characteristic, although they may not all relate to the same case among 
those we have distinguished above, and this we should not confuse with 
‘study trips,’ even legitimately initiatic ones with the special missions of 
the adepts or even of certain initiates of a lesser degree.have distinguished above, and this we should not confuse with 
‘study trips,’ even legitimately initiatic ones with the special missions of 
the adepts or even of certain initiates of a lesser degree.

127 Les Arcanes, p. 81-82.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

86 
The Veil of Isis

To return to the expression ‘noble travelers,’ what we wished to draw 
attention to is that the epithet ‘noble’ seems to indicate that it should 
designate, not all initiation indistinctly, but more properly an initiation 
of Kshatriyas, or what may be called the ‘royal art,’ according to the word 
preserved until today by Masonry. In other words, it would be an initia-
tion referring to the cosmological order and not one of a purely meta-
physical order, and the applications that are attached to it, or to all that 
in the West, has been understood the general name of ‘hermeticism.’128 
If this is so, Mr. Clavelle was quite right in saying that while Saint John 
corresponds to the purely metaphysical point of view of Tradition, Saint 
James corresponds rather to the point of view of ‘traditional sciences;’ 
and, even without mentioning the plausible connection with the ‘Master 
James’ of the Compagnonnages, many consistent indications would tend 
to prove that this correspondence is effectively justified. It is indeed in 
this area that we can qualify as an ‘intermediary,’ which indeed refers to 
all that has spread through pilgrimages, as well as traditions of the Com-
pagnonnage or those of the Bohemians. The knowledge of ‘lesser mys-
teries,’ which is that of the laws of ‘becoming,’ is acquired by traversing 
the ‘wheel of things;’ but the knowledge of the ‘greater mysteries,’ being 
that of the immutable principles, requires the immobile contemplation in 
the ‘great solitude,’ at the fixed point which is the center of the wheel, 
the invariable pole around which the revolutions of the manifested Uni-
verse are accomplished.e immobile contemplation in 
the ‘great solitude,’ at the fixed point which is the center of the wheel, 
the invariable pole around which the revolutions of the manifested Uni-
verse are accomplished.

128 On the distinction of the sacerdotal and royal initiations, we will return to 
our last book, Spiritual Authority and Temporal Power.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e manifested Uni-
verse are accomplished.

128 On the distinction of the sacerdotal and royal initiations, we will return to 
our last book, Spiritual Authority and Temporal Power.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

At-Tawḥīd 
Et-Tawhid, July 1930. 
The doctrine of Unity, that is, the affirmation the Principle of all exist-
ence is essentially One, is a fundamental point common to all Orthodox 
traditions, and we can even say that it is on this point that their under-
lying identity appears most clearly, reflected even in the very expression. 
Indeed, when it comes to unity, all diversity disappears, and it is only 
when we descend to the multiplicity that the differences of forms appear, 
the modes of expression then being multiple themselves, and are vary 
indefinitely to suite the circumstances of time and place. But ‘the doc-
trine of Unity is unique’ (according to the Arabic formula: at-tawḥīd 
waḥidun), which is to say that it is everywhere and always the same, 
invariable as the Principle, independent of the multiplicity and is of 
change only when it can affect contingent applications. 
So we can say that, contrary to current opinion, there has never been 
anywhere really of a ‘polytheistic’ doctrine, which is to say admitting a 
plurality of absolute and irreducible principles. This ‘pluralism’ is only 
possible as a deviation resulting from the ignorance and misunderstand-
ing of the masses, their tendency to focus exclusively on the multiplicity 
of the manifest: hence ‘idolatry’ in all its forms, arising from the confu-
sion of the symbol in itself with what it is intended to express, and the 
personification of the divine attributes considered as so many independ-
ent beings, which is the only possible origin of an actual ‘polytheism.’ 
This tendency, moreover, is accentuated as we advance in the develop-
ment of a cycle of manifestation, because this development itself is a de-
scent into multiplicity, and because of the spiritual obscurity which in-
evitably accompanies this descent. That is why the most recent tradi-
tional forms are those which must state in the most apparent way the 
affirmation of Uniqueness; and, indeed, this affirmation is expressed no-
where so explicitly and so insistently as in Islam where it seems even, if 
one can say, to absorb in itself any other affirmation. 
The sole difference between traditional doctrines in this respect is the 
one we have just indicated: the affirmation of Unity is everywhere, but 
originally it did not even need to be formulated expressly to appear as 
the most obvious of all truths, because men were then too close to the 
Principle to disregard it or lose sight of it. Now, on the contrary, it mayt even need to be formulated expressly to appear as 
the most obvious of all truths, because men were then too close to the 
Principle to disregard it or lose sight of it. Now, on the contrary, it may

--- PAGE BREAK ---

88 
The Veil of Isisbe said that most of them, engaged entirely in the multiplicity, and hav-
ing lost the intuitive knowledge of higher-order truths, have difficulty in 
understanding Unity; and this is why it gradually becomes necessary, 
during the history of earthly humanity, to formulate this affirmation of 
unity on many occasions and more and more clearly, we could say more 
and more energetically.

If we consider this present state of affairs, we see that this affirmation 
is somewhat more enveloped in certain traditional forms, that it some-
times even constitutes it as the esoteric side, taking this word in its 
broadest sense, while that in others, it appears to all eyes, so that we 
come to see more than it, although there are certainly many other things, 
but which are more than secondary to this one.

This last case is that of 
Islam, even exoterically; esoterism here only explains and develops all 
that is contained in this affirmation and all the consequences that derive 
from it, and if it does so in terms often identical to those we encounter 
in other traditions, such as the Vedanta and Taoism, there is no reason to 
be surprised, nor to see there the effect of borrowings which are histori-
cally contestable; it is simply so because truth is one, and because, in this 
principal order, as we said at the beginning, Unity is necessarily trans-
lated even into the expression itself.

However, it is to be noted, always considering things in their present 
state, the Western peoples, and especially the Nordic peoples, are the 
ones who seem to have the greatest difficult in understanding the doc-
trine of unity, at the same time they are more engaged than everyone 
else in change and multiplicity.

These two things obviously go together, 
and perhaps there is something at least partly related to the conditions 
of existence of these peoples: a question of temperament, but also of cli-
mate, one being besides function of the other, at least to a certain point.88 
The Veil of Isis

However, it is to be noted, always considering things in their present 
state, the Western peoples, and especially the Nordic peoples, are the 
ones who seem to have the greatest difficult in understanding the doc-
trine of unity, at the same time they are more engaged than everyone 
else in change and multiplicity. These two things obviously go together, 
and perhaps there is something at least partly related to the conditions 
of existence of these peoples: a question of temperament, but also of cli-
mate, one being besides function of the other, at least to a certain point. In the Northern countries, indeed, where the sunlight is weak and of-
ten veiled, all things appear in view with equal value, so to speak, and in 
a way which asserts purely and simply their individual existence without 
leaving anything to be seen beyond; so, in ordinary experience itself, one 
really sees only the multiplicity. It is quite different in countries where 
the sun, by its intense radiations, absorbs, so to speak, all things within 
itself, making them disappear before it as multiplicity disappears before 
unity, not that it ceases to exist according to its own mode, but because 
this existence is strictly nothing with regard to the Principle. Thereby 
the Unity becomes somewhat sensitive: this solar flare is the image of the 
fulguration of the eye of Shiva, which reduces to ashes all manifestations. The sun stands out here as the symbol par excellence of the Principle 
One (Allahu ʿAḥad), which is his necessary Being, the one who alone is 
self-sufficient in His absolute fullness (Allahu aṣ-Ṣamad), and on whom

--- PAGE BREAK ---bol par excellence of the Principle 
One (Allahu ʿAḥad), which is his necessary Being, the one who alone is 
self-sufficient in His absolute fullness (Allahu aṣ-Ṣamad), and on whom

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
89 
depends the entirety of existence and sustenance of all things, which out-
side of Him would be nothingness. 
‘Monotheism,’ if we can use this word to translate At-Tawḥīd, alt-
hough it somewhat restricts its meaning by making one think almost in-
evitably of an exclusively religious point of view, ‘monotheism,’ we say, 
therefore has a character that is essentially ‘solar.’ It is nowhere more 
‘responsive’ than in the desert where the diversity of things is reduced 
to a minimum, and where, at the same time, the mirages reveal all that is 
illusory of the manifested world. There, solar radiation produces things 
and destroys them in turn; or rather, because it is incorrect to say that he 
destroys them, he transforms them and reabsorbs them after having 
manifested them. One could never find a truer image of Unity unfolding 
externally in multiplicity without ceasing to be itself and without being 
affected by it, and then bringing back to it, always according to appear-
ances, this multiplicity which, in reality, has never come out of it, for 
there can be nothing outside the Principle, to which nothing can be added 
and from which nothing can be subtracted, because it is the indivisible 
totality of the unique Existence. In the intense light of the countries of 
the East, it is enough to see to understand these things, to seize immedi-
ately the deep truth; and above all it seems impossible not to understand 
them thus in the desert, where the sun traces the divine names in letters 
of fire in the sky.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ze immedi-
ately the deep truth; and above all it seems impossible not to understand 
them thus in the desert, where the sun traces the divine names in letters 
of fire in the sky.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Al-Faqr 
El-Faqru, October 1930. 
The contingent being can be defined as one who does not have within 
himself sufficient reason; such a being, therefore, is nothing by himself 
and nothing of his own belongs to him. Such is the case of the human 
being, as an individual, as well as of all manifested beings, in whatever 
state, for whatever the difference between the degrees of Universal Ex-
istence, it is always null in respect to the Principle. These beings, human 
or otherwise, are, in all that they are, in a complete dependence on the 
Principle, “out of which there is nothing, absolutely nothing that ex-
ists;”129 this is the consciousness of this dependence that properly con-
sists of what many traditions refer to as ‘spiritual poverty.’ At the same 
time, for the being who has attained this consciousness, this has the im-
mediate consequence of detachment from all manifested things, for he 
knows then that these things too are nothing, that their importance is 
strictly zero in relation to Absolute Reality. This detachment, in the case 
of the human being, implies essentially, and above all, the indifference 
towards the fruits of action, as taught in particular by the Bhagavad-Gita, 
indifference by which the being escapes the indefinite sequence of the 
consequences of this action: it is ‘action without desire’ (nishkama 
Karma), while ‘action with desire’ (sakama Karma) is the action accom-
plished in view of its fruits. 
By this, the being thus departs from multiplicity; it escapes, according 
to the expressions used by the Taoist doctrine, the vicissitudes of the 
‘streams of form,’ the alternation of states of ‘life’ and ‘death,’ ‘conden-
sation’ and ‘dissipation,’130 from the circumference of the ‘cosmic wheel’ 
to its center, which is itself designated as “the emptiness (the unmanifest) 
that unites the rays and makes them a wheel.”131 “The one who has 
reached the maximum amount of emptiness,” Lao-tzu also states, “will 
be firmly fixed in the rest… To return to its root (that is to say the Prin-
ciple which is both the first origin and the last end of all beings) is to 
enter the state of rest.”132 “Peace in the void,” the Lieh-tzu states, “is ano return to its root (that is to say the Prin-
ciple which is both the first origin and the last end of all beings) is to 
enter the state of rest.”132 “Peace in the void,” the Lieh-tzu states, “is an

129 Muḥyiddīn ibn ‘Arabī, Risālat al-ʾAḥadīyyah. 
130 Aristotle, in a similar sense, says ‘generation’ and ‘corruption.’ 
131 Tao-Te-Ching, XI. 
132 Tao-Te-Ching, XVI.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tes, “is an

129 Muḥyiddīn ibn ‘Arabī, Risālat al-ʾAḥadīyyah. 
130 Aristotle, in a similar sense, says ‘generation’ and ‘corruption.’ 
131 Tao-Te-Ching, XI. 
132 Tao-Te-Ching, XVI.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
91 
definable state; it is neither taken nor give; we are only able to settle 
there.”133 This ‘peace in the void’ is the ‘great peace’ (Ash-Shakinah) of 
Muslim esoterism,134 which is at the same time the ‘divine presence’ at 
the center of being, implied by the union with the Principle, which can 
only really occur in this very center. “To him who abodes in the unman-
ifest, all beings who are manifested themselves are united unto the Prin-
ciple, he is in harmony with all beings. United with the Principle, he 
knows everything by superior general reasons, and no longer uses, his 
various senses to know. The true reason of things is invisible, elusive, 
indefinable, indeterminable. Only the mind restored to the state of per-
fect simplicity can reach it in deep contemplation.”135  
‘Simplicity,’ the expression of the unification of all the powers of be-
ing, characterizes the return to the ‘primordial state;’ and here we see the 
difference that separates transcendent knowledge from the wise, from 
ordinary and ‘profane’ knowledge. This ‘simplicity’ is also what is re-
ferred to elsewhere as the state of ‘childhood’ (in Sanskrit, balya), under-
stood naturally in the spiritual sense, and which, in the Hindu doctrine, 
is considered a precondition for the acquisition of knowledge par excel-
lence. This is reminiscent of the similar words found in the Gospel: 
“Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall 
not enter therein.” “You have hidden these things from the wise and 
learned, and revealed them to the simple and the small.”136 
‘Simplicity’ and ‘smallness’ are basically the equivalents of ‘poverty,’ 
which is so often discussed in the Gospel, and is generally understood 
very poorly: “Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of 
heaven.”137 This ‘poverty’ (in Arabic al-faqr) leads, according to Muslim 
esoterism, to al-fanāʾ, which is to say to the ‘extinction’ of the ‘me;’138 
and by this ‘extinction’ we reach the ‘divine place’ (al-maqām al-ilāhī), 
which is the central point where all the distinctions inherent in external 
points of view are passed, where all the oppositions have disappeared 
and are resolved in a perfect equilibrium. “In the primordial state, these 
oppositions do not exist. All are derived from the diversification of being 
(inherent in the manifestation and contingencies of it), and from theirrfect equilibrium. “In the primordial state, these 
oppositions do not exist. All are derived from the diversification of being 
(inherent in the manifestation and contingencies of it), and from their

133 Lieh-tzu, I. 
134 See our chapter on War and Peace in The Symbolism of the Cross. 
135 Lieh-tzu, IV. 
136 Matthew, XI, 25; Luc, X, 21. 
137 Matthew, V, 2. 
138 This ‘extinction’ is not without analogy, even as to the literal meaning of the 
term which designates it, with the Nirvana of the Hindu doctrine; beyond al-
fanāʾ, there is still fanāʾ al-fanāi, the ‘extinction of extinction’ which corre-
sponds to Parinirvana.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

92 
The Veil of Isist, with the Nirvana of the Hindu doctrine; beyond al-
fanāʾ, there is still fanāʾ al-fanāi, the ‘extinction of extinction’ which corre-
sponds to Parinirvana.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

92 
The Veil of Isis

contacts caused by the universal gyration (that is, by the rotation of the 
‘cosmic wheel’ around its axis). They immediately cease to affect the be-
ing who has reduced his distinct self and his particular movement to al-
most nothing.”139 
This reduction of the ‘distinct self,’ which finally disappears in one 
single point, is the same as al-fanāʾ, and also as the ‘emptiness’ men-
tioned above; it is also evident from the symbolism of the wheel that the 
‘movement’ of a being is all the more reduced as this being moves closers 
to the center. “This being no longer comes into conflict with any being, 
because he is established in the infinite, erased in the indefinite.140 He 
has arrived and stands at the starting point of transformation, the neutral 
point where there is no conflict. By concentrating his nature, by feeding 
his vital spirit, by gathering all his power, he is united with the principle 
of all genesis. His nature being whole (totalized synthetically in the prin-
cipal unity), his vital spirit being intact, no being can crush it.”141 
The ‘simplicity’ referred to above corresponds to the ‘dimensionless’ 
unity of the primordial point, which is the result of the movement back 
to the origin. “The simply absolute man bends all beings by his simplic-
ity… so that nothing is opposed to him in the six regions of space, that 
nothing is hostile towards him, that fire and water do not harm him.”142 
Indeed, he stands in the center, whose six directions are radiated, and 
where they converge, in the returning moment, neutralize each other in 
pairs in this single point, their triple opposition ceases entirely, and that 
nothing which results from it or is localized to it cannot reach the being 
who remains in immutable unity. The latter does not oppose anything, 
nothing can be opposed to him, because opposition is necessarily a re-
ciprocal relation, which requires two terms in the presence, and which, 
consequently, is incompatibly with a principled unity; and hostility, 
which is only a continuation or an outward manifestation of opposition, 
cannot exist with respect to a being who is outside and beyond any op-
position. Fire and water, which are the two types of opposites in the ‘el-
ementary world,’ cannot harm him, for, to tell the truth, they do not exist 
contrary to him, having been absorbed, balancing and neutralizing eacher, which are the two types of opposites in the ‘el-
ementary world,’ cannot harm him, for, to tell the truth, they do not exist 
contrary to him, having been absorbed, balancing and neutralizing each

139 Chuang-tzu, XIX. 
140 The first of these two expressions refers to ‘personality’ and the second to 
‘individuality.’ 
141 Ibid. The last sentence still refers to the conditions of the ‘primordial state:’ 
this is what the Judeo-Christian tradition refers to as the immortality of man 
before the ‘fall,’ immortality recovered by the one who, returned to the ‘Center 
of the World,’ feeds upon the ‘Tree of Life.’ 
142 Lieh-tzu, II.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ers to as the immortality of man 
before the ‘fall,’ immortality recovered by the one who, returned to the ‘Center 
of the World,’ feeds upon the ‘Tree of Life.’ 
142 Lieh-tzu, II.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
93 
other by the union of their apparently opposite, but really complemen-
tary, qualities in the undifferentiation of the primordial ether. 
This central point, by which communication with the higher or ‘ce-
lestial’ states is established for the human being, is also the ‘narrow door’ 
of evangelical symbolism, and we can therefore understand who the 
‘rich’ who cannot enter: they are the beings attached to multiplicity, and 
who, consequently, are incapable of rising from distinctive knowledge to 
unified knowledge. This attachment, in fact, is directly contrary to the 
detachment mentioned above, as wealth is contrary to poverty, and it 
connects beings to the indefinite series of cycles of manifestation.143 The 
attachment to multiplicity is also, in a certain sense, the Biblical ‘temp-
tation’ which, by making taste be the fruit of the ‘Tree of the Knowledge 
of Good and Evil,’ which is of the dual and distinctive knowledge of con-
tingent things, removes it from the original central unit and prevents it 
from attaining the fruit of the ‘Tree of Life;’ and it is indeed by this fact 
that the being is subject to the alternation of cyclical mutations, that is, 
at birth and at death. The indefinite course of multiplicity is precisely 
represented by the serpent’s spirals wrapping around the tree that sym-
bolizes the ‘Axis Mundi:’ it is the path of the ‘misguided’ (ad-dāllīn), of 
those who are in ‘error,’ in the etymological sense of the word, as op-
posed to the ‘right path’ (aṣ-Ṣirāṭ al-mustaqīm), in vertical ascension 
along the same axis of which is spoken in the first surah of the Qurʾān.144 
‘Poverty,’ ‘simplicity,’ ‘childhood,’ these are all one and the same 
thing, and the bareness that all these words express145 leads to an ‘ex-
tinction’ which is, in reality, the fullness of being, just as ‘non-action’ 
(wui-wei) is the fullness of the activity, since it is from there that are de-
rived all particular activities: “The Principle is always non-acting, and yet 
everything is done by him.”146 The being who has thus arrived at the 
central point has thereby achieved the totality of the human state: it is 
the ‘true man’ (chen-jen) of Taoism, and when, from this point ascends 
towards higher states, he has achieved the perfect totalization of his pos-
sibilities, he will have become the ‘divine man’ (cheun-jen), who is the 
‘Universal Man’ (al-Insān al-Kāmil) of Muslim esoterism. Thus, it can be 
said that it is the ‘rich’ from the point of view of manifestation who are 
in reality the ‘poor’ in regards to the Principle, and conversely so; this isl-Kāmil) of Muslim esoterism. Thus, it can be 
said that it is the ‘rich’ from the point of view of manifestation who are 
in reality the ‘poor’ in regards to the Principle, and conversely so; this is

143 It is the Buddhist samsara, the indefinite rotation of the ‘wheel of life,’ whose 
being must be liberated to reach Nirvana. 
144 This ‘right path’ is identical to the Te or ‘Righteousness’ of Lao-Tzu, which 
is the direction that a being must follow in order for his existence to be according 
to the ‘Way’ (Tao), or, in other words, in accordance with the Principle. 
145 It is the ‘stripping of metals’ in Masonic symbolism. 
146 Tao-Te-Ching, XXXVII.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

94 
The Veil of Isis

what the words of the Gospel still very clearly express: “So the last shall 
be the first, and the first last;”147 and we must note in this regard, once 
more, the perfect agreement of all the traditional doctrines, which are 
only the various expressions of the one Truth.

147 Matthew, XX, 16.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Limits of the Mind 
Les limites du Mental, November 1930.ent of all the traditional doctrines, which are 
only the various expressions of the one Truth.

147 Matthew, XX, 16.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Limits of the Mind 
Les limites du Mental, November 1930.

Following a series of questions from a few of our readers, we believe it 
necessary to return to a point which we have often dealt with in our 
works: the deficiency of the mind in regard to all knowledge of a properly 
metaphysical or initiatic order. We are obliged to use the term ‘mind,’ 
over any other, as an equivalent to the Sanskrit manas, because it is con-
nected to it via roots; by this we mean the set of faculties of knowledge 
which are specifically characteristic of the human individual (also desig-
nated in various languages by having words of the same root), and of 
which the principal is reason. 
We shall not return here to the distinction between reason and pure, 
supra-individual, intellect, a distinction which has been recognized, at 
least theoretically, by certain ancient Western philosophers such as Ar-
istotle and the Scholastics, although they do not seem to have drawn all 
the consequences that this implies. We will say only that metaphysical 
knowledge, in the true sense of the word, being of a universal order 
would be impossible if there was in the being a faculty of the same order, 
thus transcendent knowledge with respect to the individual is intellec-
tual intuition. Indeed, all knowledge being essentially a realization, it is 
obvious that the individual, as such, cannot reach knowledge that is be-
yond the individual domain, which would be contradictory; this 
knowledge is possibly only because the being who is a human individual 
in a certain contingent state of manifestation is also something else, at 
the same time.148 It would be absurd to say that man, as a man and by his 
human means, can surpass himself; but the being who appears in this 
world as a man is, in reality, quite another thing by the permanent and 
immutable principle which constitutes its deep essence. All knowledge 
that can truly be called ‘initiatic’ results from a communication con-
sciously established with the higher states; and it is to such a communi-iple which constitutes its deep essence. All knowledge 
that can truly be called ‘initiatic’ results from a communication con-
sciously established with the higher states; and it is to such a communi-

148 We are referring here to the metaphysical theory of the multiple states of 
being, to which our work, which is currently being prepared, is specifically re-
lated, on The Symbolism of the Cross.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96 
The Veil of Isissical theory of the multiple states of 
being, to which our work, which is currently being prepared, is specifically re-
lated, on The Symbolism of the Cross.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

96 
The Veil of Isis

cation that words, such as those of ‘inspiration’ and ‘revelation’ are al-
luded to, if they are understood in their true meaning and without taking 
into account the abuse that is sometimes made of them.149 
Direct knowledge of the transcendent order, with the absolute cer-
tainty which it implies, is evidently, within itself, incommunicable and 
inexpressible; every expression, being necessarily distinct and thereby 
individual, is therefore inadequate and can only give it a reflection in the 
human order of things. This reflection may help certain beings to attain 
this same knowledge, by awakening in them higher faculties, but it can-
not dispense them from doing personally what no one can do for them; 
it is only a ‘support’ for their inner work. Such is the role of symbols, 
which are the mode of expression best suited to initiatic teaching; such 
can be also that of ordinary language, which, when applied to the truths 
of this order, also take on a truly symbolic value. Now, since human lan-
guage is closely related, in respect to its very constitution, to the exercise 
of the rational faculty, it follows that all that is expressed or translated 
by means of language necessarily takes on a form of ‘reasoning;’ but it 
must be understood that there can be only a purely apparent and external 
similarity, a similarity of form and not of substance, between ordinary 
reasoning, which concerns the things of the individual domain, and that 
which is intended to reflect something of the supra-individual truths. It 
must also be understood that he who, by the study of any dialectical ex-
position, has arrived at a theoretical knowledge of certain truths of this 
order, yet has in no way a real (or ‘realized’) knowledge of it, in view of 
this, theoretical knowledge cannot constitute anything more than a sim-
ple preparation. 
This theoretical preparation, so apparently indispensable in fact 
(apart perhaps from certain exceptional cases), has only a value of con-
tingent and accidental means; as long as we stick to it, we cannot speak 
of ‘initiation,’ even to the lowest degree. If there was nothing more and 
nothing else, there would only be the analog, in a higher order of what 
philosophy is in any other similar speculation, for such knowledge that 
is merely theoretical is only of the mind, while actual knowledge is by 
the ‘spirit’ and the ‘soul’ (rūḥ wa an-nafs). This is why even the simple-
minded ‘mystics,’ in the sense that this word is taken most commonly in 
the Western world, without exceeding the limits of the individual do-the ‘soul’ (rūḥ wa an-nafs). This is why even the simple-
minded ‘mystics,’ in the sense that this word is taken most commonly in 
the Western world, without exceeding the limits of the individual do-

149 These two words refer basically to the same thing but considered from two 
different points of view: what is ‘inspiration’ for the very being who receives it 
becomes ‘revelation’ for other beings to whom he transmits it, as far as possible, 
by manifesting it externally by any mode of expression.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ion’ for the very being who receives it 
becomes ‘revelation’ for other beings to whom he transmits it, as far as possible, 
by manifesting it externally by any mode of expression.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
97 
main, are nevertheless incomparably superior to philosophers, even the-
ologians, because the smallest piece of actual knowledge is immensely 
worth more than all the reasonings which proceed only from the mind.150 
As long as knowledge is only of the mind, it remains only a mere 
‘reflection’ of knowledge, such as the shadows seen by the prisoners of 
Plato’s cave, hence an indirect, exterior knowledge. To transition from 
shadow to reality, seized directly within itself, is to pass from the ‘exte-
rior’ (az-ẓāhir) to the ‘interior’ (al-batin); this passage implies the renun-
ciation of the mind, which is to say, of any ‘discursive’ faculty, which has 
now become powerless, since it cannot cross the limits imposed on it by 
its very nature; intellectual intuition alone is beyond these limits because 
it does not belong to the order of individual faculties. Using the symbol-
ism based on organic correspondences, one can say that the center of 
consciousness must be transferred from the ‘brain’ to the ‘heart;’ for this 
transfer, all speculation and dialectics can obviously no longer be of any 
use; and it is from there only that it is possible to truly speak of ‘initia-
tion’ (at-Taṣawwuf). The point at which this begins is therefore well be-
yond all that is relatively valid in the philosopher’s theories ends; be-
tween the one and the other, there is a true abyss, that the renunciation 
of the mind, as we have just said, allows one to cross. He who attaches 
himself to reasoning remains a prisoner of form, which is the limitation 
by which the individual state is defined; he will never go beyond it, and 
he will never go further than the ‘exterior,’ that is, he will remain abound 
to the indefinite cycle of manifestation. The passage from the ‘exterior’ 
to the ‘interior’ is also the passage from multiplicity to unity, from the 
circumference to the center, to the unique point from which it is possible 
for the human being, restored in the prerogatives of the ‘primordial 
state,’ to rise to the higher states and, by the total realization of its true 
‘essence’ (ad-dat), to finally be effectively what it is from virtually all 
eternity. He who knows himself in the ‘truth’ (al-ḥaqīqah) of the eternal 
and infinite ‘Essence,’ he knows and possesses all things in himself and 
by himself, because he has managed to reach the unconditioned state 
which leaves no possibility out of itself, and this state, in relation to alle,’ he knows and possesses all things in himself and 
by himself, because he has managed to reach the unconditioned state 
which leaves no possibility out of itself, and this state, in relation to all

150 We must specify that this superiority of the mystics must be understood as 
to their internal state; it may happen that, for lack of theoretical preparation, 
they are unable to express anything intelligibly. On the other hand, the realiza-
tion of these mystics can only be fragmentary and incomplete: but it is in fact 
all that remains possible, in fact of realization, where there no longer exists any 
initiation and traditional teaching, and one can say that the purpose of this ‘ir-
regular’ realization is precisely to keep alive what may remain in such a case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

98 
The Veil of Isis

the others, however high they may be, are only preliminary stages in-
comparable to it, that state which is the ultimate goal of all initiation is 
properly what is meant by ‘Supreme Identity.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Sifra di-Zeniuta 
Le Siphra di-Tzeniutha, December 1930.rable to it, that state which is the ultimate goal of all initiation is 
properly what is meant by ‘Supreme Identity.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Sifra di-Zeniuta 
Le Siphra di-Tzeniutha, December 1930.

Mr. Paul Vulliaud has just given, as a beginning for a series on the ‘fun-
damental texts of the Kabbalah,’ a translation of the Sifra di-Zeniuta, pre-
ceded by a long introduction, which is much longer than the translation 
itself, and even then there are two translations, because there are, in this 
volume, two successive versions of the text, one that is literal and the 
other that is paraphrased. This introduction seems destined above all to 
show that, even after the Zohar of Jean de Pauly, such a work is far from 
useless; most of it is devoted to a detailed history of the stated French 
translation of the Zohar, a historical record containing as it seems, almost 
all that is possible to know of the life of the translator, who is a truly 
enigmatic character and whose origins are still not finally clear. All of 
the history is very intriguing, and it is not indifferent in explaining the 
shortcomings and imperfections of the work, to know in what conditions 
it was made and the strange difficulties the editor had with the unfortu-
nate Jean de Pauly, who was somewhat affected by a persecution com-
plex. However, we will allow ourselves to find that these details hold too 
large of a place here; upon reading them, it is regrettable that Mr. Vul-
liaud had not devoted himself to what may be called the little details of 
history, for he certainly would have brought with it an unusual elo-
quence; but the Kabbalistic studies would have greatly suffered. 
On the present state of these studies, the same introduction contains 
some general considerations on the course of which Mr. Vulliaud attacks, 
as only he is capable, the ‘Doctors,’ that is, the ‘officials,’ which lay claims 
to hard truths in Jewish Kabbalah, then he criticizes a Jesuit Father, Fa-
ther Bonsirven, whom some, it seems, are trying to present as an incom-
parable authority on matters of Judaism. This discussion is an occasion 
to give a number of very interesting remarks, notably on the Kabbalists’ 
processes and path, considered as ‘stupefying’ by the critics, of which 
they only quote the scriptural texts; and Mr. Vulliaud adds in this link: 
“Contemporary exegesis has been unable to analyze properly the ‘quota-
tions’ of the Gospels, because it has been resolved to ignore the processes 
of the Jewish hermeneutics; it is necessary to move to Palestine, since the 
evangelical work was elaborated in this country.” This seems to fit, at 
least as a trend, with the work of another Jesuit Father, Father Mercelutics; it is necessary to move to Palestine, since the 
evangelical work was elaborated in this country.” This seems to fit, at 
least as a trend, with the work of another Jesuit Father, Father Mercel

--- PAGE BREAK ---

100 
The Veil of IsisJousse; it is a pity that this is not mentioned, because it would have been 
biting to have put him in front of his colleague.

On the other hand, Mr.

Vulliaud rightly points out that the Catholics who make a mockery of 
the so-called magic formulas, contained within Kabbalistic works, and 
who hasten to call them ‘superstitious,’ should be cautious, for their own 
rituals are filled with things of the same type.

The same applies to accu-
sation of ‘erotism’ and ‘obscenity’ against a certain type of symbolism: 
“The critics who belong to Catholicism should think before joining their 
voices with the Jews and the rationalist Protestants, Catholic theology is 
likely, just as Kabbalah is, to be easily ridiculed with what we are dealing 
with.” It is good that these things are said by a writer who has taken 
Catholicism as a profession; and, especially, some anti-Jewish and anti-
Masonic fanatics should make good use of this excellent lesson.

There are many more things to note in the introduction, especially on 
the Christian interpretation of the Zohar: Mr.

Vulliaud has reservations 
about some of the rather forced rapprochements established by Drach 
and accepted by Jean de Pauly.

He also returns to the question of the 
Zohar’s antiquity, that the opponents of Kabbalah strive to challenge 
with very bad reasoning.

But there is something else we are glad to em-
phasize: Mr.

Vulliaud declares that, “in order to translate certain essential 
passages properly, it is necessary to be initiated into the mysteries of 
Jewish esoterism,” and that, “de Pauly has approached the translation of 
the Zohar without possession this initiation;” further on, he notes that 
the Gospel of Saint John, as well as of the Apocalypse, “was addressed to 
initiates;” and we can note other such similar sentences.

There is, there-
fore, a certain change of attitude in Mr.100 
The Veil of Isis

Vulliaud declares that, “in order to translate certain essential 
passages properly, it is necessary to be initiated into the mysteries of 
Jewish esoterism,” and that, “de Pauly has approached the translation of 
the Zohar without possession this initiation;” further on, he notes that 
the Gospel of Saint John, as well as of the Apocalypse, “was addressed to 
initiates;” and we can note other such similar sentences. There is, there-
fore, a certain change of attitude in Mr. Vulliaud, of which we can only 
congratulate him for, previously he seemed to have an odd qualm with 
pronouncing the word ‘initiation,’ or at least if he did it was only to mock 
certain ‘initiates’ that he should have, to avoid any unpleasant confusion, 
qualified rather as ‘pseudo-initiates.’ What he is writing now is the exact 
truth: it is a matter of ‘initiation’ that it is, in the proper sense of the 
word, with regard to Kabbalah as well as any other form of esoterism 
that is worth the name; and we must add that it goes much further than 
deciphering a type of cryptography, which is what Mr. Vulliaud seems 
to have in mind when he has previously spoken on the topic. Without a 
doubt, this also exists but this is only a question of external form, which 
is far from being negligible, since we must pass through this to arrive at 
an understanding of the doctrine; but we must not confuse the means 
with the end, nor put them on the same plane. Be that as it may, it is quite certain that Kabbalists can, more often 
than not, speak in reality of something else than what they openly speak 
about; and these processes are not unique to them, far from it, because it

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat Kabbalists can, more often 
than not, speak in reality of something else than what they openly speak 
about; and these processes are not unique to them, far from it, because it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
101 
is also found in the Western Middle Ages; we have had the opportunity 
to see this subject when relating to Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amore,’ and 
we indicated then that the main causes for this, are not all of simple pru-
dence as the ‘profane’ can be tempted to assume. The same exists in Is-
lamic esoterism, and it is developed to a point that no one, we believe, 
can suspect in the Western world; the Arabic language, as well as the 
Hebrew language, can be admired in this respect. Here, we do not find 
only the usual symbolism which Mr. Luigi Valli, in his work, has shown 
to be common to both the Sufis and the ‘Fedeli d’Amore;’ there is still 
much better to be seen: is it inconceivable, for Western minds, that a 
simple treatise on grammar, or geography, or even commerce, has at the 
same time another meaning which is also a far-reaching initiatic work? 
These are examples that really exist and that we currently have in our 
possession. 
This leads us to make a slight criticsm with regards to the translation 
that Mr. Vulliaud has given to the very title of the Sifra di-Zeniuta: he 
names it as the ‘Secret Book,’ and not ‘Book of the Secret,’ and the rea-
sons that he gives seems inconclusive. It is certainly juvenile to imagine, 
as some have done, that “this title recalls the flight of Simeon bar Yochai, 
during which time the Rabbi secretly composed this short work;” but this 
is not what the ‘Book of the Secret’ means, which in reality has a much 
higher and deeper meaning than that of the ‘Secret Book.’ We mean here 
to allude to the important role played in certain initiatic traditions, the 
very ones that concern us presently, the notion of a ‘secret’ (sod in He-
brew, sirr in Arabic) which has nothing to do with discretion or conceal-
ment, but what is the very nature of things; should we recall in this con-
nection that the early Christian church itself had a ‘secret discipline,’ and 
that the word ‘mystery’ in its original sense refers properly to the inex-
pressible? 
As for the translation itself, we said that there were two versions, and 
they are not duplicates, because the literal version, which is so useful for 
those who wish to refer to the text and follow it closely, is often unintel-
ligible. It is always so, as we have said on many other occasions, when it 
comes to Sacred Books or other traditional writings, if a translation must 
necessarily be ‘word for word’ according the school and university meth-
odology, we should declare them truly untranslatable. In reality, for 
those of us who have a completely different point of view from that of 
linguists, it is the paraphrased and commented version which constitutes 
the meaning of the text and which makes it possible to understand it, 
where the literal version sometimes makes the effect of a kind of ‘logo-
griph,’ as Mr. Vulliaud puts it, or incoherent rambling. We only regret 
that the commentary is not more extensive and more explicit; the notes,version sometimes makes the effect of a kind of ‘logo-
griph,’ as Mr. Vulliaud puts it, or incoherent rambling. We only regret 
that the commentary is not more extensive and more explicit; the notes,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

102 
The Veil of Isis

although numerous and very interesting, are not always sufficiently ‘en-
lightening,’ so to speak, and it is to be feared that they cannot be under-
stood by those who do not already have more than an elementary under-
standing of Kabbalah; but no doubt it is necessary to wait for the contin-
uation of these ‘fundamental texts,’ which, hopefully will happily com-
plete this first volume. Mr. Vulliaud owes us, and himself, to now provide 
a similar work in regards to the Idra Rabba and the Idra Zuta, who, along-
side the Sifra di-Zeniuta, as he states, are far from simply “annexes or 
appendages” of the Zohar, but “are, on the contrary, the central parts,” 
those which contain in some way, in the most concentrated form, all the 
essentials of the doctrine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s or 
appendages” of the Zohar, but “are, on the contrary, the central parts,” 
those which contain in some way, in the most concentrated form, all the 
essentials of the doctrine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sacerdotal Initiation and Royal Initiation 
Initiation sacerdotale et initiation royale, January 1931. 
Although we deal with it often, particularly in our last work Spiritual 
Authority and Temporal Power, the question of the relations between the 
dual sacerdotal and royal functions, and their corresponding initiations, 
we think it would be of benefit to return to this once again due to certain 
erroneous conceptions which seem to be spread, and which tend to pre-
sent each of the two initiations as forming by themselves a complete 
whole, so that we are not dealing with two different degrees of hierarchy, 
but with two irreducible doctrines. The main intention of those who 
propagate such a conception seems to be simply to oppose Eastern tradi-
tions, which is of the sacerdotal or contemplative type, against the West-
ern traditions, which are of the royal and warlike or active type; and 
when they do not go so far as to proclaim one superior to the other, they 
at least claim that they are on equal footing. It should be added that this 
is generally accompanied, as far as Western traditions are concerned, by 
somewhat fantastical historical views of their origin, such as, as an ex-
ample, the hypothesis of a primitive and unique ‘Mediterranean tradi-
tion,’ which likely has never existed.  
In reality, in the beginning, and before the division of the castes, the 
dual sacerdotal and royal functions did not exist in distinct and differen-
tiated states; they were both contained within their common principle, 
which is beyond castes, and from which they only emerged in a later 
phase of the cycle of earthly humanity. It is also clear that once castes 
have been distinguished, all social structures must have included them 
both, since they represent different functions that must necessarily co-
exist; we cannot conceive of a society comprised solely of Brahmins, nor 
another composed solely of Kshatriyas. The coexistence of these func-
tions imply their hierarchization, according to their nature, and conse-
quently that of the individuals who filled these roles; the Brahmin is su-
perior to the Kshatriya by nature, and not because he has taken a more 
or less arbitrary place in society; it is because knowledge is superior to 
action, because the ‘metaphysical’ domain is superior to the ‘physical’ 
domain; as the principle is superior to everything that derives from it; 
and this comes, no less naturally, in the distinction between ‘greaterhe ‘metaphysical’ domain is superior to the ‘physical’ 
domain; as the principle is superior to everything that derives from it; 
and this comes, no less naturally, in the distinction between ‘greater

--- PAGE BREAK ---

104 
The Veil of Isismysteries,’ which properly constitutes sacerdotal initiation, and ‘lesser 
mysteries,’ which properly constitute royal initiation.

However, any tradition, to be regular and complete, must include both 
forms of initiation, that of the ‘greater mysteries’ and of the ‘lesser mys-
teries,’ the second being subordinated to the first, as indicated by the very 
terms that designate them.

This subordination could only be denied by 
the rebellious Kshatriyas, who strove to overthrow normal relations, and 
in some cases, succeeded in constituting a sort of irregular and incom-
plete tradition, which is reduced to the ‘lesser mysteries,’ the only ones 
of which they had any knowledge, and falsely presenting this as the total 
doctrine.

In such a case, royal initiation alone remains, moreover being 
degenerated and deviated by the very fact that it is no longer attached to 
the principle which legitimized it; as for the opposite case, the case where 
the sacerdotal initiation alone exists, it is certainly impossible to find any 
example of this anywhere.

This is enough to put things in order: if there 
are really two types of traditional and initiatic organizations, it is that 
one is regular while the other is irregular, one complete and the other 
incomplete; it could not be otherwise, and this is a general principle, in 
the Occident as well as in the Orient.

Admittedly, we have said on many occasions that, in the present state 
of things at least, contemplative tendencies are much more widespread 
and active (or rather ‘effective’) in the East than in the West; but this is 
only a question of proportion, and not of exclusivity.104 
The Veil of Isis

This is enough to put things in order: if there 
are really two types of traditional and initiatic organizations, it is that 
one is regular while the other is irregular, one complete and the other 
incomplete; it could not be otherwise, and this is a general principle, in 
the Occident as well as in the Orient. Admittedly, we have said on many occasions that, in the present state 
of things at least, contemplative tendencies are much more widespread 
and active (or rather ‘effective’) in the East than in the West; but this is 
only a question of proportion, and not of exclusivity. If there was a tra-
ditional organization in the West, which is not the case now, but just as 
in the East, should include both sacerdotal initiation and royal initiation 
in one form or another, but always with acknowledgement of the supe-
riority of the former over the latter, and regardless of the number of in-
dividuals who would respectively be able to receive one or the other of 
these two types of initiation, because the quantity does not change any-
thing about it and cannot in any way change what is inherent in the very 
nature of things. What acts as an illusion in the West, where any truly initiatic organ-
ization has disappeared (in spite of the maintenance in some cases of 
certain misunderstood symbolic forms), we find it easier to see the ves-
tiges of the royal initiation when compared to sacerdotal initiation; and 
even, by some rather strange phenomena, one sometimes sees reappear-
ing, in a more or less fragmented manner, something of these deviated 
traditions which were, under different circumstances of time and place, 
the product of the Kshatriyas’ revolt, whose ‘naturalistic’ character is still 
the primary mark. It is not appropriate, at least in the current time, to 
press on this and give specific examples; we will only point out the pre-
ponderance often given in such cases to the ‘magic’ point of view (and

--- PAGE BREAK ---, at least in the current time, to 
press on this and give specific examples; we will only point out the pre-
ponderance often given in such cases to the ‘magic’ point of view (and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
105 
one must not exclusively search for more or less extraordinary external 
effects), which is the result of the alteration of traditional sciences sepa-
rated from their metaphysical principle. 
The ‘mixture of castes,’ which is to say the destruction of any real 
hierarchy, which is characteristic of the last period of the Kali-Yuga, 
makes it much more difficult, at least for those who do not dive into the 
depths of matters, to determine exactly the real nature of the elements 
we are discussing; and again, we have not yet arrived at the most con-
fusing points. The historical cycle, starting from a superior level to the 
distinction of castes, must lead, by a gradual descent in the stages we 
have described elsewhere, to a level below the same distinction, since 
there are obviously two opposite ways to be separated from the castes: 
we can be above or below, above the highest, or below the lowest; and if 
the first of these two cases was the norm for men at the beginning of the 
cycle, the second will be that of the immense majority in its final phase; 
we can see such clear indications that this is the case that it would be 
useless to dwell on it further, for no one can deny the tendency towards 
moving below, which is one of the most striking characteristics of the 
present epoch. 
However, one may object: if the end of one cycle must necessarily 
coincide with the beginning of another, how can the lowest point reach 
the highest point? An adjustment must take place, and this will only be 
possible precisely when the lowest point has been reached; this is related 
to the ‘reversal of the poles.’ This recovery will have to be prepared, per-
haps even visibly, before the end of the current cycle; but it can only be 
done by him who, uniting within himself the powers of the Heavens and 
the Earth, that of the East and the West, manifesting both in the realm of 
knowledge and in that of action, the dual sacerdotal and royal powers 
preserved throughout the ages, in the integrity of its unique principle, by 
the hidden holders of the Primordial Tradition. It would be futile to try 
and find out when and how such an event will occur, and no doubt it will 
be far different from one could imagine; the ‘mysteries of the Pole’ (al-
asrār al-quṭbānīyyah) are well guarded, and nothing can be known of this 
before the time is set.occur, and no doubt it will 
be far different from one could imagine; the ‘mysteries of the Pole’ (al-
asrār al-quṭbānīyyah) are well guarded, and nothing can be known of this 
before the time is set.

--- PAGE BREAK ---it will 
be far different from one could imagine; the ‘mysteries of the Pole’ (al-
asrār al-quṭbānīyyah) are well guarded, and nothing can be known of this 
before the time is set.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Science of Letters (ʾIlm al-Hurūf) 
La Science des Lettres (Ilmul-Hurûf), February 1931. 
In the introduction of his study on the ‘Theodicy of the Kabbalah’ (Octo-
ber 1930), Mr. Warrain, after saying that the “Kabbalistic assumption is 
that the Hebrew language is the perfect language taught by God to the 
first man,” finds it necessary to make some reservations about “the de-
ceptive pretension of possessing the pure elements of the natural lan-
guage, whereas one only possesses snippets and deformations.” None-
theless, he admits that “it remains probable that ancient languages derive 
from a hieratic language composed by inspiration,” and that “there must 
therefore be words expressing the essence of things and their numerical 
relations,” and that “the same can be said of the divinatory arts.” We 
think it would be of benefit to make some clarifications on this issue; but, 
first, we wish to point out that Mr. Warrain has placed himself in a par-
ticular philosophical point of view, while we intend to restrict ourselves 
strictly, as we always do, to the initiatic and traditional field. 
An initial point to draw attention to is this: the affirmation that the 
Hebrew language is the very language of primitive revelation seems to 
have nothing but an exoteric character and is not the essence of the Kab-
balistic doctrine, but, indeed, used to simply cover something much more 
profound. The proof for this is that this is also true of other languages, 
and this claim of ‘primordiality,’ so to speak, cannot be taken literally in 
all cases, since there would be an obvious contradiction. In particular, 
this is the case with the Arabic language, and it is even a fairly common 
opinion that it is the original language of mankind in the countries where 
it is in use; but what is remarkable, and what makes us believe that this 
is the same case with regards to Hebrew, is that this vulgar opinion is so 
unfounded and devoid of authority that it is in contradiction with the 
true traditional teachings of Islam, according to which the ‘Adamic’ lan-
guage was the ‘Syriac language,’ loghah suryānīyyah, which has nothing 
to do with the country currently known as Syria, nor with any of the 
more or less ancient languages of which men have preserved the memory 
of until today. This loghah suryānīyyah is properly, according to the in-
terpretation given by its name, the language of ‘solar illumination,’ 
shams-ishrāqīyyah; in fact, Sūrya is the Sanskrit name of the Sun, and 
this would seem to indicate that its root sur, would designate light, anden by its name, the language of ‘solar illumination,’ 
shams-ishrāqīyyah; in fact, Sūrya is the Sanskrit name of the Sun, and 
this would seem to indicate that its root sur, would designate light, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---language of ‘solar illumination,’ 
shams-ishrāqīyyah; in fact, Sūrya is the Sanskrit name of the Sun, and 
this would seem to indicate that its root sur, would designate light, and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
107 
it belongs to that original language. It is therefore this primitive Syria 
that Homer speaks of as an island located ‘beyond Ogygia,’ which iden-
tifies it with the Hyperborean Thule, and ‘where revolutions of the Sun 
are found.’ According to Josephus, the capital of this country was named 
Heliopolis, ‘The City of the Sun,’151 a name later given to the city in Egypt 
called On, like Thebes would have been one of the first of the names for 
the capital of Ogygia. The successive transfers of these names and many 
others would be particularly interesting to study in regards to the con-
stitution of the secondary spiritual centers of various periods, a constitu-
tion which is closely related to that of languages destined to serve as 
‘vehicles’ for their corresponding traditional forms. These languages are 
those which can properly be called ‘sacred languages;’ and it is precisely 
this distinction which must be made between these sacred languages and 
the vulgar, or profane, languages upon which the justification of the Kab-
balistic methodology rests, as well as similar processes found in other 
tradition. 
We can say this: just as every secondary spiritual center is an image 
of the supreme and primordial center, as we have explained in our study 
on The King of the World, any sacred language, or ‘hieratic’ language if 
one wishes, can be regarded as an image or reflection of the original lan-
guage, which is the sacred language par excellence; this is the ‘Lost 
Word,’ or rather, hidden for men of the ‘dark age,’ just as the Supreme 
Center has become invisible and inaccessible to them. But this is not 
‘snippets and deformations;’ on the contrary, it is a question of ordinary 
adaptations necessitated by circumstances of time and place, which is to 
say, according to what Muḥyiddīn ibn ʿArabī taught at the beginning of 
the second part of al-Futūḥāt al-Makkīyyah, each prophet or revelator 
had to use a language that could be understood by those to whom it was 
addressed and what was appropriate to the mentality of such people and 
times. The reason for this is because of the diversity of traditional forms, 
and it is in this diversity that results, as an immediate consequence, the 
languages that must serve as their respective means of expression; it is 
therefore all sacred languages that must be regarded as truly the work of 
the ‘inspired,’ without which they cannot be fit for the role to which they 
are essentially destined. As for the primitive language, its origin was to 
be ‘non-human’ such as the Primordial Tradition itself; and every sacred 
language participates in this character of its structure (al-mabanī) and its 
significance (al-maʾānī), a reflection of this primitive language. This canPrimordial Tradition itself; and every sacred 
language participates in this character of its structure (al-mabanī) and its 
significance (al-maʾānī), a reflection of this primitive language. This can

151 Cf. the ‘Solar Citadel’ of the Rose-Cross, the ‘City-State of the Sun’ of Cam-
panella, etc. – It is to this first Heliopolis that the cyclic symbolism of the Phoe-
nix should be related.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108 
The Veil of IsisRose-Cross, the ‘City-State of the Sun’ of Cam-
panella, etc. – It is to this first Heliopolis that the cyclic symbolism of the Phoe-
nix should be related.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

108 
The Veil of Isis

also be interpreted in different ways, which do not have the same signif-
icance in all cases, because the issue of adaptation intervenes here once 
again: for example, the symbolic form of the signs used for writings;152 
such is the case, particularly with Hebrew and Arabic, the correspond-
ence of numbers with letters, and consequently with the words which 
compose them. 
It is certainly difficult for Westerns to realize what sacred languages 
really are, because, under the present conditions at least, they have no 
direct contact with any of them; and we can recall in this link what we 
have said more generally on other occasions, with the difficult of assim-
ilating the ‘traditional sciences,’ which is much more difficult than that 
of teachings of a purely metaphysical order, because of their special char-
acter which binds them indissolubly to particular forms, and which does 
not allow for transportation from one civilization to another, under 
threats of making them completely unintelligible, or to have only an il-
lusory result, if not one that is completely false. Thus, to effectively un-
derstand the full significance of the symbolism of letters and numbers, it 
is necessary to live it in a way, in its application to the very circumstances 
of everyday life, as is possible in certain Eastern countries; but it would 
be absolutely quixotic to pretend to introduce considerations and appli-
cations of this sort into European languages, for which they were not 
made, and where the numerical value of letters, in particular, is a non-
existent thing. The essays that seek to attempt anything from this sort of 
order of ideas, apart from what is from traditional data, are therefore in-
correct from the outset; and, if they have obtained some accurate results, 
for example from the ‘onomantic’ point of view, this does not prove the 
value and legitimacy of the processes employed, but only the existence 
of a kind of ‘intuitive’ faculty (which, of course, has nothing in common 
with the true intellectual intuition) of those who have implemented 
them, as frequently happens in the ‘divinatory arts.’153of a kind of ‘intuitive’ faculty (which, of course, has nothing in common 
with the true intellectual intuition) of those who have implemented 
them, as frequently happens in the ‘divinatory arts.’153

152 This form may have undergone modifications corresponding to later tradi-
tional readaptations, as it happened to Hebrew after the Babylonian captivity; 
we can say that this is a readaptation, because it is unlikely that the old writing 
system was really lost in a short period of seventy years, and it is amazing that 
this seems generally to not be perceived. Occurrences of the same type have had 
also had to occur for other more or less remote writings systems, notably for the 
Sanskrit alphabet and, to a certain extent, for the Chinese ideograms. 
153 It seems as if, in spite of the ‘scientific’ appearance of these methods, the 
results obtained by modern astrology, which is so far removed from true tradi-
tional astrology; the latter, whose keys seem to be lost, was quite something 
other than a mere ‘divinatory art,’ although it was obviously susceptible to ap-
plications of this kind, but they are altogether secondary and ‘accidental.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---, was quite something 
other than a mere ‘divinatory art,’ although it was obviously susceptible to ap-
plications of this kind, but they are altogether secondary and ‘accidental.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
109 
To expose the metaphysical principle of the ‘science of letters’ (in Ar-
abic ʾilm al-hurūf), Sayyidī Muḥyiddīn, in al-Futūḥāt al-Makkīyyah, con-
siders the Universe to be symbolized by a book: it is the well-known sym-
bolism of the Liber Mundi of the Rose-Cross, and also of the apocalyptic 
Liber Vitae.154 The character in this book are, in principle, all written sim-
ultaneously and indivisibly by the ‘divine pen’ (al-qalam al-ilāhī); these 
‘transcendent letters’ are the eternal essence or divine ideas; and every 
letter being at the same time a number, one will notice the agreement of 
this teaching with the Pythagorean doctrine. These same ‘transcendent 
letters,’ which are all creatures, having been condensed principally 
within the divine omniscience, are by the divine breath, descended to the 
lower lines, thereby composing and forming the manifested Universe. A 
rapprochement is necessary here with the role that the letters play in the 
cosmogonic doctrine of the Sefer Yetzirah; the ‘science of letters’ has 
more or less equal importance in both the Hebrew Kabbalah and in Is-
lamic esoterism.155 
According to the basis of this principle, it will be easy to understand 
that correspondence is established between the letters and the different 
portions of the manifested Universe, and more particularly within our 
world; the existence of planetary and zodiacal correspondences is, in this 
regard, sufficiently well known to be useless to press further upon, and 
it suffices to note that this places the ‘science of letters’ in close connec-
tion with the astrology envisaged as a ‘cosmological’ science.156 Further-
more, by virtue of the constitutive analogy of the ‘microcosm’ (al-kawn 
as-ṣaghīr) with the ‘macrocosm’ (al-kawn al-kabīr), these same letters 
also correspond to different parts of the human organism; and, in this 
connection, we will note in passing that there is a therapeutic application 
of the ‘science of letters,’ each letter being employed in a certain manner 
to cure the diseases which affect the corresponding organism.will note in passing that there is a therapeutic application 
of the ‘science of letters,’ each letter being employed in a certain manner 
to cure the diseases which affect the corresponding organism.

154 We have already had occasion to point out the relation between this symbol-
ism of the ‘Book of Life’ and that of the ‘Tree of Life:’ the leaves of the tree and 
the characters of the book represent all the beings of the Universe (the ‘ten thou-
sand beings’ of the Far-Eastern traditions). 
155 It should also be noted that the ‘Book of the World’ is at the same time the 
‘Divine Message’ (Ar-Risālat al-Ilāhīyyah), the archetype of all sacred books; tra-
ditional scriptures are only translations into the human language. This is af-
firmed expressely in the Vedas and the Qurʾān: the idea of the ‘Eternal Gospel’ 
also shows that this same conception is not wholly foreign to Christianity, or 
that at least it has not always been so. 
156 There are also other correspondences, with the elements, sensible qualities, 
the celestial spheres, etc.; the letters of the Arabic alphabet, being twenty-eight 
in number, are also in relation with the lunar mansions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

110 
The Veil of Isisble qualities, 
the celestial spheres, etc.; the letters of the Arabic alphabet, being twenty-eight 
in number, are also in relation with the lunar mansions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

110 
The Veil of Isis

It also follows from what has been just said that the ‘science of letters’ 
must be considered in different orders, that we can in fact related this to 
the ‘three worlds:’ understood in its higher sense is the knowledge of all 
things in the very principle, as eternal essences beyond all manifestation; 
in another sense, that can be said to be an average, it is the cosmogony, 
which is to say, the knowledge of the creation or the formation of the 
manifested world; finally, in the inferior sense, it is the knowledge of the 
virtues of names and numbers, insofar as they express the nature of each 
being, knowledge allowing, by way of application, to exercise by their 
means, and reasons for this correspondence, a ‘magic’ action on the be-
ings themselves and on the events concerning them. Indeed, according 
to what Ibn Khaldūn explains, the written formulas, being composed of 
the same elements which constitute the totality of beings, have the fac-
ulty of acting upon them; and this is also why the knowledge of the name 
of a being, expression of its own nature, can give a power over him; it is 
this application of the ‘science of letters’ which is usually referred to by 
the name sīmīā.157 It is importante to note that this goes much further 
than a simple ‘diviniatory’ process: one can first, by means of a calcula-
tion (ḥisab) carried out on the numbers corresponding to letters and 
names, arriving at the forecast of certain events;158 but this is only an 
initial degree, the most elementary of all, and it is possible to carry out 
mutations on the results of this calculation which will have the effect of 
bringing about a corresponding modification in the events themselves.  
Here again, we must also distinguish between varying degrees, as in 
the knowledge itself, of which this is only one application and implemen-
tation: when this action is exerted only in the sensible world, it is only 
the lowest degree, and it is in this case that we can properly speak of 
‘magic;’ but it is easy to conceive that one is dealing with something of a 
completely different order when it is an action having an impact within 
the higher worlds. In the latter case we are obviously dealing with the 
‘initiatic’ order in the most complete sense of the word; in only such an 
order can you actively operate in all the worlds, which has reached the 
degree of ‘red sulfur’ (Al-Kabrīt al-aḥmar), a designation indicating an the most complete sense of the word; in only such an 
order can you actively operate in all the worlds, which has reached the 
degree of ‘red sulfur’ (Al-Kabrīt al-aḥmar), a designation indicating a

157 This word sīmīā does not appear to be purely Arabic; it probably comes from 
the Greek semeia, ‘signs,’ which makes it roughly equivalent to the name of the 
Kabbalistic gematria, a word of Greek origin as well, which is not derived from 
geometria as is often claimed, but from grammateia (from grammata, ‘letters’). 
158 One can also, in certain cases, obtain by a calculation of the same kind the 
solution of doctrinal questions; and this solution sometimes presents itself in a 
remarkable symbolic form.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
111 
link, which may appear quite unexpectedly, between the ‘science of let-
ters’ with alchemy.159 Indeed, these two sciences, understood in their 
most profound meanings, are but one in reality; and what they both ex-
press, under very different appearances, is nothing other than the very 
process of initiation which rigorously reproduces the cosmogonic pro-
cess, the total realization of possibilities of a being necessarily taking 
place through the same phases as that of the Universal Existence.160tiation which rigorously reproduces the cosmogonic pro-
cess, the total realization of possibilities of a being necessarily taking 
place through the same phases as that of the Universal Existence.160

159 Sayyidī Muḥyiddīn is called Ash-Shaykh al-Akbar wa Al-Kabrīt al-Aḥmar. 
160 It is curious to note that the Masonic symbolism itself, in which the ‘Lost 
Word’ and its research plays an important role, in characterizing the initiatic 
degrees by expressions obviously borrowed from the ‘science of letters:’ spell, 
read, write. The ‘Master’ who has among his attributes the ‘tracing board,’ if he 
were really what he should be, would be able to not only read from, but also to 
write in the ‘Book of Life,’ that is to say he can cooperate consciously in the 
realization of the plan of the ‘Great Architect of the Universe;’ one may be 
judged by the distance separating the nominal possession of this rank from its 
actual possession!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Rind and the Core 
(Al-Qashar wa al-Lab) 
L’écorce et le noyau (El Qishr wa el-Lobb), 
March 1931.separating the nominal possession of this rank from its 
actual possession!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Rind and the Core 
(Al-Qashar wa al-Lab) 
L’écorce et le noyau (El Qishr wa el-Lobb), 
March 1931.

This title, which is one of the many traits of Sayyidī Muḥyiddīn ibn 
ʿArabī, expresses in symbolic form the relations between exoterism and 
esoterism, compared respectively to the skin of a fruit and its inner part, 
the pulp or kernel.161 The skin or rind (al-qashar) is the sharīʿāh, which 
is to say the external religious law, which is addressed to all and is made 
to be followed by all, as indicated by the meaning of the ‘great road’ 
which is attached to the derivation of its name. The core (al-lab) is the 
ḥaqīqah, that is to say the truth or the essential reality, which, unlike the 
sharīʿāh, is not accessible to all, but is reserved for those who know how 
to discover it under appearances and reach it through the external forms 
that cover it, protecting and concealing it all at once.162 In another sym-
bolism, sharīʿāh and ḥaqīqah are also designated respectively as the 
‘body’ (al-jism) and the ‘marrow’ (al-mukh),163 whose relations are ex-
actly the same as the rind and the core; and no doubt we would still find 
other symbols that are the equivalent to these. 
What we are talking about, under whatever designation, is always the 
‘exterior’ (az-ẓāhir) and the ‘interior’ (al-bāṭin), which is to say the ap-
parent and the hidden, which by their very nature are such, and not by 
the effect of any conventions or precautions taken artificially, if not ar-
bitrarily, by the holders of the traditional doctrine. This ‘exterior’ and 
this ‘interior’ are represented by the circumference and the center, which 
can be considered as the very section of the fruit evoked by the precedingof the traditional doctrine. This ‘exterior’ and 
this ‘interior’ are represented by the circumference and the center, which 
can be considered as the very section of the fruit evoked by the preceding

161 Incidentally, the symbolism of fruit is related to the ‘Egg of the World,’ as 
well as to the heart. 
162 It may be noted that the role of external forms is related to the double mean-
ing of the word ‘revelation,’ since they manifest and conceal at the same time 
the essential doctrine, the one truth, as this word inevitably does for the thought 
it expresses; and what is true of the word in this regard is also true of every 
other formal expression. 
163 We will recall Rabelais’ ‘substantive marrow,’ which also represents an inner 
and hidden meaning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of the word in this regard is also true of every 
other formal expression. 
163 We will recall Rabelais’ ‘substantive marrow,’ which also represents an inner 
and hidden meaning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
113 
symbolism, at the same time that we are thus returned to the image, com-
mon to all traditions, of the ‘wheel of things.’ Indeed, if we consider the 
two terms in question in the universal sense, and without limiting our-
selves to the application which is usually reserved to a particular tradi-
tional form, we can say that the sharīʿāh, the ‘great road’ traversed by all 
beings, is nothing other than what the Far Eastern traditions calls the 
‘stream of forms,’ while the ḥaqīqah, the one and unchangeable truth, 
lies in the ‘invariable middle.’164 To pass from one to the other, from the 
circumference to the center, one must follow one of the rays: it is the 
ṭarīqah, which is to say the ‘path,’ the narrow way which is only followed 
by a few.165 There are also a multitude of ṭuruq, which are all the rays of 
the circumference taken in the centripetal sense, since it is a question of 
starting from the multiplicity to go towards the principal unity: each 
ṭarīqah, starting from a certain point on the circumference, is particularly 
appropriate to the beings who are at this point; but all whatever their 
point of departure, tends towards a single point,166 all ending in the cen-
ter and bringing back the beings who follow them to the essential sim-
plicity of the ‘primordial state.’ 
Indeed, beings who are now in multiplicity, are forced to leave from 
there if they seek any realization whatsoever; but this multiplicity is at 
the same time, for most of them, the obstacle that stops and holds them 
back: the changing and diversity of appearances prevent them from see-
ing the true reality, so to speak, as the skin of the fruit prevents one from 
seeing one’s interior; and this can only be attained by those who are able 
to pierce the skin, that is, to see the Principle through manifestation, and 
even to see only Him in all things, for the manifestation of the whole of 
itself is no more than a set of symbolic expressions. The application ofis, to see the Principle through manifestation, and 
even to see only Him in all things, for the manifestation of the whole of 
itself is no more than a set of symbolic expressions. The application of

164 It is to be noted, with regards to the Far Eastern traditions, that we find there 
the very clear equivalents to these two terms, not as two exoteric and esoteric 
aspects of the same doctrine, but as two separate teachings, at least since the 
beginning of the time of Confucius and Lao-Tzu: it can be said, indeed, that 
strictly speaking, Confucianism corresponds to sharīʿāh and Taoism to ḥaqīqah. 
165 The words sharīʿāh and ṭarīqah both contain the idea of a ‘journey:’ therefore 
movement (and note the symbolism of the circular motion for the first and the 
rectilinear motion for the second); there is indeed a change and a multiplicity in 
both cases, the first having to adapt to the diversity of external conditions, the 
second to that of individual natures; only the being who has reached the ḥaqīqah 
participates in unity and immutability. 
166 This convergence is represented by that of the qiblāh (ritual orientation) of 
all places towards the kaʿabah, which is the ‘house of God’ (Bayt Allah), and 
whose shape is that of a cube (an image of stability) occupying the center of a 
circumference which is the terrestrial (human) section of the sphere of universal 
existence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

114 
The Veil of Isisat of a cube (an image of stability) occupying the center of a 
circumference which is the terrestrial (human) section of the sphere of universal 
existence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

114 
The Veil of Isis

this to exoterism and esoterism understood in their ordinary sense, 
which is to say, as aspects of a traditional doctrine, is easy to make here: 
here too, the outer forms hide the profound truth from the eyes of the 
vulgar, whereas they make it appear on the contrary to those of the elite, 
for which what is an obstacle or a limitation for others thus becomes a 
point of reference, support, and a means of realization. It must be under-
stood that this difference results directly and necessarily from the very 
nature of the beings, the possibilities and the aptitudes that each one car-
ries within himself, so that the exoteric side of the doctrine always plays 
exactly the role he must play for everyone, giving to those who cannot 
go further all that they can receive in their present state, and at the same 
time providing those who are beyond it the ‘supports,’ which without 
being a strict necessity, since contingents can greatly assist them in ad-
vancing inwardly, and without which the difficulties would, in certain 
cases, amount to real impossibilities.  
It must be noted, in this respect, that for the greater number of men, 
who inevitably cling to the exterior law, it takes on a character which is 
less that of a limit than that of a guide; it is always a link, but a link that 
prevents them from going astray or getting lost; without this law, which 
makes them go down a central road, not only would they never reach the 
center, but they would be able to move away from it indefinitely, while 
the circular shape keeps them at least at a constant distance.167 By this, 
those who cannot directly contemplate the light at least receive a reflec-
tion and a participation; and they thus remain attached in some way to 
the Principle, even though they do not have any and cannot have the 
actual consciousness. Indeed, the circumference cannot exist without the 
center, of which it proceeds in reality entirely, and, if the beings which 
are bound to the circumference do not see the center, or even the rays, 
each of them is found inevitably at the end of a ray whose other end is 
the very center. Only it is here that the rind intervenes and hides all that 
is inside, while the one that pierces it, thereby becoming aware of the 
radius corresponding to its own position on the circumference, will be 
freed from the indefinite rotation of it and will only have to follow this 
radius to go towards the center; this ray is the ṭarīqah, by which, begin-
ning with the sharīʿāh, it will reach the ḥaqīqah. It must also be pointed 
out that, as soon as the skin has been penetrated, one finds oneself in the 
domain of esoterism, this penetration being, in the situation of being in 
relation to the skin itself, a sort of reversal in what consists of the passageas been penetrated, one finds oneself in the 
domain of esoterism, this penetration being, in the situation of being in 
relation to the skin itself, a sort of reversal in what consists of the passage

167 Let us add that this law must be regarded normally as an application or a 
human specification of the cosmic law itself, which similarly connects the entire 
manifestation to the Principle, as we have explained elsewhere about the mean-
ing of the ‘Law of Manu’ in the Hindu doctrine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
115 
from the exterior to the interior; it is even more properly, in a sense, that 
the designation of ṭarīqah is appropriate when considered with eso-
terism, because, to tell the truth, the ḥaqīqah is beyond the distinction of 
exoterism and esoterism, which implies comparison and correlation: the 
center appears as the innermost point of all, but, as soon as one has 
reached it, there can no longer be any question of exterior or interior, 
any contingent distinction then disappears while resolving itself in the 
principal unity. This is why Allah, just as he is the ‘First and the Last’ 
(Al-ʿAwwal wa Al-ʿAkhir),168 is also the ‘Exterior and the Interior’ (Az-
Ẓāhir wa Al-Bāṭin),169 for nothing that can not be beyond Him, and in 
Him alone is contained all of reality, because He himself is the Absolute 
Reality, the Total Truth: ʾAl-Ḥaqq.

168 That is, as in the symbol of the alpha and the omega, the Principle and the 
End. 
169 It can also be translated as the ‘Evident’ (in relation to manifestation) and the 
‘Hidden’ (in itself), which still corresponds to the two points of view of the 
sharīʿāh (of a social and religious order) and of the ḥaqīqah (of a purely intellec-
tual and metaphysical order), though the latter can also be said to be beyond all 
points of view, as including all of them synthetically within itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Hermetic Tradition 
La Tradition hermétique, April 1931.gh the latter can also be said to be beyond all 
points of view, as including all of them synthetically within itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Hermetic Tradition 
La Tradition hermétique, April 1931.

Under the title: La Tradizione Ermetica nei suoi Simboli, nella sua Dottrina 
e nella sua « Ars Regia »,170 Mr. J. Evola has published an interesting work 
in many respects, but which shows once more, if necessary, the desira-
bility of what we have written recently here (in the January 1931 issue) 
on the relationship of sacerdotal initiation and royal initiation. We find 
here, indeed, the same affirmation of the independence of the latter, to 
which the author wishes precisely to connect hermetism, and this idea 
of two distinct and even irreducible traditional types, one contemplative 
and the other active, which would be, generally, respectively character-
istic of the East and the West. So, we must make some reservations about 
the interpretation given to hermetic symbolism, insofar as it is influenced 
by such a conception, although, on the other hand, it shows that true 
alchemy is spiritual and not material, which is precisely the truth, and a 
truth which is too often unknown and ignored by the moderns who pre-
tend to cover these questions. 
We will take this opportunity to further clarify some important con-
cepts, the first of which is the meaning that should be attributed to the 
word ‘hermetism’ itself, as some of our contemporaries seem to be using 
it somewhat incorrectly. This word indicates that it is essentially a tradi-
tion of Egyptian origin, later clothed in a Hellenic form, most likely in 
the Alexandrian period, and transmitted in this form, in the Middle Age, 
to the Islamic world and to the Christian world, and, we will add, it is 
through the former that it has reached the latter, as the numerous Arab 
and Arabized terms adopted by the European hermetists prove, begin-
ning with the very word ‘alchemy’ (al-kīmiyāʾ).171 It would therefore be 
quite illegitimate to extend this designation to other traditional forms, 
just as it would be, for example, to call ‘Kabbalah’ something other than 
Hebrew esoterism; it is not, of course, that there is no equivalent else-
where, and there is even so much so that this traditional science of al-
chemy has its exact correspondences in doctrines such as those of India,t is not, of course, that there is no equivalent else-
where, and there is even so much so that this traditional science of al-
chemy has its exact correspondences in doctrines such as those of India,

170 I vol. in-8°, G. Laterza, Bari, 1931. 
171 This word is Arabic in form, but not at its root; it is likely derived from the 
name Kemi or ‘black earth’ given to ancient Egypt.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
117 
Tibet, and China, although with quite different modes of expression and 
methods of realization; but as soon as one pronounces the name ‘hermet-
ism,’ one specifies by this a definite form, whose origin can only be 
Greco-Egyptian.

Indeed, the doctrine thus designated is thereby at-
tributed to Hermes, as it was considered by the Greeks to be identical to 
the Egyptian Thoth; and we will point out immediately that this goes 
against Mr.

Evola’s thesis, this doctrine is presented as essentially de-
rived from a sacerdotal teaching, for Thoth, in his role as conservator and 
transmitter of tradition, is not something other than the very represen-
tation of the ancient Egyptian priesthood, or rather, to speak more pre-
cisely, of the principle of inspiration with which he held authority and in 
whose name he formulated and communicated initiatic knowledge.

Now a question arises: what has been maintained under the name of 
‘hermetism,’ does it constitute a complete traditional doctrine?

The an-
swer can only be negative, because it is strictly a knowledge of order and 
not metaphysical, but only cosmological (by hearing this it also applies 
the dual application of ‘macrocosmic’ and ‘microcosmic’).Now a question arises: what has been maintained under the name of 
‘hermetism,’ does it constitute a complete traditional doctrine?

The an-
swer can only be negative, because it is strictly a knowledge of order and 
not metaphysical, but only cosmological (by hearing this it also applies 
the dual application of ‘macrocosmic’ and ‘microcosmic’).

It is therefore 
not acceptable that hermetism, in the sense that this word has been taken 
since Alexandrian times and has been constantly kept since then, repre-
sents the entirety of the Egyptian tradition; although, in this, the cosmo-
logical view point seems to have been particularly advanced, and that it 
is in any case what is most apparent in all vestiges that remains, whether 
in texts or monuments, we must not forget that it can never be anything 
but a secondary and contingent point of view, an application of the doc-
trine to the knowledge of what we can call the ‘intermediate world.’ It 
would be interesting, but probably quite difficult, to find out how this 
part of the Egyptian tradition could have been in some way isolated and 
preserved in a seemingly independent manner, then being incorporated 
into Islamic esoterism and Christian esoterism of the Middle Ages (which 
a complete doctrine never could have done), to the point of becoming a 
truly integral portion of both of them, and to provide them with a whole 
symbolism which, by a proper transposition, may even serve as a vehicle 
for truths of a higher order.

This is not the place to enter into these com-
plex historical considerations; but, in any case, we must say that the 
strictly cosmological character of hermetism, if it does not justify the 
conception of Mr.

Evola, it may explain this at least to a certain extent, 
because the sciences of this order are indeed those which were the pre-
rogative of the Kshatriyas or their equivalents, while the pure metaphys-
ics was that of the Brahmins.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is not the place to enter into these com-
plex historical considerations; but, in any case, we must say that the 
strictly cosmological character of hermetism, if it does not justify the 
conception of Mr. Evola, it may explain this at least to a certain extent, 
because the sciences of this order are indeed those which were the pre-
rogative of the Kshatriyas or their equivalents, while the pure metaphys-
ics was that of the Brahmins. This is why, by an effect of the Kshatriyas’ 
revolt against the spiritual authority of the Brahmins, we have some-
times seen the formation of incomplete traditional currents, reduced to 
those sciences separated from their principle, and even deviated in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

118 
The Veil of Isise have some-
times seen the formation of incomplete traditional currents, reduced to 
those sciences separated from their principle, and even deviated in the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

118 
The Veil of Isis

‘naturalistic’ sense, by the negation of metaphysics and the ignorance of 
the subordinate character of ‘physical’ science, as well as of the sacerdo-
tal origin of all initiatic teachings, even more particularly intended for 
the use of Kshatriyas, as we have explained on a variety of occasions.172 
This is not to say, certainly, that hermetism constitutes within itself such 
a deviation or that it essentially involves something illegitimate (which 
would have made it impossible to incorporate it into traditional orthodox 
forms); but it must be admitted that it can easily lend itself to it by its 
very nature, and it is there, more generally, the danger of all the tradi-
tional sciences, when they are cultivated in a way for themselves which 
exposes them to losing sight of the attachment to the main order. Al-
chemy, which could be defined as the ‘techniques’ of hermetism, is truly 
a ‘royal art,’ if we mean by this a mode of initiation more specifically 
appropriate to the nature of Kshatriyas; but this even marks its exact 
place in the whole of a regularly constituted tradition, and, furthermore, 
we must not confuse the means of initiatic realization, whatever they are, 
with its final goal, which is always of pure knowledge.  
Another point which seems questionable to us in Mr. Evola’s thesis is 
the assimilation which he tends almost constantly to establish between 
hermetism and ‘magic;’ it is true that he seems to take it in a sense quite 
different from that in which we usually hear it, but we are very much 
afraid that it may only cause some rather unfortunate confusions. Inevi-
tably, as soon as one speaks of ‘magic,’ one thinks of a science destined 
to produce more or less extraordinary phenomena, notably (but not ex-
clusively) in the sensible order; whatever the origin of this word may 
have been, this meaning has become so inherent within it, it should be 
left to this. It is then only the most inferior of all the applications of tra-
ditional knowledge, we might even say the most despised, whose exer-
cise is abandoned to those whom their individual limitations render in-
capable of developing other possibilities; we see no advantage in evoking 
the idea when it is really a question of things which, even though still 
contingent, are still noticeably higher; and, if it is only a question of ter-
minology, it’s importance must be admitted. Besides, there may be some-
thing more: this word ‘magic’ has a certain fascination with some people 
in our time, and, as we have already noted in the previous article which 
we referred to at the beginning, the preponderance accorded to such a 
point of view would not be the same as in intention, which is still linked 
to the alteration of the traditional sciences separated from their meta-
physical principle, it is doubtless the pitfall with which every attempt at 
reconstituting such sciences is confronted, if we do not begin with whathe traditional sciences separated from their meta-
physical principle, it is doubtless the pitfall with which every attempt at 
reconstituting such sciences is confronted, if we do not begin with what

172 See Spiritual Authority and Temporal Power, especially.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tless the pitfall with which every attempt at 
reconstituting such sciences is confronted, if we do not begin with what

172 See Spiritual Authority and Temporal Power, especially.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
119 
is the beginning in all respects, that is to say, by the very principle, which 
is also the end in view of which everything must be ordinarily ordered. 
On the other hand, where we fully agree with Mr. Evola, and where 
we see the greatest merit in his book, is when he insists on the purely 
spiritual and ‘inner’ nature of true alchemy, which has absolutely noth-
ing to do with the material operations of any ‘chemistry,’ in the natural 
sense of the word; almost all the moderns are strangely mistaken on this, 
both those who wish to pose as defenders of alchemy and those who 
make themselves detractors. Yet it is easy to see in what terms the old 
hermetists speak of ‘blowers’ and ‘coal burners,’ in which we must rec-
ognize the real precursors of the current chemists, which is so unflatter-
ing for them; and, in the eighteenth century again, an alchemist like 
Pernéty does not fail to emphasize the difference between the ‘hermetic 
philosophy’ and the ‘vulgar chemistry.’ Thus, what gave birth to modern 
chemistry is not alchemy, with which it has in fact no relation (any more 
than the ‘hyper chemistry’ imagined by some contemporary occultists); 
it is only a distortion or deviation, resulting from the incomprehension 
of those who, unable to penetrate the true meanings of symbols, took all 
literally, and believing that it was all in material operations, embarked 
on a more or less disordered experimentation. In the Arab world too, 
material alchemy has always been considered very lowly, sometimes 
even assimilated to a kind of witchcraft, while spiritual alchemy, the only 
real type, is often referred to by the name of al-kīmiyāʾ as-saʾādah or the 
‘alchemy of bliss.’173 
Moreover, this is not to say that it is necessary to deny the possibility 
of metallic transmutations, which represent the alchemy in the eyes of 
the vulgar; but we must not confuse things that are of a completely dif-
ferent order, and we do not even see, ‘a priori,’ why such transmutations 
could not be realized by processes that are simply a matter of secular 
chemistry (and, at its essence, the ‘hyper chemistry’ we were alluding to 
earlier is nothing other than this). However, there is another aspect of 
this issue, which Mr. Evola rightly points out: the being who has arrived 
at the realization of certain interior states can, by virtue of the analogical 
relation of the ‘microcosm’ with the ‘macrocosm,’ produce externally 
corresponding effects; it is therefore permissible for him who has at-
tained to such a degree in the practice of spiritual alchemy to be able to 
thereby accomplish metallic transmutations, but this is an accidental 
consequence, and without recourse to any of the methods of material 
pseudo-alchemy, but only by a kind of projection outside the energies it 
carries within itself. Here there is a comparable difference to that which 
separates ‘theurgy’ or the action of ‘spiritual influences’ from magic andby a kind of projection outside the energies it 
carries within itself. Here there is a comparable difference to that which 
separates ‘theurgy’ or the action of ‘spiritual influences’ from magic and

173 There is a treatise of Al-Ghazālī which bears this title.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

120 
The Veil of Isis

even witchcraft: if the apparent effects are sometimes the same on both 
sides, the causes which provoke them are totally different. Moreover, we 
will add that those who really possess such powers do not generally 
make use of them, at least outside of very peculiar circumstances in 
which their exercise is legitimized by other considerations. Be that as it 
may, what we must never lose sight of, and what is at the basis of all true 
initiatic teaching, is that any worthy realization of the name is essentially 
internal, even if it is likely to have exterior repercussions; man can find 
the principles and the means within himself, and he can because he car-
ries in him the correspondence of all that exists: al-insānu ramz al-wujūd, 
“Man is a symbol of Universal Existence;” and if he manages to penetrate 
to the center of his own being, he thereby attains total knowledge, with 
all that it implies in addition: man ʾyaraf nafsahu ʾyaraf Rabbāhu, “Who-
soever knows himself knows his Lord,” and he then knows all things in 
the supreme unity of the very Principle, out of which there is nothing 
that can have the least degree of reality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Rose-Cross and Rosicrucians 
Rose-Croix et Rosicruciens, May 1931.preme unity of the very Principle, out of which there is nothing 
that can have the least degree of reality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Rose-Cross and Rosicrucians 
Rose-Croix et Rosicruciens, May 1931.

The name of the Rose-Cross is nowadays most often used in a vague and 
sometimes abusive manner, and applied indistinctly to many different 
characters, among whom very few, without a doubt, would truly be en-
titled to the name. To avoid these unfortunate confusions, it seems that 
the best solution would be to establish a clear distinction between the 
Rose-Cross and Rosicrucians, the latter term possibly being extended to 
a greater extent than the first; and it is probable that much of the so-
called Rose-Cross, commonly referred to as such, were really only Rosi-
crucians. 
To understand this important yet overly neglected distinction, it is 
necessary to remember that, as we have already pointed out on other 
occasions, the true Rose-Cross never formed an association with defined 
external forms; there were, however, from the seventeenth century at the 
least, many associations that can be described as Rosicrucian, but we can 
at the same time be assured that the members were by no means of the 
Rose-Cross, by the very fact that they were apart of such associations. 
There is something here that may seem paradoxical and even contradic-
tory at first glance; we have therefore thought that some explanations on 
the subject might be of some benefit, for the distinction is far from being 
reduced to a mere question of terminology, as one may think, and is con-
nected with considerations of a much more profound order. 
The term of Rose-Cross is properly the designation of an actual initi-
atic degree, which is to say, of a certain spiritual state, which obviously 
is not necessarily linked to the fact of belonging to a defined organiza-
tion; what it represents is what can be named as the perfection of the 
human state, which was the goal of the initiation into the ‘lesser myster-
ies.’ What must be taken into account, on the other hand, due to this 
designation, which is expressly linked to the usage of a certain symbol-
ism, has been used only in certain determined circumstances of time and 
place, outside of which it would be illegitimate to apply it; it could be 
said that those who possessed this degree in question appeared as the 
Rose-Cross in these circumstances only and for historical reasons, as 
they may have appeared in other respects in other circumstances.hat those who possessed this degree in question appeared as the 
Rose-Cross in these circumstances only and for historical reasons, as 
they may have appeared in other respects in other circumstances.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

122 
The Veil of Isistion appeared as the 
Rose-Cross in these circumstances only and for historical reasons, as 
they may have appeared in other respects in other circumstances.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

122 
The Veil of Isis

It does not seem possibly to trace the name of the Rose-Cross to be-
yond the fourteenth century, and this is attested to by the legend of the 
Christian Rosenkreutz, in which it is doubtful that he is a historical fig-
ure, whatever some may have said, but rather appears as the representa-
tive of a ‘collective entity.’ This, of course, does not mean that the symbol 
to which this name refers cannot be much older, and, as with any truly 
traditional symbol, it would probably be futile to search for a definite 
origin; but this relates to another issue that we do not wish to address 
here. What we wish to say is that the name taken from the symbol was 
applied to an initiatic degree only from the fourteenth century, and, 
moreover, one that is exclusive to the Western world; it therefore applies 
only in relation to a certain traditional form, which is that of Christian 
esoterism, or, one could say more precisely, that of Christian hermetism. 
We explained in our previous article that hermetism was a knowledge of 
a cosmological order, corresponding precisely to the initiation into the 
‘lesser mysteries’ whose sign of the Rose-Cross marks the completion, 
appearing as the reintegration to be at the center of the human state and 
the full expansion of its individual possibilities within this center. We 
have also seen that hermetism, of a Greco-Egyptian origin, as its name 
suggests, had incorporated both Christian esoterism and Islamic eso-
terism, so as to become an essential part of both worlds; besides, these 
two traditional forms certainly present, in almost every respect, more 
similarities to each other than to all others. 
The meaning of the legend of the Christian Rozenkreutz and the jour-
neys attributed to him seem to be that, following the destruction of the 
Order of the Temple, the initiates of Christian esoterism reorganized 
themselves, in agreement with initiates of Islamic esoterism to maintain, 
as far as possible, the link which had apparently been broken by this de-
struction; but this reorganization had to be done in a hidden manner, 
invisible in some respects, and without taking its support in an institu-
tion which is known externally and which, as such, could have been de-
stroyed once again. Those truly of the Rose-Cross were likely the inspir-
ers of this reorganization, or, if one wishes, the possessors of the initiatic 
degree of which we spoke, envisaged especially as they played this role, 
which continued until when, as a result of other historical events, the 
traditional bond was definitively broken for the Western world in the 
seventeenth century. It is said that those of the Rose-Cross retreated to 
the Orient, which means that there was no longer any initiation in the 
West to achieve this degree effectively, and also that the action which 
had been exercised up to then for the maintenance of traditional educa-
tion ceased to manifest itself, at least on a regular basis.to achieve this degree effectively, and also that the action which 
had been exercised up to then for the maintenance of traditional educa-
tion ceased to manifest itself, at least on a regular basis.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
123 
As for knowing which are the true Rose-Cross, and to say with cer-
tainty if this or that personage was of them, it appears as absolutely im-
possible, by the very fact that it is essentially a question of a spiritual 
state, therefore being purely interior, of which it would be very impru-
dent to judge according to any external signs.

Moreover, because of the 
nature of their role, those of the Rose-Cross, could not leave any trace in 
secular history, so that, even if their names could be known, they would 
learn nothing from anyone; and besides these names would have only a 
certain relative value, since it is said that they changed according to the 
countries in which they resided, which clearly indicates that they were 
freed from certain limitations of ordinary individuality.

As for those 
characters who are known, especially those of authors of such and such 
writings, and who are commonly referred to as being from the Rose-
Cross, it is likely that, in many cases, they were only influenced or in-
spired by the Rose-Cross, to which they served as a sort of spokesman, 
which we will express by saying that they were only Rosicrucians, 
whether or not they belonged to some of the groups to which we can 
attribute the same name.

On the other hand, if it has occurred in an ex-
ceptional accident that a true one of the Rose-Cross has played a role in 
external events, historians may be far from suspecting its quality, since 
the two belong to different domains.

All this, assuredly, is unsatisfactory 
for the curious, but they must take their part; many things are thus be-
yond the means of investigation of secular history, which in shorts al-
lows us to grasp only what can be called the exterior of events.

We must add another reason why the true ones of the Rose-Cross 
have remained unknown: none of them can every assert themselves as 
such, any more than, in Islamic initiation, no authentic Ṣūfī can claim 
this title.--- PAGE BREAK ---

All this, assuredly, is unsatisfactory 
for the curious, but they must take their part; many things are thus be-
yond the means of investigation of secular history, which in shorts al-
lows us to grasp only what can be called the exterior of events. We must add another reason why the true ones of the Rose-Cross 
have remained unknown: none of them can every assert themselves as 
such, any more than, in Islamic initiation, no authentic Ṣūfī can claim 
this title. There is even then a similarity to which it is particularly inter-
esting to note, although, to tell the truth, what is enclosed in the name 
Ṣūfī, by the numerical value of the letters which compose it, is of a higher 
order than that of the Rose-Cross, and refers to possibilities that go be-
yond those of human individuality, even when considered in the entirety 
of its indefinite extension; but it goes without saying that the being who 
has developed these possibilities possess a fortiori degree that makes up 
the Rose-Cross and may, if necessary, perform corresponding functions. Moreover, the name of Ṣūfī is commonly subject to the same abuse as 
that of the Rose-Cross, to the point of it being applied to those who are 
on the path which leads to real initiation, without having ever reached 
even the first degrees of it (and it may be noted in this connection that 
such an illegitimate extension is commonly given to the word Yogi as far 
as the Hindu tradition is concerned, so that this word, which properly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124 
The Veil of Isisection that 
such an illegitimate extension is commonly given to the word Yogi as far 
as the Hindu tradition is concerned, so that this word, which properly

--- PAGE BREAK ---

124 
The Veil of Isis

designates the one who has reached the supreme goal, comes to be ap-
plied to those who are still in the preliminary stages and even the most 
external stages of preparation). Not just in this case, but even for the one 
who has attained the highest degrees, yet has not reached the final term, 
the proper designation is that of mutaṣawwuf; and as the Ṣūfī itself is not 
marked by any external distinction, this same designation will also be 
the only one it can take or accept, not by virtue or purely human consid-
erations such as prudence or humility, but because his spiritual state is 
truly an incommunicable secret. It is distinctly analogous, in a more re-
stricted order (since it does not go beyond the bounds of the human 
state), which can be expressed by the two terms Rose-Cross and Rosicru-
cian, the latter can designate any aspirant to the state of the Rose-Cross, 
despite the degrees he has actually arrived to. Furthermore, we can draw 
from what we have just said as a negative criterion in the sense that, if 
someone has declared himself as the Rose-Cross or Ṣūfī, we can say that 
he certainly was not in reality.  
Another negative criterion results from the fact that we discussed at 
the beginning that the Rose-Cross never formed an association; if they 
invisibly inspired and directed certain associations, which may be termed 
Rosicrucian for this very reason, they never took any direct part in it, 
which would have been contrary to their role and character; and, there-
fore, if anyone is known to have been a member of such an association, 
it can still be said that, at least as long as he was a member, he was not 
truly of the Rose-Cross. It should also be noted that the more or less ex-
ternal organizations of this kind did not bear the title of Rose-Cross until 
much later, since it does not appear until the beginning of the seven-
teenth century, which is to say shortly before the moment when the true 
Rose-Cross withdrew from the West; and it is even visibly, by many in-
dications, that those who made themselves known under this title were 
already more or less deviated, or at any rate far removed, from the orig-
inal source. This is all the more necessary in the case of the associations 
which later formed under the same name, and of which most would have 
probably claimed, with respect to the Rose-Cross, only on link, that of an 
‘ideal,’ so to speak, and not of an authentic and regular filiation; and we 
do not speak, of course, of contemporary formations which have retained 
any of the rosicrucians except in name, having kept no trace of tradi-
tional doctrine, and having simply adopted a symbol which each inter-
prets according to his own fantasies, for want of not understanding the 
true meaning. 
In the above, there is still a point on which we must return for more 
accuracy: we have said that there must have been, at the origin of Rosi-asies, for want of not understanding the 
true meaning. 
In the above, there is still a point on which we must return for more 
accuracy: we have said that there must have been, at the origin of Rosi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ot understanding the 
true meaning. 
In the above, there is still a point on which we must return for more 
accuracy: we have said that there must have been, at the origin of Rosi-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
125 
crucianism, a collaboration between initiates in both Christian and Is-
lamic esoterism; this collaboration must also continue thereafter, since it 
was precisely to maintain the link between the initiations of the Orient 
and the Occident. We will go even further: the same characters, whether 
from Christianity or Islam, may have lived in both East and West (and 
constant references to their journeys suggest that it was the case with 
many of them), to be both Rose-Cross and Ṣūfī (or mutaṣawwuf of higher 
degrees), the spiritual state they had reached implying they were beyond 
the differences that exist between external forms and which in no way 
affect the essential and fundamental unity of the traditional doctrine. 
Moreover, when there is lack of the name of the Rose-Cross, the symbol 
itself was no stranger to Islamic hermetism, and we can see, above the 
tomb of a shaykh founder of a ṭarīqah, the image of the crucified rose. Of 
course, it is none the less appropriate to maintain, between Sufism and 
Rosicrucianism, the distinction which is that of two different forms of 
traditional education; and the Rosicrucians, more or less direct disciples 
of the Rose-Cross, are only those who follow the path of Christian her-
metism; but there can be no initiatic organization worthy of the name 
which does not have, at the top of its hierarchy, beings having exceeded 
the diversity of formal appearances. These may, according to the circum-
stances, appear as Rosicrucians, as mutaṣawwufīn, or in other aspects; 
they are truly the living link between all traditions, because, through 
their consciousness of unity, they actually participate in the grand Pri-
mordial Tradition, all of which are derived by adaptations to times and 
places, and which is like the Truth itself.through 
their consciousness of unity, they actually participate in the grand Pri-
mordial Tradition, all of which are derived by adaptations to times and 
places, and which is like the Truth itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Magic and Mysticism 
Magie et Mysticisme, June 1931.rand Pri-
mordial Tradition, all of which are derived by adaptations to times and 
places, and which is like the Truth itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Magic and Mysticism 
Magie et Mysticisme, June 1931.

In an interesting article published recently herein (the March issue of 
1931), Mr. J. Marquè-Rivière rightly points out the dangers and illusions 
to which those who engage in the practice of magic are exposed. We 
believe that it would be of benefit to return to this issue, to clarify and 
supplement some certain points on the notes already given, because it is 
important to leave no ambiguity. 
The dangers in questions are especially grave for Westerners for at 
least two reasons, the first of which is their tendency to attach undue 
importance to everything that is ‘phenomena,’ as evidenced by the de-
velopment they gave to the experimental sciences; and if they are so eas-
ily seduced by magic, it is because it is also an experimental science, how-
ever different it is from those sciences that the university educators know 
under this label. One must not be deceived: this is an order of things 
which in itself has absolutely nothing ‘transcendent;’ and if such a sci-
ence can, like any other, be legitimized by its attachment to the higher 
principles upon which everything depends, according to the general con-
ception of the ‘traditional sciences,’ it will be placed only at the last rank 
of secondary and contingent applications, among those furthest away 
from the principles. This is how magic is considered in all Eastern civili-
zations: it exists there, it is a fact that needs no challenge, but it is far 
from being held in honor as Westerners often imagine, who willingly 
lend their tendencies to others. In Tibet itself, as well as in India or in 
China, the practice of magic as a ‘specialty,’ so to speak, is abandoned to 
those who are unable to rise to a higher order; of course, this does not 
mean that others cannot sometimes produce, for particular reasons, phe-
nomena externally similar to magic phenomena, but the goal and even 
the means are then quite different in reality. Moreover, to stick to what 
is known in the Western world, simply take tales of saints and sorcerers, 
and see how similar facts are on both sides; and this shows that, contrary 
to the belief of the modern ‘scientist,’ phenomena cannot prove anything 
by themselves.  
Now, it is obvious that deluding ourselves about the value of these 
things greatly increases their danger, and this brings us to the second oftist,’ phenomena cannot prove anything 
by themselves.  
Now, it is obvious that deluding ourselves about the value of these 
things greatly increases their danger, and this brings us to the second of

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
127 
the two reasons we mentioned earlier: this is the ignorance of Western-
ers, as in the absence of any traditional teaching, of which they are deal-
ing with such a case.

Even leaving aside the numerous street performers 
and charlatans who have greatly stigmatized Mr.

Marquès-Rivière, those 
who want to try study these phenomena, lacking sufficient data to guide 
them, or organizations set up to support and protect them, are reduced 
to a rather crude empiricism; they act like children who would like to 
handle formidable forces, and, if unfortunate accidents result from this, 
there is no link to be astonished at.

Speaking here of accidents, we wish to refer above all to the risks of 
imbalance to which those who act in this way expose themselves: this 
imbalance is indeed an all too frequent consequence of communication 
in what Mr.

Marquès-Rivière calls the ‘vital plan,’ and which is in fact 
nothing else than the domain of subtle manifestation.

The explanation 
for this is simple: this is exclusively a development of certain individual 
possibilities; if this development occurs abnormally, disordered, and in-
harmonic, it is naturally and in a certain sense inevitable that it should 
lead to such a result, not to mention the reactions of the forces of all 
kinds with which the individual is indiscriminately in contact with.

We 
say ‘forces,’ without specifying further; we prefer this term, despite its 
vagueness, to that of ‘entities,’ which risks giving rise too easily to ‘per-
sonifications’ which are more or less fanciful.

Furthermore, this ‘inter-
mediary world’ is much more complex and extensive than the corporeal 
world; but the study of this world enters, in the same manner, into what 
may be called the ‘natural sciences,’ in the most true sense of this expres-
sion; to want to see something more through this, is, we reiterate, to de-
lude ourselves in the strangest way.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We 
say ‘forces,’ without specifying further; we prefer this term, despite its 
vagueness, to that of ‘entities,’ which risks giving rise too easily to ‘per-
sonifications’ which are more or less fanciful. Furthermore, this ‘inter-
mediary world’ is much more complex and extensive than the corporeal 
world; but the study of this world enters, in the same manner, into what 
may be called the ‘natural sciences,’ in the most true sense of this expres-
sion; to want to see something more through this, is, we reiterate, to de-
lude ourselves in the strangest way. There is nothing to it, let us say it 
clearly, anything ‘initiatic,’ and it emerges there in a generally way, there 
are many more obstacles than of supports to reaching true knowledge, 
especially for beings subject to the attraction of phenomena which is one 
of the characters of the modern West. Some, after having engaged in this search for extraordinary phenom-
ena, end up getting bored, for whatever reason, or by being disappointed, 
and it often happens that they turn to mysticism, which is entirely West-
ern; surprising at it may seem at first glance, it still meets needs or aspi-
rations of the same order. Certainly, it may seem that mysticism has a 
higher character than magic; but, if we reach the essence of things, we 
can realize that the difference is not so vast: here again, it is about ‘phe-
nomena,’ visions to others, sensitive and sentimental manifestations of 
all kings, with which one always remains exclusively the realm of indi-
vidual possibilities. Which is to say, the dangers of illusion and imbalance 
are far from being surpassed, and if they assume here different forms,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

128 
The Veil of Isisof indi-
vidual possibilities. Which is to say, the dangers of illusion and imbalance 
are far from being surpassed, and if they assume here different forms,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

128 
The Veil of Isis

they may be no less important for that; they are even aggravated, in a 
sense, by the passive attitude of the mystic, who leaves the door open to 
all the influences that may arise, while the magician is at least defended 
to a certain extent by the active attitude he strives to conserve. The un-
fortunate consequences of passivity are too obvious to insist upon; they 
are found carried to their most extreme degree in a case such as of the 
mediums; we would certainly not wish to establish the slightest assimi-
lation, or even the slightest comparison, between mediums and mystics, 
but it must be admitted that this character of passivity is common to both. 
What also emerges from the mystic, almost always, is he is too easily 
duped by his imagination, whose productions in him, come to mingle 
with the real results of his ‘experiences’ in an almost inextricably way. 
For this reason, we must not exaggerate the importance of the ‘revela-
tions’ of the mystics, or at least we cannot accept them without some 
restrain; what makes all the visions of interest, such as those of Anne-
Catherine Emmerich, since Mr. Marquès-Rivière cited this example, is 
that they are in agreement, on many points, with certain traditional data; 
but it would be a mistake, and a reversal of normal relations, to wish to 
find here a ‘confirmation’ of these points, which, furthermore, have no 
need for this, and which are, on the contrary, the only guarantee that the 
visions in question are more than just a product of individual fantasy. 
We have just said that there is nothing ‘initiatic’ in magic; we can say 
the same thing again for mysticism; we do not mean to depreciate things 
whose value, albeit relative, may still be considerable in certain points of 
view, but it is advisable to put them in their place and not to confuse 
them. Truly initiatic knowledge is something other than this; without 
any trace of ‘phenomenalism’ or ‘sentimentalism,’ it is only purely intel-
lectual intuition, which alone is pure spirituality.them. Truly initiatic knowledge is something other than this; without 
any trace of ‘phenomenalism’ or ‘sentimentalism,’ it is only purely intel-
lectual intuition, which alone is pure spirituality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Hieroglyph of Cancer 
L’hiéroglyphe du cancer, July 1931.of ‘phenomenalism’ or ‘sentimentalism,’ it is only purely intel-
lectual intuition, which alone is pure spirituality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Hieroglyph of Cancer 
L’hiéroglyphe du cancer, July 1931.

We have often had occasion, during our various studies, to refer to the 
symbolism of the annual cycle, with its two ascending and descending 
halves, and especially to that of the two solsicial gates, which open and 
close respectively the two halves of the cycle, and which are related to 
the figures of Janus of the Latins, as well that of Ganesha among the Hin-
dus.174 To fully understand the importance of this symbolism, it must be 
remembered that, by virtue of the analogy of each part of the universe 
with the whole, there is a correspondence between the laws of all the 
cycles no matter what order, so that the annual cycle, for example, can 
be reduced and therefore more accessible, the picture of the great cosmic 
cycles (and an expression such as that of the ‘great year’ indicates this 
quite clearly), and as an abridgement, if one may say so, of the very pro-
cess of universal manifestation; this is what gives astrology all its mean-
ing as a properly ‘cosmological’ science. 
If this is so, the two ‘stopping points’ of the solar march (this is the 
etymological meaning of the word ‘solstice’) must correspond to the two 
extreme terms of the manifestation, either as a whole or in each of the 
cycles which constitute it, cycles which are in indefinite multitude, and 
which are nothing other than the different states or degrees of the Uni-
versal Existence. If we wish to apply this more specifically to a cycle of 
individual manifestation, such as that of existence in the human state, we 
can easily understand why the two solsticial gates are traditionally des-
ignated as the ‘door of men’ and the ‘door of the gods.’ The ‘door of men,’ 
corresponding to the summer solstice and the Cancer zodiacal sign, is the 
entry into the individual manifestation; the ‘door of the gods,’ corre-
sponding in the same way to the winter solstice and to the Capricorn 
zodiacal sign, is the exit of this same manifestation and the passage to 
the higher states, since the ‘gods’ (the devas of the Hindu tradition), just 
as the ‘angels’ according to another terminology, properly represent,exit of this same manifestation and the passage to 
the higher states, since the ‘gods’ (the devas of the Hindu tradition), just 
as the ‘angels’ according to another terminology, properly represent,

174 See especially The King of the World, ch. 3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

130 
The Veil of Isisdevas of the Hindu tradition), just 
as the ‘angels’ according to another terminology, properly represent,

174 See especially The King of the World, ch. 3.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

130 
The Veil of Isis

from the metaphysical point of view, the supra-individual states of be-
ing.175 
If we consider the distribution of the zodiacal signs according to the 
four elementary trigons, we see that the sign of Cancer corresponds to 
the ‘depths of the waters,’ which is to say, in the cosmogonic sense, to 
the embryogenic medium which the germs are deposited into the mani-
fested world, germs corresponding in the ‘macrocosmic’ order, to the 
Brahmanda or the ‘Egg of the World,’ and, in the ‘microcosmic’ order, to 
pinda, a formal protoype of individuality, pre-existing in a subtle mode 
from the beginning of the cyclical event, as constituting one of the pos-
sibilities that will have to develop during this event.176 This can also be 
related to the fact that this same sign of Cancer is the home of the Moon, 
whose relationship with the Waters is well known, and which, like the 
waters itself, represents the passive and plastic principle of manifesta-
tion: the lunar sphere is properly the ‘world of formation,’ or the domain 
of elaboration of forms in the subtle state, the starting point of existence 
in the individual mode.177 
In the astrological symbol of Cancer, we see the germ in the state of 
half-development which is precisely the subtle state; it is therefore not a 
question of the bodily embryo, but of the formal prototype of which we 
have just spoken, and whose existence is situated in the psychic domain 
of the ‘intermediate world.’ Moreover, this figure is also that of the San-
skrit u, an element which, in the akshara or the sacred monosyllable Om, 
constitutes the intermediate term between the point (m), representing 
the non-principal manifestation, and the straight line (a), representing 
the complete development of the manifestation in the gross or corporal 
state.178 
What is more, this germ is here double, placed in two inverse posi-
tions of one another and thus representing two complementary terms: itent of the manifestation in the gross or corporal 
state.178 
What is more, this germ is here double, placed in two inverse posi-
tions of one another and thus representing two complementary terms: it

175 This point will be more fully explained in a book in preparation on The Mul-
tiple States of the Being.  
176 See Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta, ch. 13. – The constitutive 
analogy of ‘microcosm’ and ‘macrocosm,’ considered in this respect is expressed 
in the Hindu doctrine by this formula: Yatha pinda Tathâ Brahmnda, “as the 
individual (subtle) embryo, so is the World Egg.” 
177 See ibid., ch. 21. On a variety of occasions, we have pointed out the identity 
of the ‘world of formation,’ or Yetzirah in the terminology of Hebrew Kabbalah, 
with the domain of subtle manifestation. 
178 On these geometric forms corresponding respectively to the three matras of 
Om, see ibid., ch. 17. – It should be remembered in this link that the point is the 
primordial principle of all geometric figures, as the unmanifested is of all states 
of manifestations, and that, being supra-formal and ‘dimensionless,’ it is, in this 
order, the true indivisible unity, which makes it a natural symbol of pure Being.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f all states 
of manifestations, and that, being supra-formal and ‘dimensionless,’ it is, in this 
order, the true indivisible unity, which makes it a natural symbol of pure Being.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
131 
is the yang and the yin of the Far Eastern Tradition, where the yin-yang 
symbol that brings them together has the exact same form. This symbol, 
as representative of the cyclic revolutions, whose phases are related to 
the alternative predominance of yang and of yin, is related to other fig-
ures of great importance from the traditional point of view, such as that 
of the swastika, and also that of the double spiral which refers to the 
symbolism of the two hemispheres. These, one luminous and the other 
dim (yang, in its original meaning, is the side of the light, and yin the side 
of shadow), are the two halves of the ‘Egg of the World,’ linked respec-
tively to the Heavens and the Earth.179 There is also for each being, al-
ways by virtue of the analogy of the ‘microcosm’ with the ‘macrocosm,’ 
the two halves of the primordial Androgyne, which is generally de-
scribed symbolically as being of spherical form;180 the spherical form is 
that of the complete being which is in virtuality in the original germ, and 
which must be reconstituted in its full plenitude at the end of the indi-
vidual cyclical developement. 
It should be noted, furthermore, that the for mis also the schema of 
the conch (shankha), which is in obvious relations with the Waters, and 
which is also represented as containing the seeds of the future cycle dur-
ing the periods of pralaya or of the ‘outer dissolution’ of the world. This 
conch encloses the primordial and imperishable sound (akshara), the 
monosyllable Om, which is, by its three elements (matras), the essence of 
the triple Vedas; and this is how the Veda perpetually subsists, being in 
itself anterior to all the worlds, but somehow hidden or enveloped during 
the cosmic cataclysms which separate the various cycles, to then be man-
ifested once again at the beginning of each of these.181 The diagram can 
also be completed as that of the akshara itself, the straight line (a) cover-
ing and closing the conch (u), which contains within its interior the pointeginning of each of these.181 The diagram can 
also be completed as that of the akshara itself, the straight line (a) cover-
ing and closing the conch (u), which contains within its interior the point

179 These two hemispheres were represented by the Greeks by the round coifs 
of the Dioscuri, which are the two halves of Leda’s egg, which is to say, the 
swan’s egg, which, similar to the snake’s egg, represents the ‘Egg of the World’ 
(Cf. the Hamsa of the Hindu tradition). 
180 For example, see the speech that Plato, in the Symposium, gives to Aristoph-
anes, and which most modern commentators wrongly ignore the symbolic, yet 
obvious, value. – We have developed the considerations concerning this spher-
ical form in our recent work on The Symbolism of the Cross. 
181 The affirmation of the perpetuity of the Veda must be directly related to the 
cosmological theory of the primordiality of sound (shabda among the sensible 
qualities, as a proper quality of the Ether, Akasha, which is the first of the ele-
ments); and this theory itself must be brought closer to that of the ‘creation by 
the Word’ in Western traditions: the primordial sound is the Divine Word “by 
which all things have been made.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

132 
The Veil of Isise brought closer to that of the ‘creation by 
the Word’ in Western traditions: the primordial sound is the Divine Word “by 
which all things have been made.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

132 
The Veil of Isis

(m), or the essential principle of beings;182 the straight line then repre-
sents at the same time, by its horizontal direction, the ‘surface of the Wa-
ters,’ that is to say, the substantial environment in which the develop-
ment of the germs will take place (represented in Eastern symbolism by 
the blossoming of the Lotus flower) after the end of the period of inter-
mediate obscurity (Sandhya) between two cycles. We will then have, in 
the same schematic representation, a figure that we can describe as the 
inversion of the conch, opening to let the germs escape, following the 
straight line now oriented in the descending vertical direction, which is 
that of the development of the manifestation from its unmanifest princi-
ple.183 
Of these two positions of the conch, which are found in the two halves 
of the symbol of Cancer, the first corresponds to the figure of Noah’s Ark 
(or Satyavrata in the Hindu tradition), which can be represented as the 
lower bottom of a circumference, closed by its horizontal diameter, and 
containing inside it the point in which all the germs are synthesized in 
the state of the complete environment.184 The second position is then 
symbolized by the rainbow, appearing ‘in the cloud,’ which is to say in 
the region of the superior Waters, at the moment that marks the restora-
tion of order and the renovation of all things, while the Ark, during the 
cataclysm floated on the inferior Ocean of the Waters; it is therefore the 
upper half of the same circumference and the union of the two figures, 
inverse and complementary to each other, forming a single complete cir-
cular or cyclic figure, the reconstitution of the primordial spherical 
shape: this circumference is the vertical section of the sphere whose hor-
izontal section is represented by the circular enclosure of the earthly Par-
adise.185 In the yin-yang of the Far-East, we find in the inner part of the 
two half-circumferences, but displaced by a doubling of the center rep-ented by the circular enclosure of the earthly Par-
adise.185 In the yin-yang of the Far-East, we find in the inner part of the 
two half-circumferences, but displaced by a doubling of the center rep-

182 By a rather remarkable agreement, this schema is also that of the human ear, 
the organ of hearing, which must, in order to be adapted to the perception of 
sound, have a disposition corresponding to the nature of the latter. 
183 This new figure is the one given in the Archeometer for the letter ח, which 
corresponds to the Cancer zodiacal. 
184 The half-circumference is to be considered here as a morphological equiva-
lent of the spiral element which we envisaged previously; but in this one clearly 
shows the development taking place from the initial germ point. 
185 See The King of the World, ch. 11. – This is also related to the mysteries of the 
letter ن in the Arabic alphabet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
133 
resenting a polarization which is, for each state of manifestation, the an-
alog of what is Sat or of the pure Being in Purusha-Prakriti for the Uni-
versal Manifestation.186 
These considerations do not pretend to be complete, and without a 
doubt only correspond to some of the aspects of the sign of Cancer; but 
they can at least serve as an example to show that there is in traditional 
astrology anything other than a ‘divinatory art’ or a ‘conjectural science’ 
as the moderns think. In reality, there is all that is found, under various 
expressions, in other sciences of the same order, as we have already in-
dicated here in our previous study on the ‘Science of Letters,’ and what 
gives these sciences a truly initiatic value, allowing them to be regarded 
as truly part of ‘sacred science.’ave already in-
dicated here in our previous study on the ‘Science of Letters,’ and what 
gives these sciences a truly initiatic value, allowing them to be regarded 
as truly part of ‘sacred science.’

186 This is a first distinction or differentiation, but still without separation of the 
complementary; it is at this stage that the constitution of the Androgyne corre-
sponds properly, whereas, prior to this differentiation, we can speak only of the 
‘neutrality’ which is that of the pure Being (see The Symbolism of the Cross, ch. 
30).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Place of the Atlantean Tradition 
in the Manvantara 
Place de la tradition atlantéenne dans le Manvantara, 
August-September 1931.g (see The Symbolism of the Cross, ch. 
30).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Place of the Atlantean Tradition 
in the Manvantara 
Place de la tradition atlantéenne dans le Manvantara, 
August-September 1931.

We have previously, in an article published here under the title Atlantis 
and Hyperborea,187 pointed out the confusion that is too often made be-
tween the primordial tradition, originally ‘polar’ in the literal sense of 
the word, and whose starting point is the same one of the present Man-
vantara, and the derivative and secondary tradition that was the Atlan-
tean tradition, referred to a much more restricted period. We have said 
then, and elsewhere at various times,188 that this confusion can be ex-
plained, to a certain extent, by the fact that the subordinate spiritual cen-
ters were constituted in the image of the Supreme Center, and that the 
same denominations have been applied to them. Therefore the Atlantean 
Thule, whose name was preserved in Central America where it was 
brought by the Toltecs, had to be the seat of a spiritual power which was 
like an emanation of the Hyperborean Thule; and, as this name Thule 
designates Libra, its double meaning is closely related to the transfer of 
this same designation from the polar constellation of the Great Bear to 
the zodiacal sign, which still bears the name of Libra. It is also the Atlan-
tean tradition that the transfer of sapta-riksha (the symbolic abode of the 
seven Rishis) should be related, at a certain time from the same Great 
Bear to the Pleiades, a constellation also composed of seven stars, but of 
a zodiacal situation; what leaves no doubt in this respect is that the Plei-
ades were called the daughters of Atlas and, as such, are also called At-
lanteans. 
All this is in keeping with the geographical location of the traditional 
centers, which is itself linked to their own characteristics, as well as to 
their respective place in the cyclical period, because everything here is 
much closer than those who ignore the laws of certain correspondences 
could suppose. Hyperborea corresponds of course to the North, and At-
lantis to the West; and it is remarkable that the very designations of thesethose who ignore the laws of certain correspondences 
could suppose. Hyperborea corresponds of course to the North, and At-
lantis to the West; and it is remarkable that the very designations of these

187 Le Voile d’Isis, no 118, October 1929. 
188 See especially The King of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e North, and At-
lantis to the West; and it is remarkable that the very designations of these

187 Le Voile d’Isis, no 118, October 1929. 
188 See especially The King of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
135 
two distinctly different regions may also be confusing, since names of 
the same root have been applied to both. Indeed, one finds this root in a 
variety of forms such as hiber, iber, or eber, and also ereb by a transposi-
tion of letters, designating at the same time the region of winter, which 
is to say the North, and the region of the evening or the setting sun, 
which is to say the West, and the peoples who inhabit one and the other; 
this fact is obviously of the same order as we have just recalled. 
The very position of the Atlantean center on the East-West axis indi-
cates its subordination to the Hyperborean center, which is located on 
the North-South polar axis. Indeed, although these two axes form, in the 
complete system of the six directions of space, what may be called a hor-
izontal cross, the North-South axis must nevertheless be considered as 
relatively vertical with respect to the East-West axis, as we have ex-
plained elsewhere.189 One can still, in accordance with the symbolism of 
the annual cycle, give the first of these two axes the name of the solsticial 
axis, and the second that of the equinoctial axis; and this helps to under-
stand that the starting point given to the year is not the same in all the 
traditional forms. The starting point which one can call normal, as being 
directly in conformity with the Primordial Tradition, is the winter sol-
stice; beginning the year at one of the equinoxes indicates the connection 
to a secondary tradition, such as the Atlantean tradition. 
The latter, on the other hand, being situated in a region which corre-
sponds to the evening in the diurnal cycle, must be regarded as belonging 
to one of the last divisions of the cycle of the terrestrial humanity of to-
day, so relatively recent; and, in fact, without seeking to give details that 
would be difficult to justify, we can say that it certainly belongs to the 
second half of the present Manvanatara.190 In addition, as the autumn in 
the year corresponds to the evening in the day, we can see a direct allu-
sion to the Atlantean world in what is indicated by the Hebrew tradition 
(whose name is also that of those who mark the origin of the West), that 
the world was created at the autumnal equinox (the first day of the 
month of Tishri, following a certain transposition of the letters of the 
word Bereshith); and perhaps this is also the most immediate reason 
(there are others of a deeper order) from the enunciation of the ‘evening’following a certain transposition of the letters of the 
word Bereshith); and perhaps this is also the most immediate reason 
(there are others of a deeper order) from the enunciation of the ‘evening’

189 See our study on The Symbolism of the Cross. 
190 We believe that the duration of the Atlantean civilization must have been 
equal to a ‘great year’ understood in the sense of the half-period of procession 
of the equinoxes; as for the cataclysm that ended there, certain condordant data 
seem to indicate that it took place 7,200 years before the year of the Kali-Yuga, 
a year which is itself the starting point of a known epoch, but of which those 
who still use it today no longer seem to know the origin nor the meaning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

136 
The Veil of Isisa, 
a year which is itself the starting point of a known epoch, but of which those 
who still use it today no longer seem to know the origin nor the meaning.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

136 
The Veil of Isis

(ereb) before the ‘morning’ (boqer) in the story of the ‘days’ of Genesis.191 
This can be confirmed by the fact that the literal meaning of Adam’s 
name is ‘red,’ the Atlantean tradition being precisely that of the red race; 
and it also seems that the Biblical flood corresponds directly to the cata-
clysm in which Atlantis disappeared, and that, consequently, it must not 
be identified with the deluge of Satyavarta which, following the Hindu 
tradition, issued directly from the Primordial Tradition, preceded imme-
diately by the beginning of our Manvantara.192 Of course, this meaning 
that can be labelled as historical does not exclude other meanings; it must 
never be forgotten that, according to the analogy which exists between 
a primary cycle and the secondary cycles in which it is subdivided, all 
the considerations of this order are always susceptible of applications to 
varying degrees; but what we wish to say is that it seems that the Atlan-
tean cycle was taken as a basis in the Hebrew tradition, that the trans-
mission was done via the Egyptians, which at the least is not implausible 
through any other means. 
If we make this last reservation, it is because it seems particularly dif-
ficult to determine how the junction of the current came from the West, 
after the disappearance of Atlantis, with another current descended from 
the North and proceeding directly from the Primordial Tradition, a junc-
tion from which the constitution of the different traditional forms be-
longing to the final part of the Manvantara. This is not, in any case, a 
pure and simple reabsorption in the Primordial Tradition, of what had 
emanated from it in an earlier period; it is a kind of fusion between pre-
viously differentiated forms, to give birth to other forms adapted to new 
circumstances of time and place; and the fact that these two currents ap-
pear in some way as autonomous can still contribute to maintaining the 
illusion of an independence of the Atlantean tradition. No doubt it would 
be necessary, if one wished to search for the conditions in which this 
junction takes place, would give particular importance to the Celts and 
the Chaldeans, whose name, which is synonymous, actually means not a 
particular people, but rather a sacerdotal caste; but who knows today of 
the Celtic and Chaldean traditions, as well as that of the ancient Egyp-
tians? One cannot be too cautious when it comes to completely extinct 
civilizations, and it is certainly not the attempts at reconstitution made 
by profane archaeologists that are capable of clarifying this question; but 
it is nonetheless true that many vestiges of a forgotten past come out ofertainly not the attempts at reconstitution made 
by profane archaeologists that are capable of clarifying this question; but 
it is nonetheless true that many vestiges of a forgotten past come out of

191 Among the Arabs also, the use is to count the hours of the day from the 
Maghrib, which is to say, from the sunset. 
192 Par contre, les déluges de Deucalion et d’Ogygès, chez les Grecs, semblent se 
rapporter à des périodes encore plus restreintes et à des cataclysmes partiels 
postérieurs à celui de l’Atlantide.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
137 
the earth in our time, and this cannot be without a purpose. Without 
risking the slightest prediction of what might result from these discov-
eries, of which those who make them are generally incapable of suspect-
ing their possible scope, we must certainly see here a ‘sign of the times:’ 
should not everything at the end of Manvantara, serve as a starting point 
for the development of the future cycle?

--- PAGE BREAK ---ssible scope, we must certainly see here a ‘sign of the times:’ 
should not everything at the end of Manvantara, serve as a starting point 
for the development of the future cycle?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sheth 
Sheth, October 1931. 
Kāna al-insānu ḥayyah fī al-qidam 
(“Man was formerly a serpent.”) 
In the column recently published by our colleague Argos (July issue) de-
voted to a curious English book on the ‘end times,’ there is one point 
which has particularly caught our attention and on which we would like 
to make some additional clarifications: the interpretation of the names 
Nimrod and Sheth. As a matter of fact, the link established between the 
two by E. H. Moggridge calls for some reservations, but there is at least 
a certain real relation, and the approximations drawn from the animal 
symbolism seems to us well founded. 
Firstly, namar in Hebrew, as is nimr in Arabic, is properly the ‘spotted 
animal,’ a common name for the tiger, panther, and the leopard; and it 
may even be said according to the most external sense, that these animals 
represent the ‘hunter’ that was Nimrod according to the Bible. But, fur-
thermore, the tiger, envisaged in a sense which is not necessarily unfa-
vorable, is, like the bear in the Nordic tradition, a symbol of the Kshat-
riya; and the foundation of Nineveh and the Assyrian empire by Nimrod 
seems to be indeed the fact of a revolt of the Kshatriyas against the au-
thority of the Chaldean sacerdotal caste. Hence the legendary relation-
ship established between Nimrod and the Nephilim or other antediluvian 
‘giants,’ who also included the Kshatriyas in earlier periods; and from 
there also the epithet of ‘nimrodian’ is applied to a temporal power which 
asserts itself independent of spiritual authority. 
Now, what is the relationship of all this with Sheth? The tiger and 
other similar animals are, as ‘destroyers,’ emblems of the Egyptian Set, 
the brother and murderer of Osiris, to which the Greeks attributed the 
name Typhoon; and it may be said that the ‘nimrodian’ spirit proceeds 
from the dark principle designated by the name Set, without, however, 
claiming that it is one with Nimrod himself; there is a distinction that is 
more than a simple nuance. But the point that seems to give rise to the 
greatest difficulty is this evil meaning of the name Set or Sheth, who on 
the other hand, as he designates the son of Adam, designating the stabil-
ity and restoration of order. Moreover, if we wish to establish biblical 
connections, the role of Set vis-à-vis Osiris will recall that of Cain vis-à-ignates the son of Adam, designating the stabil-
ity and restoration of order. Moreover, if we wish to establish biblical 
connections, the role of Set vis-à-vis Osiris will recall that of Cain vis-à-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
139 
vis Abel; and we note in this connection that some designate Nimrod as 
one of the ‘Cainites’ who would have escaped the diluvian cataclysm. But 
the Sheth of Genesis is opposed to Cain, far from being linked with him, 
how has his name appeared here? 
In fact, the word Sheth, in Hebrew proper, really has two opposing 
meanings, that of ‘foundation’ and that of ‘tumult’ and ‘ruin;’193 and the 
expression beni-Sheth (son of Sheth) is also given this double meaning. It 
is true that linguists wish to see in these two distinct words, coming from 
two different verbal roots, shith for the first and shath for the second; but 
the distinction of these two roots appears altogether secondary, and in 
any case their essential constitutive elements are identical. In reality, this 
is nothing more than an application of the double meaning of symbols to 
which we have often had occasion to refer to; and this application relates 
more particularly to the symbolism of the serpent. 
Indeed, if the tiger or the leopard is a symbol of the Egyptian Set, the 
snake is another,194 and this is easily understood, if one considers it under 
the malefic aspect which is most commonly attributed to it; but we al-
most always forget that the snake also has a beneficial aspect, which is 
also in the symbolism of ancient Egypt, especially in the form of the royal 
serpent, ‘uraeus’ or the basilisk.195 Even in Christian iconography, the 
serpent is sometimes a symbol of Christ;196 and the Biblical Sheth, whose 
role in the legend of the Grail we have mentioned elsewhere,197 is often 
regarded as a ‘prefiguration’ of Christ.198 It can be said that the two Sheths 
are nothing else, at its most basic, than the two serpents of the hermeticail we have mentioned elsewhere,197 is often 
regarded as a ‘prefiguration’ of Christ.198 It can be said that the two Sheths 
are nothing else, at its most basic, than the two serpents of the hermetic

193 The word is identical in both cases, but, curiously enough, it is masculine in 
the first and feminine in the second. 
194 It is quite remarkable that the Greek name Typhon is anagramically formed 
of the same elements as Python. 
195 Let us also remember that the snake appears in the Kneph and produces the 
‘Egg of the World’ by its mouth (a symbol of the Word); it is known that this, 
for the Druids, was likewise the ‘egg of the snake’ (represented by the fossil sea 
urchin). 
196 In The King of the World, ch. 3, we have mentioned in this respect the figura-
tion of the ‘amphisbene’ or two-headed serpent, one of which represents Christ 
and the other Satan. 
197 The King of the World, ch. 5. 
198 It is likely that so-called ‘Sethian’ Gnostics did not differ in reality from the 
‘Ophites,’ for whom the serpent (ophis) was the symbol of the Word and Wisdom 
(Sophia).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140 
The Veil of Isishat so-called ‘Sethian’ Gnostics did not differ in reality from the 
‘Ophites,’ for whom the serpent (ophis) was the symbol of the Word and Wisdom 
(Sophia).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

140 
The Veil of Isis

caduceus:199 it is, if you will, life and death, both produced by a unique 
power in its essence, but dual in its manifestation.200 
If we stop at this interpretation in terms of life and death, although it 
is in fact only a particular application of the consideration of two con-
trary or antagonistic terms, it is because the symbolism of the serpent is 
indeed linked, before everything, to the very idea of life:201 in Arabic, the 
snake is al-ḥayyah, and life is al-ḥayah (in Hebrew hayah, is both ‘life’ 
and ‘animal,’ of the hayi root which is common to both languages).202 
This, which is related to the symbolism of the ‘Tree of Life,’203 allows at 
the same time to glimpse a singular relationship of the serpent with Even 
(Hawah, ‘the living’); and one can recall here the medieval figurations of 
the ‘temptation’ where the body of the serpent wound to the tree is sur-
mounted by a woman’s bust.204 It is no less strange, in Chinese symbol-
ism Fu-hsi and his sister Nu-wa, who are said to have ruled together, 
forming a fraternal couple as is also found in ancient Egypt (and even up 
to the time of the Ptolemies), are sometimes represented with the body 
of a snake and a human head; and it happens that these two snakes are 
intertwined like those of the caduceus, without a doubt alluding then to 
the complementarianism of yang and yin.205 Without further pressing, 
which might carry us far astray, we can see in all this the indication that 
the serpent head, at times no doubt very remote, an importance that we 
no longer suspect today; and if one studied all aspects of its symbolism 
closely, especially in Egypt and India, one might be led to quite unex-
pected findings. 
With regard to the double meaning of symbols, it should be noted that 
the number 666, too, does not have an exclusively malefic meaning; if itIndia, one might be led to quite unex-
pected findings. 
With regard to the double meaning of symbols, it should be noted that 
the number 666, too, does not have an exclusively malefic meaning; if it

199 It is rather curious that the name of Sheth, reduced to its essential elements S 
and T in the Latin alphabet (which is only a form of the Phoenician alphabet) 
gives the figure of the ‘serpent of brass.’ With regard to the latter, let us point 
out that it is actually the same word which in Hebrew means ‘snake’ (nahash) 
and ‘brass’ or ‘copper’ (nehash); in Arabic there is another no less strange con-
nection: nahas ‘calamity,’ and nahās, ‘copper.’ 
200 On this point, we can refer to the article we have devoted here to the ‘thunder 
stones.’ 
201 This meaning is particularly evident for the serpent that wraps around the 
staff of Aesculapius. 
202 Al-Hay is one of the principal divine names; it must be translated, not as ‘the 
Living’ as is often done, but as ‘the Vivifying,’ the one who gives life or who is 
the principle of life. 
203 See The Symbolism of the Cross, ch. 25. 
204 An example is found at the left portal of the Notre-Dame of Paris. 
205 It is said that Nu-wa melted stones of five colors (white, black, red, yellow, 
blue) to repair a tear in the sky, and also that she cut the four feet of the turtle 
to lay the four extremities of the world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d stones of five colors (white, black, red, yellow, 
blue) to repair a tear in the sky, and also that she cut the four feet of the turtle 
to lay the four extremities of the world.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
141 
is the ‘number of the Beast,’ it is first of all a solar number, and, as we 
have said elsewhere,206 he is of Hakathriel, or the ‘Angel of the Crown.’ 
On the other hand, this number is also given to the name of Sorath, who 
is, according to the Kabbalists, the solar demon, as opposed to the arch-
angel Michael, and this refers to the two faces of Metatron;207 Sorath is 
also the anagram of sthur, which means ‘hidden thing,’ is this the ‘name 
of mystery’ of which the Apocalypse speaks? But, if sathar means ‘to 
hide,’ it also means ‘to protect;’ and, in Arabic, the same word salar 
evokes almost exclusively the idea of protection, and often even divine 
providential protection;208 here again, things are so much less simple 
than those who only view this from one side. 
But let us return to the symbolic animals of the Egyptian Set: there is 
still the crocodile, which is self-explanatory, and the hippopotamus, in 
which some have wished to see the Behemoth of the Book of Job, and 
perhaps not without some reason, for this word (the plural of behemah, 
bahīmah in Arabic) is properly a collective designation of all the great 
quadrupeds.209 But another animal that is at least as important here as 
the hippopotamus, as amazing as it may seem, is the donkey, and espe-
cially the red donkey,210 who was represented as one of the most formi-
dable entities among all those whom the dead must meet during their 
journey from beyond the grave, or, esoterically, the initiate during his 
trials; would it not be here, even more than the hippopotamus, the ‘scar-
let beast’ of the Apocalypse?211 In any case, one of the most gloomy as-
pects of the ‘typhonian’ mysteries;212 we have some reason to think that,be here, even more than the hippopotamus, the ‘scar-
let beast’ of the Apocalypse?211 In any case, one of the most gloomy as-
pects of the ‘typhonian’ mysteries;212 we have some reason to think that,

206 The King of the World, ch. 5. 
207 Ibid., ch. 3. 
208 Could one, without too much linguistic fancy, bring up the Greek soter, ‘sav-
ior?’ And must it be mentioned in this connection that there can and should be 
a singular likeness between the designations of Christ (Al-Māssīḥ), and that of 
the Anti-Christ (Al-Massīḥ)? 
209 The root baham or abham means ‘to be mute,’ and also ‘to be hidden;’ if the 
general meaning of Behemoth is related to the first of these two ideas, the second 
can evoke more specifically the animal ‘which hides under the reeds;’ and here 
the connection with the meaning of the other sathar root of which we have just 
spoken is rather curious. 
210 Still another strange linguistic rapprochement: in Arabic ‘donkey’ is called 
ḥimar (in Hebrew hemor) and ‘red’ ʾaḥmar; the red donkey would be like the 
‘brazen serpent,’ a kind of ‘pleonasm’ in phonetic symbolism. 
211 In India, the donkey is the symbolic mount of Mudevi, the ‘infernal’ aspect of 
Shakti. 
212 The role of the donkey in the Gospel tradition, at the birth of Christ and his 
entry into Jerusalem, may seem at odds with the maleficent character attributed 
to it almost everywhere else; and the ‘feast of the donkey’ which was celebrated 
in the Middle Ages does not seem to have ever been satisfactorily explained: we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

142 
The Veil of Isist almost everywhere else; and the ‘feast of the donkey’ which was celebrated 
in the Middle Ages does not seem to have ever been satisfactorily explained: we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

142 
The Veil of Isis

in one form or another, it has continued to this day, and some even say 
that it must last until the end of the current cycle. 
From this last point, we want to draw at least one conclusion: to the 
decline of a civilization, it is the lowest side of its tradition that persists 
the longest, especially the ‘magical’ side, which contributes, by the devi-
ations to which it gives rise, to complete its ruin; this is what would have 
happened, it is said, for Atlantis. This is also the only thing from which 
the debris has survived for civilizations that have completely disap-
peared; the observation is easy to make for Egypt, for the Chaldeans, for 
Druidism; and no doubt the ‘fetishism’ of the Negro peoples has a similar 
origin. One could say that sorcery is made of the remains of a dead civi-
lization; is this why the snake, in the most recent epochs, has almost kept 
only its evil meaning, and that the dragon, the ancient Far-Eastern sym-
bol of the Word, awakens only ‘diabolical’ ideas in the spirit of Western 
moderns?

will be careful not to risk the slightest interpretation on this very obscure sub-
ject.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Language of Birds 
La Langue des Oiseaux, November 1931.spirit of Western 
moderns?

will be careful not to risk the slightest interpretation on this very obscure sub-
ject.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Language of Birds 
La Langue des Oiseaux, November 1931.

Wa as-ṣāffāti ṣaffan 
Fa az-zājirāti zajrā, 
Fa at-tālīyāti dhikran 
(“By those who range themselves in ranks, 
And those who are so strong in repelling, 
And thus proclaim the invocation!”) 
(Qurʾān, XXXVII, 1-3). 
In a variety of traditions, we often speak of a mysterious language 
called ‘the language of birds:’ an obviously symbolic designation, for the 
very importance attributed to the knowledge of this language, as a pre-
rogative of a higher initiation, does not permit it to take it literally. This 
is also what we read in the Qurʾān: “And Solomon was David’s heir; and 
he said: O people! We have been taught the language of birds (ʾulimnā 
manṭaq at-ṭayrī) and on us has been bestowed all things.” (XXVII, 16). 
Elsewhere, we have seen dragon-vanquishing heroes, such as Siegfried 
in the Nordic legends, immediately understand the language of the birds; 
and this makes it easy to understand the symbolism in question. In fact, 
the victory over the dragon has the immediate consequence of conquer-
ing immortality, represented by some object of which this dragon has 
defended the approach; and this conquest of immortality essentially im-
plies reintegration at the center of the human state, that is, at the point 
where communication with the higher states of being is established. It is 
this very communication that is represented by the understanding of the 
language of birds; and, indeed, birds are frequently taken as a symbol of 
angels, that is, precisely the higher states. We have had the opportunity 
to cite elsewhere,213 the Evangelical parable where, in this meaning, it is 
a question of the ‘birds of the sky’ coming to rest upon the branches of 
the tree, of the same tree which represents the axis passing through the 
center of each state of being and linking all states together.214the ‘birds of the sky’ coming to rest upon the branches of 
the tree, of the same tree which represents the axis passing through the 
center of each state of being and linking all states together.214

213 Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta, ch. 3. 
214 In the medieval symbol of the Peridexion (a corruption of Paradision), we see 
the birds upon the branches of the tree and the dragon at its foot (see The Sym-
bolism of the Cross, ch. 9). – In a study on the symbolism of the ‘bird of paradise’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

144 
The Veil of Isiss upon the branches of the tree and the dragon at its foot (see The Sym-
bolism of the Cross, ch. 9). – In a study on the symbolism of the ‘bird of paradise’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

144 
The Veil of Isis

In the Qurʾānic text we reproduced above, the term as-ṣāffāt is con-
sidered to literally designate birds, but symbolically applied to angels (al-
malaʿīkah); and so the first verse signifies the constitution of celestial or 
spiritual hierarchies.215 The second verse expresses the angels’ struggle 
against demons, celestial powers against the infernal powers, that is, the 
opposition of the higher and lower states;216 it is, in the Hindu tradition, 
the struggle of the Devas against the Asuras, and also, according to a 
symbolism quite similar to what we are dealing with here, the fight of 
the Garuda against the Naga, in which we find, furthermore, the snake 
or dragon that we mentioned earlier; the Garuda is agile, and elsewhere 
it is replaced by other birds such as the ibis, the stork, the heron, all en-
emies and destroyers of reptiles.217 Finally, in the third verse, we see the 
angels reciting the dhikr, which, in the most common interpretation, is 
considered as having been the recitation of the Quran, not, of course, of 
the Quran expressed in the human language, but from its eternal proto-
type inscribed on the ‘guarded tablet (al-lawḥ al-laḥfūẓ), which extends 
from heaven to earth as Jacob’s ladder, hence through all the degrees of 
Universal Existence.218 Similarly, in the Hindu tradition, it is said that the 
Devas, in their struggle against the Asuras, protected themselves (acchan 
dayan) by reciting the hymns of the Veda, and that for this reason theimilarly, in the Hindu tradition, it is said that the 
Devas, in their struggle against the Asuras, protected themselves (acchan 
dayan) by reciting the hymns of the Veda, and that for this reason the

(Le Rayonnement Intellectuel, May-June 1930), Mr. L. Charbonneau-Lassay re-
produced a sculpture in which the bird is figured with only a head and wings, a 
form under which angels are often represented. 
215 The word ṣāff, ‘rank,’ is one of those, beside many others, in which some 
wish to find the origin of the terms ṣūfī and taṣawwuf; although this derivation 
does not appear to be acceptable from the purely linguistic point of view, it is 
none the less true that, like many others of the same type, it represents one of 
those ideas actually contained within these terms, because the ‘spiritual hierar-
chies’ are essentially identified with the degrees of initiation. 
216 This opposition is expressed in every being by that of the two ascending and 
descending tendencies, called sattwa and tamas by the Hindu doctrine. It is also 
that which Mazdaism symbolizes by the antagonism of the light and darkness, 
respectively personified in Ormuzd and Ahriman. 
217 On this subject, see the remarkable works of Mr. Charbonneau-Lassay on teh 
animal symbols of Christ. It is important to note that the symbolic opposition of 
the bird and the snake only applies when the latter is considered in its evil as-
pect; on the contrary, in its beneficial aspect, it sometimes unites with the bird, 
known in the figure of the Quetzalcohuatl of the ancient American traditions; 
moreover, we also find in Mexico the fight of the eagle against the snake. In the 
case of the association of the bird and the snake, one can recall the text of the 
Gospel: “Be gentle as doves and wise as serpents” (Matthew, X, 16). 
218 On the symbolism of the Book, to which this directly relates, see The Symbol-
ism of the Cross, ch. 14.

--- PAGE BREAK ---he 
Gospel: “Be gentle as doves and wise as serpents” (Matthew, X, 16). 
218 On the symbolism of the Book, to which this directly relates, see The Symbol-
ism of the Cross, ch. 14.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
145 
hymns were given the name of chhandas, a word which properly desig-
nates the ‘rhythm.’ The same idea is contained in the word dhikr, which, 
in Islamic esoterism, applies to rhythmic formulas corresponding exactly 
to the Hindu mantras, formulas whose repetition is intended to produce 
a harmonization of the various elements of the being, and to determine 
vibrations that, through their repercussion through the series of states, 
can induce an indefinite hierarchy to open up a communication with the 
higher states, which is, generally, the reason for essential and primordial 
being of all rites. 
We are thus brought back directly, as we see, to what we have said at 
the beginning regarding the ‘language of the birds’ which we can also 
call ‘angelic languages,’ and whose image in the human world is the 
rhythmic language, because it is on the ‘science of rhythm,’ which has 
many applications, that all the means that can be used to communication 
with the higher states are ultimately based. This is why an Islamic tradi-
tion says that Adam, in the terrestrial Paradise, spoke in verse, that is, in 
rhythmic language; this is the ‘Syriac language’ (loghah suryānīyyah) of 
which we spoke in our previous study on the ‘science of letters’ and 
which must be regarded as directly translating ‘solar’ and ‘angelic illu-
mination’ as it manifests itself at the center of the human state. This is 
also why the Sacred Books are written in rhythmic language, which, as 
we can see, is quite different from the simple ‘poems’ in the purely pro-
fane sense that the anti-traditional bias of modern ‘critics’ seeks to see; 
and, moreover, poetry, originally, was not that vain ‘literature’ which it 
has become by a degeneration explained by the downward march of the 
human cycle, and it had a true sacred character.219 It can be traced back 
to classical Western antiquity, where poetry was still called ‘the language 
of the Gods,’ an expression equivalent to those we have indicated since 
the ‘Gods,’ that is to say the Devas,220 are, like the angels, representations 
of the higher states. In Latin, the verses were called carmina, a designa-
tion which related to their use in the performance of rites, for the word 
carmen is identical to the Sanskrit Karma, which must be taken here in. In Latin, the verses were called carmina, a designa-
tion which related to their use in the performance of rites, for the word 
carmen is identical to the Sanskrit Karma, which must be taken here in

219 It may be said, more generally, that the arts and sciences have become pro-
fane only by such a degeneration, which has robbed them of their traditional 
character and, consequently, of all significance of a higher order; we explained 
ourselves on this subject in The Esoterism of Dante, ch. 2, and The Crisis of the 
Modern World, ch. 4 (see also The Reign of Quantity and the Signs of the Times, 
ch. 8). 
220 The Sanskrit Deva and Latin Deus are one and the same word.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146 
The Veil of Isishe 
Modern World, ch. 4 (see also The Reign of Quantity and the Signs of the Times, 
ch. 8). 
220 The Sanskrit Deva and Latin Deus are one and the same word.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

146 
The Veil of Isis

its special meaning of ‘ritual action;’221 and the poet himself, the inter-
preter of the ‘sacred language’ through which the Divine Word tran-
spires, was vates, a word that characterized him as endowed with a pro-
phetic inspiration. Later, by another degeneration, the vates was no more 
than a vulgar ‘diviner,’222 and the carmen (hence the English word 
‘charm’) an ‘enchantment,’ which is to say an operation of low magic; 
this is another example of the fact that magic, or even sorcery, is what 
remains as the last vestiges of lost traditions. 
These few indications will suffice, we believe, to show how wrong are 
those who wish to make fun of stories about the ‘language of the birds;’ 
it is really too easy and too simple to treat disdainfully all ‘superstitions’ 
that one does not understand; but the elders, they knew very well what 
they said when they used the symbolic language. The true ‘superstition,’ 
in the strictly etymological sense (quod superstat), is what survives of it-
self, that is, the ‘dead letter;’ but this preservation, so unworthy of inter-
est as it may seem, is not so despicable for the mind, which ‘breathes 
where it wills,’ and when it wills, it can always arrive to revitalize the 
symbols and the rites, and restore to them, with their lost meaning, the 
fullness of their original virtue.hich ‘breathes 
where it wills,’ and when it wills, it can always arrive to revitalize the 
symbols and the rites, and restore to them, with their lost meaning, the 
fullness of their original virtue.

221 The word ‘poetry’ also derives from the Greek word poiein, which has the 
same meaning as the Sanskrit root Kri, from which Karma originates, and which 
is found in the Latin verb creare understood in its primitive meaning; originally, 
it was something quite different from the mere production of an artistic or liter-
ary work, in the profane sense that Aristotle seems to have only in mind when 
speaking of what he called ‘poetic sciences.’ 
222 The word ‘diviner’ itself is no less deviated from its original meaning, because 
etymologically it is nothing else than divinus, meaning here ‘interpreter of the 
gods.’ – The ‘auspices’ (from aves spicere, ‘observe the birds’), omens were 
drawn from the flight and song of the birds, are more especially compared to the 
‘language of the birds,’ understood then in the most material sense, but never-
theless identified still to the ‘language of the gods’ since these were regarded as 
manifesting their will by these omens and the birds thus played a role as ‘mes-
sengers’ similar to that which is generally attributed to angels (hence their very 
name, since this is exactly the proper meaning of the Greek work angelos), alt-
hough taken from a very inferior aspect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Remarks on the Name Adam 
Quelques remarques sur le nom d’Adam, December 1931.ly the proper meaning of the Greek work angelos), alt-
hough taken from a very inferior aspect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Remarks on the Name Adam 
Quelques remarques sur le nom d’Adam, December 1931.

In our article on “The Place of the Atlantean Tradition in the Manvan-
tara” (August-September special issue), we said that the literal meaning 
of Adam’s name is ‘red,’ and that we can see here a hint of the connection 
between the Hebrew tradition and the Atlantean tradition, which was 
that of the red race. Furthermore, our colleague Argos, in his fascinating 
chronicle on ‘blood and some of its Mysteries’ (October issue), considers 
for the same meaning of Adam a derivation that may seem different: after 
having recalled the usual interpretation that it would mean ‘drawn from 
the earth’ (adamah), he wonders if it would rather come from the word 
dam ‘blood;’ but the difference is only apparent, all these words actually 
having one and the same root. 
Firstly, it should be noted that from the linguistic point of view, the 
vulgar etymology, which amounts to deriving Adam from adamah, trans-
lated as ‘earth,’ is impossible; reverse derivation would be more plausi-
ble; but, in fact, both substantives come from one and the same verbal 
root adam, which means ‘to be red.’ Adamah is not, originally at least, 
the earth in general (erets), nor the element of earth (yabashah, a word 
whose primitive meaning indicates ‘drought’ as the characteristic quality 
of this element); it is properly the red clay, which, by its plastic proper-
ties, is particularly apt to represent a certain potentiality, a capacity to 
receive forms; and the work of the potter has often been taken as a sym-
bol of the production of beings manifested from undifferentiated primor-
dial substance. It is for this reason that the ‘red earth’ seems to have a 
special importance in Hermetic symbolism, where it can be mistaken for 
one of the figures of the ‘raw material,’ although, if we understood it 
literally it can only play a role in a very relative way since it already has 
definite properties. Let us add that the relationship between a designa-
tion of the earth and the name of Adam, taken as a type of humanity, is 
found in another form in the Latin language, where the word humus, 
‘earth,’ is also singularly close to homo and humanus. Moreover, if one 
relates more specifically the same name Adam to the tradition of the red 
race, this becomes in accordance with the earth among the elements, as 
with the West among the cardinal points, and this final concordance still 
comes to justify what we said previously.of the red 
race, this becomes in accordance with the earth among the elements, as 
with the West among the cardinal points, and this final concordance still 
comes to justify what we said previously.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

148 
The Veil of Isise with the earth among the elements, as 
with the West among the cardinal points, and this final concordance still 
comes to justify what we said previously.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

148 
The Veil of Isis

As for the word dam, ‘blood’ (which is common to both Hebrew and 
Arabic), it is also derived from the same root adam;223 blood is properly 
the red liquid, which is, indeed, its most immediately apparent character. 
The kinship between this designation of blood and the name Adam is 
therefore incontestable and can be explained by the derivation of a com-
mon root; but this derivation appears as direct for both, and it is not pos-
sible, from the verbal root edam, to pass through dam to arrive at Adam’s 
name. It is true, one could consider things in another way, which is less 
strictly linguistic, and say that it is because of his blood that man is called 
‘red;’ but such an explanation is unsatisfactory, because the fact of hav-
ing blood is not peculiar to man, but is common between him and animal 
species, so that he cannot serve to be characterized by this. In fact, the 
color red is, in Hermetic symbolism, that of the animal kingdom, as the 
color green is that of the vegetable kingdom, and the color white of the 
mineral kingdom;224 and this, with regards to the color red, can be related 
precisely to blood being considered as the seat, or more properly, the 
support of the proper animal vitality. On the other hand, if we return to 
the more particular relation of the name Adam to the red race, this does 
not seem, in spite of its color, to be put in relation with a predominance 
of blood in the organic constitution, because the blood temperament cor-
responds to fire among the elements, and not to the earth; and it is the 
black race that is in correspondence with the fire element, as it is with 
the South among the cardinal points. 
Note also, among the derivatives of the root adam, the word edom, 
which means ‘red,’ and which differs from the name of Adam by the di-
acritics; in the Bible, Edom is a nickname of Esau, hence the name Edom-
ites given to his descendants, and that of Idumea to the country that they 
inhabited (and which, in Hebrew, is also Edom, but feminine). This re-
minds us of the ‘seven kings of Edom’ mentioned in the Zohar, and 
Edom’s close resemblance to Adam may be one of the reasons this name 
is taken here to refer to the lost humanities, which is to say those of the 
previous Manvantaras.225 We also see the relation that this last point pre-
sents with the question of what we have called the ‘pre-Adamites:’ if we 
take Adam as the origin of the red race and its particular tradition, it can 
simply be a matter of the other races that have preceded the former inn of what we have called the ‘pre-Adamites:’ if we 
take Adam as the origin of the red race and its particular tradition, it can 
simply be a matter of the other races that have preceded the former in

223 The initial aleph, which exists in the root, disappears into the derivative, 
which is not an exceptional fact; this aleph does not constitute a prefix with an 
independent meaning as Latouche thinks, whose linguistic conceptions are too 
often fanciful. 
224 On the symbolism of these three colors, see our study on The Esoterism of 
Dante. 
225 See The King of the World, ch. 6.

--- PAGE BREAK ---whose linguistic conceptions are too 
often fanciful. 
224 On the symbolism of these three colors, see our study on The Esoterism of 
Dante. 
225 See The King of the World, ch. 6.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
149 
the course of the present human cycle; if we take it in a more extended 
sense, as the prototype of all present humanity, it will be these earlier 
humanities to which the ‘seven kings of Edom’ precisely allude to. In any 
case, the discussions to which this question gave rise appears quite use-
less, for there should be no difficulty there; in fact, there is none, at least 
for the Islamic tradition, in which there is a ḥadīth (word of the Prophet) 
saying that “before the Adam we know, God created one hundred thou-
sand Adams” (which is to say an indeterminable number), which is an 
affirmation as clear as possible of the multiplicity of cyclic periods and 
corresponding humanities. 
Since we have alluded to blood as the pillar of vitality, we will recall 
that, as we have already had occasion to explain in one of our works,226 
blood is indeed one of the bonds of the corporeal organism with the sub-
tle state of the living being, which is properly the ‘soul’ (nephesh haiah 
of Genesis), which is, the etymological meaning (anima), the animator 
principle or vivification of the being. The subtle state is called Taijasa by 
the Hindu tradition, by analogy with tejas or the igneous element; and, 
as fire is, for its own qualities, polarized between light and heat, the sub-
tle state is related to the bodily state in two different and complementary 
ways, by the blood as to the caloric quality, and by the nervous system 
to the luminous quality. In fact, blood is, even from a physiological point 
of view, the vehicle of the animating heat; and this explains the corre-
spondence, which we have indicated above, of the blood temperament 
with the element fire. Furthermore, it can be said that in fire, light repre-
sents the higher aspect, and heat the inferior aspect: Islamic tradition 
teaches that angels were created from ‘divine fire’ (or ‘divine light’), and 
that those who revolted after Iblis lost the brightness of their nature 
keeping only a dark heat.227 As a result, it can be said that the blood is in 
direct relation with the inferior side of the subtle state; and from this 
comes the prohibition of blood as food, its absorption entailing that of 
what is most gross in animal vitality, and which, assimilating and inti-
mately mingling with the physical elements of man, can actually bring 
about very serious consequences. Hence the frequent use of blood in the 
practices of magic or even sorcery (as attracting the ‘infernal’ entities by 
conformity of nature); but, on the other hand, this is also likely under 
certains conditions to be transposed into a higher order, hence the rites, 
whether religious or even initiatic (such as the Mithraic ‘taurobolium’), 
involving animal sacrifices; as it has been said that the sacrifice of Abeltransposed into a higher order, hence the rites, 
whether religious or even initiatic (such as the Mithraic ‘taurobolium’), 
involving animal sacrifices; as it has been said that the sacrifice of Abel

226 Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta, ch. 14; Cf. also The Spiritist 
Fallacy, pp. 116-119. 
227 This is indicated in the link which exists in Arabic between the words nūr, 
‘light,’ and nār, ‘fire,’ (in the sense of heat).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

150 
The Veil of Isis

is opposed to Cain’s bloodless sacrifice, we may return to this point on a 
future occasion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cain and Abel 
Caïn et Abel, January 1932.--- PAGE BREAK ---

150 
The Veil of Isis

is opposed to Cain’s bloodless sacrifice, we may return to this point on a 
future occasion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Cain and Abel 
Caïn et Abel, January 1932.

In concluding our previous article, we referred to the opposition of Cain 
and Abel in Biblical symbolism, and more particularly to the aspect under 
which this opposition manifests itself in sacrificial rites: Cain’s offering 
of vegetables, and Abel’s offering of animals. This is naturally linked to 
the type of life that is attributed to them respectively: Cain is represented 
as a farmer, and Abel as a shepherd. These are the two types of people 
that have existed since the beginning of humanity, or at least since there 
has been an initial differentiation; the sedentary, devoted to the cultiva-
tion of the earth; nomads, herding livestock;228 and each of these two 
categories having their own law, different from each other, and adapted 
to the nature of their occupations. It may be noted immediately in this 
connection, that the Hebrew Torah is connected with the law of the no-
madic peoples: hence the way in which the tale of Cain and Abel is pre-
sented, which from the point of view of settled peoples would be suscep-
tible to another interpretation; hence also the disapproval of certain arts 
and industries which are properly adapted to the settled, and especially 
to all that pertains to the construction of fixed dwellings. It was such 
until the time when Israel ceased to be nomadic, which is to say until the 
time of David and Solomon; and we know that in order to build the Tem-
ple it was necessary to call on foreign workers. 
It is naturally the farming peoples who, being sedentary, build cities; 
and in fact it is said that the first city was founded by Cain himself. The 
works of these people are, one may say, works of time: fixed in space torming peoples who, being sedentary, build cities; 
and in fact it is said that the first city was founded by Cain himself. The 
works of these people are, one may say, works of time: fixed in space to

228 These are the essential and primordial occupations of these two human types; 
the rest is accidental, derivative, or added later, and to speak of hunting peoples, 
fishermen, etc., as modern ethnologists do, it is to take the accidental for the 
most part, or to refer to only more or less later anomalies or degenerations. – 
The denominations of Iran and Turan, whose designations of race were intended 
to actually represent sedentary and nomadic peoples respectively; Iran or Ar-
yana comes from the word arya (hence aryana by elongation, which means 
‘plowman’ (derived from the root ar, which is found in the Latin arare, arator, 
and also arvum ‘field’); and the use of the word arya as an honorific designation 
(for higher castes) is, therefore, characteristic of the peasant peoples.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

152 
The Veil of Isisand also arvum ‘field’); and the use of the word arya as an honorific designation 
(for higher castes) is, therefore, characteristic of the peasant peoples.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

152 
The Veil of Isis

a strictly delimited domain, they develop their activity in a temporal con-
tinuity which appears to them as indefinite. On the other hand, the no-
madic and pastoral peoples do not build anything lasting, and do not 
work for a future that escapes them; but they have before them space, 
which has no limitations that oppose them, but on the contrary con-
stantly opens to them new possibilities. We thus find the correspondence 
of the cosmic principles to which the symbolism of Cain and Abel relates 
in another order: the principle of compression, represented by time; the 
principle of expansion, by space. To tell the truth, both of these principles 
are manifested both in time and space, as with all things, and it is neces-
sary to make a remark to resolve certain apparent oppositions that we 
do not have to consider right now; but the action of the first predomi-
nates in the temporal condition, and the second in the spatial condition. 
Time uses space, so to speak, thus affirming its role as ‘devourer,’ and 
over the ages the sedentary gradually absorbs the nomad: this is a social 
and historical meaning of the murder of Abel by Cain. 
The activity of the nomads is exercised over the animal kingdom, mo-
bile just like them; that of sedentaries takes as its object the two fixed 
kingdoms, the plant and the mineral.229 Furthermore, by the nature of 
things, the sedentary people come to form visual symbols, images made 
of varying substances, but which, from the point of view of their essential 
meaning always returns more or less directly to geometric schematism, 
the origin and base of any spatial formation. On the other hand, the no-
mads, to whom images are forbidden, just as everything that tends to 
attach them to a specific place, form sound symbols, the only ones which 
are compatible with their state of constant migration.230 But it is remark-
able that among the sensible faculties, sight has a direct relationship with 
space and hearing with time: the elements of the visual symbol express 
themselves simultaneously, those of the sound symbol in succession; 
therefore, in this order there is a kind of reversal of the relations that we 
have previously envisaged. Thus, the sedentary creates visual arts (archi-
tecture, sculptures, paintings), which is to say the art forms that unfold 
in space; the nomads create phonetic arts (music, poetry), which is to say. Thus, the sedentary creates visual arts (archi-
tecture, sculptures, paintings), which is to say the art forms that unfold 
in space; the nomads create phonetic arts (music, poetry), which is to say

229 The use of mineral elements includes construction and metallurgy: there is 
much to say about the latter, that which is of Biblical symbolism relates to Tu-
balcain. 
230 The distinction of these two fundamental theories of symbols is, in the Hindu 
tradition, that of the yantra, the figurative symbol, and the mantra, the sound 
symbol; it naturally entails a corresponding distinction between the rites in 
which these symbols are used respectively, although there is not always such a 
clear separation, and, in fact, all combinations are possible here.

--- PAGE BREAK ---istinction between the rites in 
which these symbols are used respectively, although there is not always such a 
clear separation, and, in fact, all combinations are possible here.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
153 
the art forms that take place in time; because all art, at its origin, is es-
sentially symbolic and ritual, and it is only by a later degeneration, or 
even likely very recently, that it loses this sacred character to become the 
purely profane game to which it has been reduced in our contempo-
rary.231 
Here is the complementarism of the conditions of existence: those 
who work for time are stabilized in space; those who wander in space are 
constantly changing with time. Here is where the antinomy of the ‘op-
posite meaning’ appears: those who live according to time, a changing 
and destructive element, fix themselves and preserve; those who live ac-
cording to space, a fixed and permanent element, disperse and change 
incessantly. This must be so that the existence of each remains possible, 
by a kind of relative equilibrium between the terms representative of two 
opposite tendencies; if only one of these two tendencies were in action, 
the end would come soon, either by crystallization or by volatilization, if 
it is permissible to use in this respect symbolic expressions which must 
evoke ‘coagulation’ and the alchemical ‘solution.’ In fact, we are here in 
a field where all the consequences of the cosmic dualities are particularly 
clear, images or reflections of a more or less distant first duality of ‘es-
sence-substance’ (Purusha-Prakriti), which generates and governs any 
manifestation. 
But the animal sacrifice is fatal to Abel,232 and Cain’s offering of plants 
is not accepted;233 whoever is blessed dies, whoever lives is accursed. The 
balance on both sides is broken; how to restore it, if not by exchanges 
such that each has its share of the production of the other? Thus, move-oever is blessed dies, whoever lives is accursed. The 
balance on both sides is broken; how to restore it, if not by exchanges 
such that each has its share of the production of the other? Thus, move-

231 What we say here about the arts also applies to the sciences: the secular sci-
ence of the moderns represents only a sort of residue of old traditional science, 
separate from its principle, and subsequently emptied of its profound meaning: 
the external and superficial development of this profane science (especially in 
regards to practical applications) must not be misleading in this respect. 
232 As Abel shed the blood of animals, his blood is shed by Cain; there is here the 
expression of a ‘law of compensation,’ according to which the partial imbal-
ances, in which consists all manifestations, are integrated in total equilibrium. 
233 However, it is important to note that the Hebrew Bible admits the validity of 
bloodless sacrifices considered within itself: such is the case with Melchizedek’s 
sacrifice of bread and wine; but this refers to the rite of the Vedic Soma and the 
perpetuation of the Primordial Tradition, beyond the specialized form of the He-
brew tradition, and even beyond the distinction of the law of sedentary peoples 
and that of nomadic peoples. – The acceptance of Abel’s sacrifice and the rejec-
tion of Cain’s are sometimes figured in a rather curious symbolic form: the 
smoke of the first rises vertically towards the sky, while that of the second 
spreads horizontally on the surface of the Earth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

154 
The Veil of Isiscurious symbolic form: the 
smoke of the first rises vertically towards the sky, while that of the second 
spreads horizontally on the surface of the Earth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

154 
The Veil of Isis

ment associates time and space, being in a way resultant of their combi-
nation, and reconciles in them the two opposing tendencies of which we 
have spoken; movement itself is still only a series of imbalances, but the 
sum of these forms the relative equilibrium compatible with the law of 
manifestation or ‘becoming.’ All exchange between beings is a move-
ment, or rather a set of two inverse and reciprocal movements, which 
harmonizes and compensates one another; here, equilibrium is thus re-
alized directly by the very fact of this compensation.234

234 Equilibrium, harmony, justice, are only three forms or three aspects of one 
and the same thing; in a sense, we could make them correspond to the three 
areas we are speaking about, respectively.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Symbolism of the Theater 
Le symbolisme du théâtre, February 1932.me thing; in a sense, we could make them correspond to the three 
areas we are speaking about, respectively.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Symbolism of the Theater 
Le symbolisme du théâtre, February 1932.

In a recent article (November 1931 issue), Mr. Clavelle rightfully pointed 
out that there is a symbolism of theater, just as we have spoken on a 
variety of occasions that there is a symbolism of journeys, pilgrimage, 
navigation, and war. Furthermore, this can be related to what we have 
already said about the primacy of the arts, sciences, and even trades,235 
all possessing a symbolic value by the fact that they were attached to a 
superior principle, from which they derived contingent applications, and 
which became purely ‘profane’ solely as a result of the spiritual degen-
eration of humanity in the course of the downward march of its historical 
cycle. 
It may be said, generally speaking, that the theater is a symbol of 
manifestation, of which it expresses the illusory character as perfectly as 
possible; this symbolism can be considered from the point of view of the 
actor, or from the point of view of the theater itself. The actor is, as Mr. 
Clavelle says, “a symbol of the Personality manifested as an indefinite 
series of individualities, until the day when he puts down the mask of his 
final role and leaves to never return to the scene of the manifested.” Note 
here the significance of the ancient usage of the mask and the perfect 
accuracy of this symbolism: indeed, under the mask the actor remains 
himself in all his roles, as the Personality is ‘unaffected’ by all its mani-
festations; on the contrary, the suppression of the mask forces the actor 
to modify his own physiognomy and thus seems to alter in some way his 
essential identity. However, in all cases the actor remains fundamentally 
something else than what he appears to be, just as the Personality is 
something other than the manifold states of the manifested, which are 
only the external and changing appearances of which it is clothed to re-
alized, according to the various modes which suit their nature, the indef-
inite possibilities which it contains within itself in the permanent actu-
ality of the non-manifest.ch it is clothed to re-
alized, according to the various modes which suit their nature, the indef-
inite possibilities which it contains within itself in the permanent actu-
ality of the non-manifest.

235 Let us note in this connection that the distinction between the arts and the 
crafts, between the ‘artist’ and the ‘artisan,’ does not have the importance or 
value generally assumed for them; it took the decay from the profession to the 
mechanical occupation for art to be distinguished and to make it into a higher 
category.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156 
The Veil of Isislly assumed for them; it took the decay from the profession to the 
mechanical occupation for art to be distinguished and to make it into a higher 
category.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

156 
The Veil of Isis

If we go to the other point of view, we can say that the theater is an 
image of the world: one and the other are properly a ‘representation,’ 
because the world itself, existing only as a consequence and expression 
of the Principle of which it depends essentially in all that is, can be re-
garded as symbolizing in its own way the principal order, and this sym-
bolic character confers on it a value superior even to what is within itself 
since this is where it participates in a higher degree of reality.236 In Ara-
bic, the theater is designated by the word tamthīl, which, like all those 
derived from the same root mathl, has the proper meaning of resem-
blance, comparison, image, or figure; and some Muslim theologians use 
the expression alam tamthīl, which could be translated as a ‘figurative 
world,’ to designate everything in the sacred scriptures that is described 
in symbolic terms which should not be taken literally. It is remarkable 
that some apply this expression in particular to angels and demons, who 
effectively ‘represent’ the higher and lower states of being; furthermore, 
we know the considerable role that these angels and demons played in 
the religious theater of the Western Middle Ages. 
Indeed, theater is not necessarily limited to represent the human 
world, which is a single state of manifestation; it can also represent the 
superior and inferior worlds at the same time. In the ‘mysteries’ of the 
Middle Ages the scene was, for this reason, divided into several stages 
corresponding to different worlds, generally distributed according to the 
ternary division: Heaven, Earth, Hell; and the action played simultane-
ously in these different divisions represented the simultaneity of the 
states of being. The moderns, no longer understanding this symbolism, 
have come to regard it as a ‘naïvety,’ which is not to say a dullness, pre-
cisely having the most profound meaning here; and what is astonishing 
is the rapidity with which this misunderstanding, so striking in the writ-
ers of the seventeenth century has appeared; this radical break between 
the Middle Ages and modern times is not one of the least puzzles in his-
tory. 
Since we have just spoken of the ‘mysteries,’ we do not think it is 
useless to point out the singularity of this denomination that has a dual 
meaning: one should, in all etymological rigor, write ‘misteries,’ because 
this word is derived from the Latin ministerium, meaning ‘office’ or 
‘function,’ which clearly indicates to what extent the theatrical represen-
tations of this kind were originally considered as an integral part of the 
celebration of religious holidays. But what is strange is that this name 
has contracted and abbreviated so as to become exactly the namesake ofwere originally considered as an integral part of the 
celebration of religious holidays. But what is strange is that this name 
has contracted and abbreviated so as to become exactly the namesake of

236 The consideration of the world, either as related to the Principle, or only in 
what it is in itself, is what fundamentally differentiates the traditional sciences 
and the secular sciences.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eration of the world, either as related to the Principle, or only in 
what it is in itself, is what fundamentally differentiates the traditional sciences 
and the secular sciences.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
157 
‘mysteries;’ and to finally be confused with this other work of Greek or-
igins with a derivation that is far different; is it only by allusion to the 
‘mysteries’ of religion, staged in the designated rooms that this assimila-
tion may have occurred? This can likely be a plausible reason; on the 
other hand, if one thinks that similar symbolic representations took place 
in the ‘mysteries’ of antiquity, in Greece and probably also in Egypt as 
Mr. Clavelle has noted, one may be tempted to see there something that 
goes much farther, and as an indication of the continuity of a certain 
esoteric and initiatic tradition, affirming itself outside at more or less dis-
tant intervals, by similar manifestations, with the adaptations required 
by the diversity of circumstance of time and place. Moreover, we have 
often had occasion to point out the importance, as a process of symbolic 
language, of phonetic assimilations between philologically distinct 
words; in truth, there is something there which is not arbitrary, whatever 
our contemporaries may think of it, and which is rather directly related 
to the modes of interpretation pertaining to the Hindu nirukta; but the 
secrets of the intimate constitution of language are so completely lost 
today that it is hardly possible to refer to it without everyone imagining 
that it is a question of ‘false etymologies,’ or even vulgar ‘wordplays,’ 
and Plato himself in his Cratylus, does not find favor with the pseudo-
scientific ‘criticism’ of minds limited by modern prejudices. 
To conclude these notes, we will again indicate in the symbolism of 
theater another point of view, that which relates to the dramatic author: 
the different characters, being mental productions of him, can be re-
garded as representing secondary modifications and in a way extensions 
of himself, in much the same way as the subtle forms produced in the 
dream state.237 The same consideration would, naturally, apply to the 
production of every type of imaginative work; but, in the particular case 
of the theater, it is special that this production is realized in a sensible 
way, giving the very image of life as it also takes place in the dream. In 
this respect, the author has a truly ‘demiurgic’ function, since he pro-
duces a world that he draws entirely from himself; and it is in this, the 
very symbol of the Being producing the universal manifestation. In this 
case as well as in that of the dream, the essential unity of the producer 
of the ‘illusory forms’ is not affected by the multiplicity of accidental 
modifications, any more than the unity of the Being is affected by the 
multiplicity of the manifestation. Thus, from whatever point of view one 
finds oneself, one always finds in the theater that character which is its 
profound reason, unknown as it can be for those who are purely profane, 
which forms by its very nature one of the most perfect symbols of uni-
versal manifestation.eater that character which is its 
profound reason, unknown as it can be for those who are purely profane, 
which forms by its very nature one of the most perfect symbols of uni-
versal manifestation.

237 See our recent work on The Multiple States of the Being, ch. 6.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Secret Language of Dante 
and the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ 
Le Langage secret de Dante et des « Fidèles d’Amour », 
March 1932.recent work on The Multiple States of the Being, ch. 6.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Secret Language of Dante 
and the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ 
Le Langage secret de Dante et des « Fidèles d’Amour », 
March 1932.

We have previously devoted an article here (in February 1929) to the im-
portant work published under this same title by Mr. Luigi Valli; last year 
we learned of the sudden and premature death of the author, whose other 
studies we had hoped were no less worthy of interest; then a second vol-
ume came to us bearing the same title as the first and containing within 
it the answers to the objections which were targeted at the thesis, and a 
number of additional notes.238 
Objections, bearing witness to a misunderstanding for which we have 
no reason to be surprised as it easily foreseen, which can be reduced al-
most entirely to two categories: some emanate from ‘literary critics’ im-
bued with all the scholarly and academic prejudices, and others from 
Catholic circles where they do not wish to admit that Dante belonged to 
an initiatic organization; all agree, albeit for different reasons, to deny 
the existence of esoterism, even where it appears with the most manifest 
evidence. The author seems to attach a greater importance to the former, 
which he discusses at much greater lengths than the latter; for ourselves, 
we would have been tempted to do the exact opposite, seeing in the latter 
a much more serious symptom of the distortion of the modern mentality; 
but this difference of perspective is explained by the special point of view 
to which Mr. Valli wishes to place himself in, which is that of a ‘research’ 
and a historian. From this far too exterior point of view results a number 
of gaps and inaccuracies of language which we have already pointed out 
in our previous article; Mr. Valli recognizes, precisely in connection with 
this, that “he has never had contact with initiatic traditions of any kind,” 
and that “his mental training is clearly critical;” it is all the more remark-
able then that he has arrived at conclusions so far removed from those of 
ordinary ‘criticisms,’ which is rather astonishing on the part of someone 
who affirms his wish to be ‘a man of the twentieth century.’ It is nonearrived at conclusions so far removed from those of 
ordinary ‘criticisms,’ which is rather astonishing on the part of someone 
who affirms his wish to be ‘a man of the twentieth century.’ It is none

238 Il Linguaggio segreto di Dante e dei « Fedeli d’Amore », vol. II (Discussion e note 
aggiunte); Bibliotecha di Filosofia e Scienza, Rome: Casa editrice ‘Optima.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
159 
the less regrettable that he refuses to be biased in comprehending the 
notion of traditional orthodoxy, that he persists in applying the unfortu-
nate term ‘sects’ to initiatic and non-religious organizations, and that he 
denies having confused the ‘mystic’ and the ‘initiate,’ when he precisely 
repeats this again throughout this second volume; but these faults must 
not prevent us from recognizing the great merit of this ‘layman,’ of 
which he wishes to be and to remain, who has seen a good part of the 
truth in spite of all the obstacles that his education naturally brings with 
it, and to have said it without fear of the contradictions which would be 
attracted by those who have some interest in all this being disregarded.

We will note only two or three typical examples from the misunder-
standings of the academic ‘critics:’ some have even claimed that poetry 
which is beautiful cannot be symbolic; it seems to them that a work of 
art can only be admired if it means nothing, and that the existence of a 
profound meaning destroys its artistic value!

This is clearly expressed as 
clearly as possible, this ‘profane’ conception which we have recently 
pointed out on several occasions, with regards to art in general, and po-
etry in particular, as a completely modern degeneration and as contrary 
to the character that the arts, as well as the sciences, originally possessed 
and they always had in any traditional civilization.

Note in this concep-
tion a rather interesting formula quoted by Mr.

Valli: in all medieval art, 
as opposed to modern art, “it is about the incarnation of an idea, and not 
of the idealization of a reality;” we would say a reality of a sensory order, 
because the idea is also a reality, and even of a higher degree; this ‘incar-
nation of the idea’ in a form is nothing else than the same symbolism.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Note in this concep-
tion a rather interesting formula quoted by Mr. Valli: in all medieval art, 
as opposed to modern art, “it is about the incarnation of an idea, and not 
of the idealization of a reality;” we would say a reality of a sensory order, 
because the idea is also a reality, and even of a higher degree; this ‘incar-
nation of the idea’ in a form is nothing else than the same symbolism. Others have made a really comical objection: it would be ‘wretched,’ 
they claim, to write in ‘jargon,’ which is to say in conventional language; 
they obviously see in this a kind of cowardice and concealment. As a 
matter of fact, Mr. Valli himself insisted, perhaps a bit too exclusively, 
and as we have already noted, on the desire of the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ to 
hide for reasons of prudence; it is indisputable that this actually existed, 
and it was a necessity imposed on them by circumstance; but this is only 
the slightest and most external reason for their usage of a language that 
was not only conventional but also, and above all, symbolic. Similar ex-
amples would be found in other circumstances, where there would have 
been no danger in speaking clearly if this had been possible; it can be 
said that, even then, there was an advantage in excluding those who were 
not ‘qualified,’ which is already a concern other than a simple prudence; 
but what must be said above all is that truths of a certain order, by their 
very nature, can only express themselves symbolically. Finally, there are some who have found the existence of a symbolic 
poetry unlikely in the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ because it would constitute a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

160 
The Veil of Isiselves symbolically. Finally, there are some who have found the existence of a symbolic 
poetry unlikely in the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ because it would constitute a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

160 
The Veil of Isis

‘unique case,’ whereas Mr. Valli had endeavored to show precisely that 
the same had existed in the Orient at the same time, especially in Persian 
poetry. One may even add that this symbolism of love has sometimes 
also been used in India; and to stick to the Muslim world, it is rather odd 
that one always speaks almost exclusively in this respect of Persian po-
etry, whereas one can easily find similar examples in Arabic poetry, of a 
character which is no less esoteric, for example in ʻUmar ibn Al-Fāriḍ. Let 
us add that many other ‘veils’ have been also used in the poetic expres-
sions of Ṣūfism, including that of skepticism, examples of which are 
ʻUmar al-Khayyām and Abū al-ʾAlāʿ al-Maʾarrī; especially for the latter, 
very few know that he was in fact a high-ranking initiate; and, as we 
have not seen it said elsewhere so far, it is particularly curious for the 
subject before us that his Risālat al-Ghufrān could be regarded as one of 
the principal Islamic ‘sources’ of the Divine Comedy. 
As for the obligation imposed on all members of an initiatic organi-
zation to write in verse, it was perfectly in keeping with the character of 
the ‘sacred language’ of poetry; as Mr. Valli quite rightly states, it was 
far more than “to make literature,” a goal that Dante and his contempo-
raries never had, which, he adds ironically, “were wrong in not having 
read the books of modern criticism. Even in very recent times, in certain 
esoteric Muslim fraternities, each year on the occasion of the Shaykh’s 
mawlīd, each have to present a composed poem in which he strove, even 
at the expense of the perfection of form, to enclose a more or less pro-
found doctrinal meaning. 
With regards to the new notes made by Mr. Valli and which pave the 
way for further research, one of them relates to the links between Joa-
chim de Fiore with the ‘Fedeli d’Amore:’ Fiore is one of the most common 
symbols in poetry of this type, synonymous with Rosa; and, under this 
title Fiore, an Italian adaptation of the Roman de la Rose was written by a 
Florentine named Durante, who is almost certainly Dante himself.239 Fur-
thermore, the name of the convent of San Giovanni di Fiore, from which 
Gioacchino di Fiore took his name, does not appear anywhere before him; 
is it he who gave himself this, and why has he chosen this name? Re-
markably, Joachim de Fiore speaks in his works of a symbolic ‘widow,’ 
just as Francesco da Barberino and Giovanni Boccaccio did, both of 
which belonged to the ‘Fedeli d’Amore;’ and we will add that, even today, 
this ‘widow’ is well known in Masonic symbolism. In this regard, it is 
unfortunate that political concerns seem to have prevented Mr. Valli 
from making some very striking comparisons; no doubt, he is right to say 
that the initiatic organizations in question are not Masonic, but between 
them the link is unquestionable; is it not curious, for example, that thestriking comparisons; no doubt, he is right to say 
that the initiatic organizations in question are not Masonic, but between 
them the link is unquestionable; is it not curious, for example, that the

239 Dante is indeed a contradiction of Durante, which was his real name.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
161 
‘wind’ has exactly the same significance in the language of the ‘Fedeli 
d’Amore’ as ‘rain’ in that of Masonry?

Another important point is that concerning the relationship of the 
‘Fedeli d’Amore’ with the alchemists: a particularly significant symbol in 
this respect can be found in Francesco de Barberni’s Documenti d’Amore.

It is a figure in which twelve characters arrange symmetrically and 
which form six couples representing so many initiatic degrees, leads to a 
single character placed in the center; the latter, which carries in its hands 
the symbolic rose, has two heads, one male and the other female, and is 
obviously identical to the Hermetic Rebis.

The only notable difference 
with the figures that are found in the alchemical treatises is that it is the 
right side that is male and the left side is female, whereas here we find 
the opposite disposition; this peculiarity seems to have escaped Mr.

Valli, 
who nevertheless gives the explanation himself, without seeming to no-
tice it, when he says that “the man with his passive intellect is united 
with active intelligence, represented by the woman,” whereas generally 
it is the masculine that symbolizes the active element and the feminine 
the passive element.

What is most remarkable is that this kind of reversal 
of the ordinary relation is also found in the symbolism employed by 
Hindu Tantrism; and the link is even stronger when we see Cecco d’As-
coli say “onde io son ella,” exactly like the Shaktas, instead of saying 
So’ham, ‘I am He,’ (the Ana Huwa of Islamic esoterism), say Sa’ham, ‘I 
am She.’ Furthermore, Mr.Valli, 
who nevertheless gives the explanation himself, without seeming to no-
tice it, when he says that “the man with his passive intellect is united 
with active intelligence, represented by the woman,” whereas generally 
it is the masculine that symbolizes the active element and the feminine 
the passive element.

What is most remarkable is that this kind of reversal 
of the ordinary relation is also found in the symbolism employed by 
Hindu Tantrism; and the link is even stronger when we see Cecco d’As-
coli say “onde io son ella,” exactly like the Shaktas, instead of saying 
So’ham, ‘I am He,’ (the Ana Huwa of Islamic esoterism), say Sa’ham, ‘I 
am She.’ Furthermore, Mr.

Valli notes that, next to the Rebis figured in 
the Rosarium Philosophorum, we a kind of tree bearing six pairs of faces 
arrange symmetrically on each side of the steam and a single face at the 
top, which he identifies with the characters of the figure of Francesco da 
Barberino; it seems to effectively be in both cases an initiatic hierarchy 
and seven degrees, the last degree being essentially characterized by the 
reconstitution of the Hermetic Androgyne, which is to say, on the whole 
as the restoration of the ‘primordial state;’ and this is consistent with 
what we have had the opportunity to say here about the meaning of the 
‘Rose-Cross’ as designating the perfection of the human state.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What is most remarkable is that this kind of reversal 
of the ordinary relation is also found in the symbolism employed by 
Hindu Tantrism; and the link is even stronger when we see Cecco d’As-
coli say “onde io son ella,” exactly like the Shaktas, instead of saying 
So’ham, ‘I am He,’ (the Ana Huwa of Islamic esoterism), say Sa’ham, ‘I 
am She.’ Furthermore, Mr. Valli notes that, next to the Rebis figured in 
the Rosarium Philosophorum, we a kind of tree bearing six pairs of faces 
arrange symmetrically on each side of the steam and a single face at the 
top, which he identifies with the characters of the figure of Francesco da 
Barberino; it seems to effectively be in both cases an initiatic hierarchy 
and seven degrees, the last degree being essentially characterized by the 
reconstitution of the Hermetic Androgyne, which is to say, on the whole 
as the restoration of the ‘primordial state;’ and this is consistent with 
what we have had the opportunity to say here about the meaning of the 
‘Rose-Cross’ as designating the perfection of the human state. On the 
subject of the seven degree initiation, we have spoken in our study on 
The Esoterism of Dante of the seven-step ladder; it is true that these, gen-
erally, are put in correspondence with the seven planetary heavens, 
which refers to superhuman states; but, by reason of analogy, there must 
be in the same initiatic system a similarity of hierarchical distribution 
between the ‘lesser mysteries’ and the ‘greater mysteries.’ Moreover, the 
being reintegrated into the center of the human state is thereby ready to 
rise to the higher states, and he already dominates the conditions of ex-
istence in this world of which he has become master; this is why the Rebis 
of the Rosarium Philosophorum has under its feet the moon, and that of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

162 
The Veil of Isisons of ex-
istence in this world of which he has become master; this is why the Rebis 
of the Rosarium Philosophorum has under its feet the moon, and that of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

162 
The Veil of Isis

Basil Valentine the dragon; this meaning has been completely misunder-
stood by Mr. Valli, who has seen it only as symbols of a corrupt doctrine 
or ‘the error that oppresses the world,’ whereas, in reality, the moon rep-
resents the domain of forms (the symbolism is the same as that of the 
‘walk on the waters’), and the dragon here is the figure of the elementary 
world. 
Mr. Valli, while having no doubts about Dante’s relationship with the 
Templars of which there is many indications, raises a discussion about 
the medal in the Vienna Museum, which we discussed in The Esoterism 
of Dante; when he wished to see this medal, he found that the two faces 
had been united later and had belonged first to two different medals; 
moreover, he recognizes that this strange operation did not have to be 
done without some reason. As for the initials F. S. K. I. P. F. T., which 
appears on the reverse, they are for him the seven virtues: Fides, Spes, 
Karitas, Justitia, Prudentia, Fortitudo, Temperantia, although there is an 
anomaly in the fact that they are arranged in two lines of four and three 
instead of being three and four as it would be the distinction of the three 
theological virtues and the four cardinal virtues; as they are joined with 
laurel and olive branches, “which are properly the two sacred plants of 
the initiates,” he admits that this interpretation does not necessarily ex-
clude the existence of another more hidden meaning; and we will add 
that the anomalous spelling of Karitas, rather than Charitas, could have 
been necessitated precisely by this dual meaning. Besides, we have also 
pointed out in the same study the initiatic role given to the three theo-
logical virtues, which has been preserved in the eighteenth degree of 
Scottish Masonry;240 in addition, the septenary of virtues is formed of an 
upper ternary and a lower quaternary, which indicates sufficiently that 
it is constituted according to esoteric principles; and finally it can, just as 
the ‘liberal arts’ (divided into a trivium and quadrivium too), correspond-
ing to the seven echelons to which we alluded a moment ago, especially 
since ‘Faith’ (the Fede Santa) is still at the peak of the ‘mysterious ladder’ 
of the Kadosch; therefore all of this forms a much more coherent whole 
than superficial observers can believe. 
On the other hand, Mr. Valli discovered Dante’s original medal at the 
same Vienna Museum, and the reverse of it presents an even stranger 
and enigmatic figure: a heart placed in the center of a system of circles 
that has the appearance of a celestial sphere, which may not be one inseum, and the reverse of it presents an even stranger 
and enigmatic figure: a heart placed in the center of a system of circles 
that has the appearance of a celestial sphere, which may not be one in

240 In the seventeenth degree, that of the ‘Knight of East and West,’ one also 
finds a watchword formed of seven initials, which are those of a septenary of 
divine attributes whose enumeration is drawn from a passage in the Apocalypse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t and West,’ one also 
finds a watchword formed of seven initials, which are those of a septenary of 
divine attributes whose enumeration is drawn from a passage in the Apocalypse.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
163 
reality, and which is not accompanied with any inscription.241 There are 
three meridian circles and four parallel circles, which Mr. Valli relates 
again respectively to the three theological virtues and to the four cardinal 
virtues; which would lead us to believe that this interpretation must be 
cored, it is above all the accuracy of the application which is made, in 
this arrangement, to the vertical meaning and the horizontal meaning to 
the relations of the contemplative life and the active life, or of the spir-
itual authority and the temporal power governing one and the other, to 
which these two groups of virtues correspond, that an oblique circle, 
completing the figure (and forming with the others the number 8, which 
is that of equilibrium), connects in perfect harmony under the radiation 
of the ‘doctrine of love.’242 
One last note concerning the secret name that the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ 
gave to God: in Francesco da Barbernio’s Tractatus Amoris, represented 
himself in an attitude of adoration before the letter I, and in the Divine 
Comed Adam says that the first name of God was I,243 the next being El. 
This letter I, which Dante calls the ‘ninth figure’ according to its rank in 
the Latin alphabet (and we know what symbolic importance the number 
9 had for him), is obviously none other than the yod, although this is the 
tenth letter in the Hebrew alphabet; and the yod, besides being repre-
sented by the first letter of the Tetragrammaton, constitutes a divine 
name by itself, either isolated or repeated thrice.244 It is the same yod 
which, in Masonry, became the letter G, by assimilation with God (be-
cause it was in England that this assimilation took place); this being with-
out prejudice against the other multiple meanings which came second-
arily in this same letter G, and which is not our intention to examine 
here. 
It is to be hoped, while saddened by the demise of Mr. Luigi Valli, that 
he finds successors in this field of research, which is as vast as it is so far 
explored; and it seems that this must be so, since he himself informs usddened by the demise of Mr. Luigi Valli, that 
he finds successors in this field of research, which is as vast as it is so far 
explored; and it seems that this must be so, since he himself informs us

241 This heart thus placed reminds us of the figure, no less remarkable and mys-
terious, of the heart of Saint-Denis d’Orques, represented in the center of the 
planetary and zodiacal circles, a figure that was studied by Mr. Charbonneau-
Lassay in the journal Regnabit. 
242 In this connection we may refer to what we have said concerning Dante’s 
treatise De Monarchia in Spiritual Authority and Temporal Power. 
243 Paradiso, XXVI, 133. 
244 Is it by a simple coincidence that the heart of Saint-Denis d’Orques, of which 
we have just spoken, bears a wound (or what appears to be a wound) in the form 
of yod? And would there not be some reason to suppose that the old figurations 
of the ‘Sacred Heart’ prior to its ‘official’ adoption by the Church, may have had 
certain links with the doctrine of the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ or of their successors?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

164 
The Veil of Isis‘Sacred Heart’ prior to its ‘official’ adoption by the Church, may have had 
certain links with the doctrine of the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ or of their successors?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

164 
The Veil of Isis

that he has already been followed by Mr. Gaetanu Scarlata, who has de-
voted a work245 to the special study of the treatise De vulgari eloquentia 
by Dante, a book also “full of mysteries,” as Rossetti and Aroux had 
clearly seen, and while it seems to speak simply on the Italian idiom, it 
relates in reality to the secret language, following a process also used in 
Islamic esoterism where, as we have pointed out on another occasion, an 
initiatic work can assume the appearance of a simple treatise on gram-
mar. Many other discoveries will likely be made in this same order of 
ideas; and even if those who devote themselves to this only personally 
bring a ‘profane’ mentality (on the condition that it is impartial) and see 
there only the object of a sort of historical curiosity the results obtained 
will not be less apt in themselves, and for those who will know to under-
stand their full significance, to contribute effectively to a restoration of 
the traditional spirit: are these works, unconscious and involuntary as 
they are, attached to the ‘search for the Lost Word,’ which is the same as 
the ‘Quest for the Grail?’

245 L’origine della letteratura italiana nel pensiero di Dante.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hermes 
Hermès, April 1932.ed to the ‘search for the Lost Word,’ which is the same as 
the ‘Quest for the Grail?’

245 L’origine della letteratura italiana nel pensiero di Dante.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Hermes 
Hermès, April 1932.

In speaking here of the Hermetic tradition (April 1931 issue), we have 
said that it properly refers to a knowledge which is not metaphysical, but 
only cosmological, by seeing in it the dual application of the ‘macrocos-
mic’ and the ‘microcosmic.’ This affirmation has not had the good for-
tune in pleasing some, despite it being an expression of the strict truth, 
and they see Hermetism through their own fantasy which would like to 
make everything fit indistinctly; it is true that they do know know what 
pure metaphysics can be… Be that as it may, it must be understood that 
we have not intended to deprecate the traditional sciences which fall 
within the domain of Hermetism, nor those which correspond to them 
in other doctrinal traditional forms of the Orient or of the Occident; but 
it is necessary to know how each thing falls in place and these sciences, 
like all specialized knowledge, are secondary and derived from the prin-
ciples, of which they are only the applications to a lower order of reality. 
Only those wish to attribute to the ‘Royal Art’ the pre-eminence over the 
‘Sacerdotal Art’ can claim the opposite;246 perhaps it is precisely here, at 
its essence, the more or less conscious reason for these protests which 
we have just alluded to. 
Without concerning ourself with what everyone thinks or says, be-
cause it is not our wont to take into account those individual opinions 
which do not exist in the light of tradition, it does not seem useless to us 
to make some new clarifications concerning what has already been said, 
and this refers particularly with what concerns Hermes, since at the least 
no one can deny that it is from this that Hermetism has its name.247 Therifications concerning what has already been said, 
and this refers particularly with what concerns Hermes, since at the least 
no one can deny that it is from this that Hermetism has its name.247 The

246 We have contemplated this question in Spiritual Authority and Temporal 
Power. – Regarding the expression, ‘Royal Art’ which has been preserved in Ma-
sonry, we can note here the curious resemblance that exists between the names 
Hermes and Hiram; of course, this does not mean that these two names have a 
common linguistic origin, but their constitution is none the less identical, and 
the ensemble H R M of which they are both essentially formed could still give 
rise to other rapprochments. 
247 We must maintain that Hermetism is of a Hellenic-Egyptian origin, and that 
it cannot be abused to extend this denomination to that which, under a variety 
of forms, correspond in other traditions, no more than, for example, we would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

166 
The Veil of Isisit cannot be abused to extend this denomination to that which, under a variety 
of forms, correspond in other traditions, no more than, for example, we would

--- PAGE BREAK ---

166 
The Veil of Isis

Greek Hermes does indeed have characters which correspond exactly to 
what is in question, and which is expressed particularly by his principal 
attribute, the caduceus, which we have no doubt we will examine the 
symbolism more completely on another occasion; for the moment, it will 
suffice to say that this symbolism relates essentially and directly to what 
may be called ‘human alchemy,’248 which concerns the possibilities of the 
subtle state, even if these should only be taken as the preparatory means 
of a higher realization, as in the Hindu tradition, the equivalent practices 
come under Hatha-Yoga. We can also transfer this to the cosmic order, 
since all that is in man has his correspondence in the world and inversely 
so;249 here again, because of this very correspondence, it will properly be 
the ‘intermediate world,’ where forces are implemented whose dual na-
ture is clearly represented by the two serpents of the caduceus. We will 
also recall in this respect, that Hermes is represented as the messenger 
of the Gods and as their interpreter (hermeneutes), a role which is indeed 
that of an intermediary between the celestial and terrestrial worlds, and 
that he also has the function of a ‘psychopomp,’ which in a lower order, 
obviously also relates to the realm of subtle possibilities.250 
Perhaps one may object when it relates to Hermetism, that Hermes 
takes the place here of the Egyptian Thoth which he has been identified 
with, and that Thoth properly represents Wisdom, relating to the priest-
hood as a conservator and transmitter of tradition; this is true, but sinceof the Egyptian Thoth which he has been identified 
with, and that Thoth properly represents Wisdom, relating to the priest-
hood as a conservator and transmitter of tradition; this is true, but since

call ‘Kabbalah’ a doctrine that is not specifically Hebrew. Without a doubt, if we 
write in Hebrew we would say qabbalah refers to tradition in general, just as 
writing in Arabic, we would call taṣawwuf initiation in any form whatsoever: 
but, transported into another language, the Hebrew, Arabic, etc., words must be 
reserved for the traditional forms whose languages of origin are their respective 
expressions, whatever the comparisons or even the assimilations to which they 
may give rise legitimately; and we must in no way confuse a certain order of 
knowledge considered within itself with this or that special form, of which it 
has been clothed in certain historical circumstances. 
248 See Man and his Becoming according to the Vedanta, ch. 21. 
249 As it is said in the Rasāʿīl Ikhwān as-Ṣafā, “the world is a great man, and the 
man is a small world” (al-ālam insān kabīr, waʾl-insān ālam ṣaghīr). – It is also 
by virtue of this correspondance that a certain achievement in the ‘microcosmic’ 
order may result, as an accidental consequence for the being who has attained 
it, an external realization relating to the ‘macrocosmic’ order, without the latter 
having been specifically researched for its own sake, as we have indicated in 
connection with certain cases of metallic transmutation in our previous article 
on The Hermetic Tradition. 
250 These two functions of the messenger of the Gods and ‘psychopomp’ could, 
astrologically, be related respectively to a diurnal aspect and a nocturnal aspect; 
furthermore, one can also find there the correspondence of the two descending 
and ascending currents which symbolize the two serpents of the caduceus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ect and a nocturnal aspect; 
furthermore, one can also find there the correspondence of the two descending 
and ascending currents which symbolize the two serpents of the caduceus.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
167 
this assimilation cannot be made without reason it must be admitted that 
in this we must consider more specifically a certain aspect of Thoth, cor-
responding to a certain part of the tradition, which includes knowledge 
relating to the ‘intermediary world;’ in fact, all that can be known of the 
ancient Egyptian civilization, according to the vestiges of what it left, 
shows precisely that knowledge of this order was much more developed 
and had taken on an importance which is more significant than any-
where else. For the rest, there is another link, we may even say an equiv-
alence, which shows that this objection would be without real signifi-
cance: in India, the planet Mercury (or Hermes) is called Budha, whose 
real root properly means Wisdom; here again it is enough to determine 
the order in which this Wisdom, which in its essence is indeed the in-
spiring principle of all knowledge, must find its more particular applica-
tion when relating to this specialized function.251 
Regarding this name Budha, it is a curious fact to note that it is iden-
tical to the Scandinavian Odin, Woden, or Wotan;252 so it is not arbitrary 
that the Romans assimilated him to their Mercury, and anyway, in the 
Germanic languages Wednesday, or the day of Mercury, is currently 
stilled designated as the day of Odin. Perhaps what is even more remark-
able is that this same name if found exactly as the votan of the ancient 
Central American traditions, which also has the attributes of Hermes in 
Quetzalcohuatl, the ‘Bird-Snake,’ and the union of these two symbolic 
animals (corresponding respectively to the elements of air and fire) is 
also represented as the wings and serpents of the caduceus.253 You wouldthe ‘Bird-Snake,’ and the union of these two symbolic 
animals (corresponding respectively to the elements of air and fire) is 
also represented as the wings and serpents of the caduceus.253 You would

251 The name Budha should not be confused with the name Buddha, the desig-
nation for Shakyamuni, although both obviously have the same radical meaning, 
and moreover certain attributes of the planetary Budha have been later trans-
ferred to the historical Buddha, the latter being represented as having been ‘il-
luminated’ by the irradiation of this star, which he would have absorbed the 
essence within himself. – Note in this connection that the mother of Buddha is 
called Mayadevi and among the Greeks and Latins, Maia was also the mother of 
Hermes or Mercury. 
252 We know that the change from b to v or w is an extremely common linguistic 
phenomenon. 
253 Regarding this subject see our article on The Language of Birds (November 
1931 issue), where we have pointed out that the snake is opposed or associated 
with the bird according to whether it is considered in its maleficent or beneficial 
aspect. We will add that a figure such as the eagle holding a snake in its claw 
(which is found precisely in Mexico) does not exclusively evoke the idea of an-
tagonism represented in the Hindu tradition, as the fight of Garuda against 
Naga; it occurs, especially in heraldic symbolism, that the snake is replaced by 
the sword (substituted particularly when it has the shape of the flaming sword, 
which is linked to the thunderbolts held by the eagle of Jupiter), and the sword,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168 
The Veil of Isisword (substituted particularly when it has the shape of the flaming sword, 
which is linked to the thunderbolts held by the eagle of Jupiter), and the sword,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

168 
The Veil of Isis

have to be blind to not see, in facts of this type, a mark of the innate unity 
of all traditional doctrines; unfortunately, such a blindness is all too com-
mon in our times when those who really know how to read the symbols 
are no more than a disabled minority, and where, on the other hand, 
there are too many ‘laymen’ who believe themselves qualified to inter-
pret ‘sacred science,’ which they accommodate according to their more 
or less disordered imagination. 
Another point that is not less interesting: in the Islamic tradition, Say-
yidūnā ʾIdrīs is identified in both Hermes and Enoch; this dual assimila-
tion seems to indicate a continuity of tradition that goes beyond the 
Egyptian priesthood, the latter having only been an inheritance of what 
Enoch represents, which clearly is related to an earlier period.254 At the 
same time, the sciences attributed to ʾIdrīs and placed under his special 
influence are not purely the spiritual sciences, which are linked to Say-
yidūnā ʿĪsā, which is to say Christ; these are the sciences that can be de-
scribed as ‘intermediary,’ among which are, primarily, alchemy and as-
trology; and these are indeed the sciences which can be said to be 
properly ‘Hermetic.’ But here is another consideration which could, at 
first sight at least, be regarded as a rather strange reversal compared to 
the usual correspondences: among the first prophets, there is one, as we 
shall see in a future study, which presides over each of the seven plane-
tary heavens, of which he is the ‘Pole’ (Al-Quṭb); it is not Sayyidūnā ʾIdrīs 
who presides over the sky of Mercury, but Sayyidūnā ʿĪsā, and Sayyidūnā 
ʾIdrīs presides over the sky of the Sun; naturally, this entails the same 
transposition in the astrological correspondences of the sciences which 
are respectively attributed to them. This raises a very complex question, 
which we cannot claim to deal with entirely here; it may be that we have 
the opportunity to return to this, but for the moment we will limit our-
selves to a few remarks which will perhaps make it possible to foreseelaim to deal with entirely here; it may be that we have 
the opportunity to return to this, but for the moment we will limit our-
selves to a few remarks which will perhaps make it possible to foresee

in its highest meaning, represents Wisdom and the power of the Word (for ex-
ample, see Revelations, I, 16). – It should be noted that one of the main symbols 
of the Egyptian Thoth was the Ibis, the destroyer of reptiles, and as such became 
a symbol of Christ; but, in the caduceus of Hermes, we have the snake under its 
two opposing aspects, as in the figure of the ‘amphisbene’ of the Middle Ages 
(see The King of the World, ch. 3). 
254 Should we not conclude from this same assimilation that the Book of Enoch, 
or at least what is known under this title, must be considered as an integral part 
of the set of ‘Hermetic books?’ – Furthermore, some also say that the prophet 
Idris is the same as Buddha; what has been indicated above sufficiently shows 
in what sense this assertion, which is in fact related to Budha, the Hindu equiv-
alent of Hermes, must be understood. It cannot here be the historical Buddha, 
whose death is a known event, while Idris is expressly said to have been trans-
ported alive to Heaven, which corresponds well to the Biblical Enoch.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere be the historical Buddha, 
whose death is a known event, while Idris is expressly said to have been trans-
ported alive to Heaven, which corresponds well to the Biblical Enoch.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
169 
the solution, and which, in any case, will at least show that there is some-
thing more than a mere confusion, and what would risk being regarded 
as such in the eyes of the superficial and ‘external’ observer is in reality 
based on very profound reasons.  
First, this is not an isolated case in the ensemble of traditional doc-
trines, because something quite similar can be found in Hebrew angelol-
ogy: generally, Michael is the angel of the Sun and Raphael is the angel 
of Mercury, but sometimes these roles are reversed. Furthermore, if Mi-
chael, representing the solar Metatron, is esoterically assimilated to 
Christ,255 Raphael is, according to the nature of his name, the ‘divine 
healer,’ and Christ also appears as the ‘spiritual healer’ and as the ‘spir-
itual revivifier;’ moreover, one can find other relations between Christ 
and the principle represented by Mercury among the planetary 
spheres.256 It is true that among the Greeks medicine was attributed to 
Apollo, which is the solar principle, and to his son Asclepius (of which 
the Latins made Aesculapius); but in the ‘Hermetic books,’ Asclepius be-
comes the son of Hermes, and it is also to be remarked that the staff 
which is his attribute has a close symbolic relationship with the cadu-
ceus.257 Cet exemple de la médecine permet d’ailleurs de comprendre 
comment une même science peut avoir des aspects qui se rapportent en 
réalité à des ordres différents, d’où des correspondances également dif-
férentes, même si les effets extérieurs qui en sont obtenus sont apparem-
ment semblables, car il y a la médecine purement spirituelle ou « théur-
gique », et il y a aussi la médecine hermétique ou « spagyrique »; ceci est 
en relation directe avec la question que nous envisageons présentement; 
et peut-être expliquerons-nous quelque jour pourquoi la médecine, au 
point de vue traditionnel, était considérée essentiellement comme une 
science sacerdotale.on que nous envisageons présentement; 
et peut-être expliquerons-nous quelque jour pourquoi la médecine, au 
point de vue traditionnel, était considérée essentiellement comme une 
science sacerdotale.

255 See The King of the World, ch. 3. 
256 Perhaps here we must see the origin of the misunderstanding that some com-
mit by considering Buddha as the ninth avatara of Vishnu; it would actually be 
a manifestation related to the principle designated as the planetary Budha; in 
this case, the solar Christ would properly be the Glorious Christ, which is to say 
the tenth avatara, the one who must come at the end of the cycle. – We will 
recall, as a curiosity, that the month of May takes its name from Maia, the 
mother of Mercury (who is said to be one of the Pleiades), to which it was for-
merly devoted; but in Christianity, it has become the ‘month of Mary,’ by an 
assimilation which is likely not purely phonetic, between Maria and Maia. 
257 Around the rod of Aesculapius is wound a single snake, the one that repre-
sents the beneficial force, because the maleficent force must disappear because 
he is the spirit of medicine. – Note also the report of this same staff of Aescula-
pius as a sign of healing, with the Biblical symbol of the ‘serpent of brass’ (see 
our article on Sheth, in the October 1931 issue).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

170 
The Veil of Isissame staff of Aescula-
pius as a sign of healing, with the Biblical symbol of the ‘serpent of brass’ (see 
our article on Sheth, in the October 1931 issue).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

170 
The Veil of Isis

On the other hand, there is almost always a close connection between 
Enoch (Sayyidūnā ʾIdrīs) and Elijah (Sayyidūnā Dhū al-Kifl), both taken 
to heaven without passing through the corporeal death,258 and the Is-
lamic tradition places them both in the solar sphere. In teh same manner, 
following the Rosicrucian tradition, Elias Artista, who presides over the 
Hermetic ‘Great Work,’259 resting in the ‘Solar Citadel,’ which is also 
properly the residence of the ‘Immortals’ (in the sense of the Chirajivis 
of the Hindu tradition, which is to say, being ‘endowing with longevity,’ 
or whose life perpetuates throughout the cycle),260 and represents one of 
the aspects of the ‘Center of the World.’ All this is undoubtedly worth of 
reflection, and if we add to this the traditions which symbolically equate 
the Sun itself with the fruit of the ‘Tree of Life,’261 we can understand 
that the special relationship that exists between solar influence and Her-
metism, for the latter, as the ‘lesser mysteries’ of antiquity, has for its 
essential aim is the restoration of the human ‘primordial state:’ is it not 
the ‘Solar Citadel’ of the Rose-Cross that must ‘descend from Heaven to 
Earth’ at the ending of the cycle, in the form of the ‘Celestial Jerusalem,’ 
realizing the ‘quadrature of the circle’ according to the perfect measure 
of the ‘golden reed?’‘descend from Heaven to 
Earth’ at the ending of the cycle, in the form of the ‘Celestial Jerusalem,’ 
realizing the ‘quadrature of the circle’ according to the perfect measure 
of the ‘golden reed?’

258 It is said that they must manifest themselves again on the Earth at the end of 
the cycle: these are the two ‘witnesses’ spoken of in ch. 11 of Revelations. 
259 He embodies in a way the nature of the ‘philosophic fire,’ and it is known 
that according to the Biblical account, the prophet Elijah was taken to heaven 
on a ‘chariot of fire;’ this refers to the igneous vehicle (taijasa in the Hindu doc-
trine) which, in the human being, corresponds to the subtle state (see Man and 
His Becoming according to the Vedanta, ch. 14). 
260 See Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta, ch. 1 – Also recall, from 
the alchemic point of view, the correspondence of the Sun with gold, designated 
by the Hindu tradition as the ‘mineral light;’ the ‘potable gold’ of the Hermetists 
is the same as the ‘drink of immortality,’ which is also called ‘gold liquor’ in 
Taoism. 
261 See The Symbolism of the Cross, ch. 9.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chirology in Islamic Esoterism 
La chirologie dans l’ésotérisme islamique, May 1932.y,’ which is also called ‘gold liquor’ in 
Taoism. 
261 See The Symbolism of the Cross, ch. 9.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Chirology in Islamic Esoterism 
La chirologie dans l’ésotérisme islamique, May 1932.

We have often had occasion to point out how the conception of ‘tradi-
tional sciences’ has become entirely foreign to Westerners in modern 
times and how difficult it is for them to understand its true nature. Re-
cently, we have found an example of this incomprehension in a study 
devoted to Muḥyiddīn ibn ʿArabī, whose author was astonished to find 
therein, besides purely spiritual doctrine, many considerations on astrol-
ogy, on the science of letters and numbers, on symbolic geometry, and 
on many other such things of the same order, which he seemed to regard 
as unrelated to this doctrine. Moreover, there was a double misunder-
standing, for the properly spiritual portion of Muḥyiddīn’s teaching was 
itself presented as being ‘mystical,’ whereas it is essentially metaphysical 
and initiatic; if it were ‘mystic,’ it could not have any relation to any 
sciences whatsoever. On the contrary, since it is a question of metaphys-
ical doctrine, these traditional sciences whose very value the author to-
tally fails to comprehend, as is ordinary with the modern prejudice, nor-
mally derive from its application just as the consequences derive from 
the principle, and, as such, is far from representing elements that are in 
a sense adventitious and heterogeneous, they are an integral part of at-
taṣawwuf, which is to say of all initiatic knowledge. 
Of these traditional sciences, most are now completely lost to West-
erners, and what they know of others is only a more or less shapeless 
debris, often degenerated to the point of taking the character of empirical 
recipes or simple ‘divinatory arts,’ which is obviously lacking any doc-
trinal value. To express clearly by example how such a way of looking at 
these is so detached from reality, we will give some indications of what, 
in Islamic esoterism, is chirology (ʾilm al-kaf), which constitutes only one 
of the many branches of what we can call, for lack of a better term, ‘phys-
iognomy,’ although this word does not give the full extant of the Arabic 
term which designates the entirety of this knowledge (ʾilm al-firāsah). 
Chirology, as strange as it may seem for those who have no idea of 
such things, is directly related in its Islamic form to the science of divine 
names: the arrangement of the main lines traced on the left hand form 
the number 81, and in the right hand the number 18, i.e. in total 99, the 
number of attributive names (ṣifātīyyah). As for the name Allah itself, itnt of the main lines traced on the left hand form 
the number 81, and in the right hand the number 18, i.e. in total 99, the 
number of attributive names (ṣifātīyyah). As for the name Allah itself, it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

172 
The Veil of Isisd form 
the number 81, and in the right hand the number 18, i.e. in total 99, the 
number of attributive names (ṣifātīyyah). As for the name Allah itself, it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

172 
The Veil of Isis

is formed by the finger, as follows: the little finger corresponds to the 
alif, the ring finger to the first lam, the middle finger and index to the 
second lam, which is double, and the thumb to the he (which, regularly, 
must be drawn in its ‘open’ form); this is the primary reason for the usage 
of the hand as a symbol which is so widespread in all Islamic countries 
(a secondary reason referring to the number 5, hence the name khums 
sometimes given to this symbolic hand). By this we can understand the 
meaning of the words of Ṣifr Sayyidūnā Ayyūb (Book of Job, 37, 7): “He 
has placed a seal (khātim) in the hands of every man, that all may know 
of His work;” and we will add that this is related to the essential role of 
the hand in the rites of blessing and consecration. 
Furthermore, the correspondance of the various parts of the hand 
with the planets (kawākib), which is generally known to have been pre-
served in Western chiromancy but in such a way that it is scarcely pos-
sible to see anything other than conventional designations, while in re-
ality this correspondence establishes an effective link between chirology 
and astrology. Moreover, as we have indicated in our last article, each of 
the seven planetary heavens presides over one of the main prophets, who 
is the ‘Pole’ (Al-Qutb); and the qualities and sciences which are specifi-
cally related to each of these prophets are in relation to the correspond-
ing astral influence. The list of the seven celestial Aqtāb is as follows: 
Heaven of the Moon (Al-Qamar): Sayyidūnā ʾĀdam. 
Heaven of Mercury (Al-Utārid): Sayyidūnā ʿĪsā. 
Heaven of Venus (Az-Zohrah): Sayyidūnā Yūsuf. 
Heaven of the Sun (Ash-Shams): Sayyidūnā ʾIdrīs. 
Heaven of Mars (Al-Mirrīkh): Sayyidūnā Dāwūd. 
Heaven of Jupiter (Al-Barjīs): Sayyidūnā Mūsā. 
Heaven of Saturn (Al-Kaywān): Sayyidūnā ʾIbrāhīm. 
Sayyidūnā ʾĀdam is linked to the farming of the Earth (Cf. Genesis, 2, 
15: “God took the man and placed him in the garden of Eden to cultivate 
and maintain it”); Sayyidūnā ʿĪsā to pure spiritual knowledge; Sayyidūnā 
Yūsuf to beauty and the arts; Sayyidūnā ʾIdrīs to the ‘intermediary’ sci-
ences, which is to say those of the cosmological and physical order; Say-
yidūnā Dāwūd to government; Sayyidūnā Mūsā, which his brother Say-
yidūnā Hārūn is inseparably associated, to things of religion under the 
dual aspects of legislation and worship; Sayyidūnā ʾIbrāhīm to faith (for 
which this correspondence to the seventh heaven must be compared to 
what we recently recalled of Dante, as to his position at the highest of 
the seven steps of the initiatic ladder). 
Moreover, surrounding these principal prophets are the other known 
prophets distributed in the seven planetary heavens (which is to say, ofthe highest of 
the seven steps of the initiatic ladder). 
Moreover, surrounding these principal prophets are the other known 
prophets distributed in the seven planetary heavens (which is to say, of

--- PAGE BREAK ---seven steps of the initiatic ladder). 
Moreover, surrounding these principal prophets are the other known 
prophets distributed in the seven planetary heavens (which is to say, of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
173 
those who are named in the Qurʾān, those that number 25) and the un-
known (which is to say all others, the number of these prophets being 
124,000 according to tradition). 
The 99 names that express the divine attributes are also distributed 
according to this septenary: 15 for the heaven of the Sun, due to its cen-
tral position, and 14 for each of the six other heavens (15 + 6 × 14 = 99). 
Examination of the signs on the portion of the hand corresponding to 
each of the planets indicates in which proportion (
𝑠
14 or 
s
15) the subject 
possesses the qualities related thereto; this proportion corresponds to the 
same number (s) of divine names among those belonging to the planetary 
heaven considered; and these names can be determined later, by means 
of a very long and complication calculation. 
Let us add that in the area of the wrist, beyond the proper hand, the 
correspondence of the two superior heavens is located, the heavens of 
the fixed stars and the empyrean sky, which, combined with the seven 
planetary heavens, completes the number 9. 
Moreover, in the different parts of the hand are the twelve zodiacal 
signs (burūj), in relation to the planets of which they are the respective 
domiciles (one for the Sun and the Moon, two for each of the five other 
planets), and also the sixteen figures of geomancy (ʾilm ar-raml), because 
all the traditional sciences are closely linked with each other. 
The examination of the left hand indicates the ‘nature’ (at-tabīyyah) 
of the subject, which is to say the tendencies, dispositions, or aptitudes 
which constitute in a way his innate characteristics. That of the right 
hands makes known acquired characters (al-istiṣḥab); these are con-
stantly shifting, in order for a thorough study, this examination must be 
repeated every four months. This four month period constitutes a com-
plete cycle, in that it brings about the return of a zodiacal sign corre-
sponding to the same element as that of the starting point; we know that 
this correspondence with the elements is done in the following sequence 
of succession: fire (nār), earth (turāb), air (hawā), water (māʾ). Therefore 
it is an error to think, as some may have done, that the period in question 
should only be three months, since the three month period is only a sin-
gle season, which is to say, one part of the annual cycle, and is not in 
itself a complete cycle. 
These few indications, however brief they may be, will show how a 
regularly constituted traditional science is attached to doctrinal princi-
ples and depend entirely upon them; and at the same time they will af-
firm what we have said so often, that such a science would be utterly 
useless outside the civilization for which it was constituted according to 
that form. For example, the considerations here which refer to the divine 
names and the prophets, which are precisely those on which all else isivilization for which it was constituted according to 
that form. For example, the considerations here which refer to the divine 
names and the prophets, which are precisely those on which all else is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

174 
The Veil of Isis

based, would be inapplicable outside the Islamic world, just as, to take 
another example, the onomantic calculation, used either alone or as a 
part of the establishment of the horoscope in certain astrological meth-
ods, can only be valid for Arabic names, whose letters have determined 
numerical values. In this order of contingent applications there is always 
a question of adaptation which makes it impossible to transport these 
sciences as they are from one traditional form to another; without a 
doubt, this is also one of the main reasons for the difficulty in under-
standing for those, just like modern Westerners, do not have the equiva-
lent in their own civilization.262

262 The data upon which these notes are based are drawn from the unpublished 
treatises of Shaykh Sayyīd ʿAlī Nūr ad-Dīn Al-Bayūmī, the founder of the ṭarīqah 
which still wears his name (bayūmīyyah); these manuscripts are still in posses-
sion of his direct descendants.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Organizations and Religious Sects 
Organisations initiatiques et sectes religieuses, June 1932.); these manuscripts are still in posses-
sion of his direct descendants.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Organizations and Religious Sects 
Organisations initiatiques et sectes religieuses, June 1932.

We have recently point out here, in reference to the final book of Mr. 
Luigi Valli, how improper it is to apply the term ‘sects’ to initiatic organ-
izations; the study done by our collaborator P. Genty on the Albigensi-
ans, published at the same time, has incited us to make some more re-
flections on this subject and we think that it is not untimely to return to 
this. Indeed, this is something more than a simple choice of words; this 
expression ‘sects,’ in such a case, is not only to be rejected because it is 
unpleasant, but because it appears to be the result of adversaries, alt-
hough some, such as Mr. Valli for example, have been able to use it with-
out particularly ill intent, by imitation or habit, as there are some who 
call ‘paganism’ the doctrines of antiquity without even suspecting that 
this is only an insulting term and of a polemical basis. In reality, there is 
a serious confusion between things of entirely different orders, and this 
confusion, in those who create or maintain it, does not seem to be always 
purely involuntary; this can be primarily attributed in the Christian 
world, and sometimes even in the Islamic world, to the enemies or nega-
tors of esoterism, who wish, by a false assimilation, to attribute some-
thing of the disrepute of ‘sects,’ which is to say in other words, ‘heresies,’ 
understood in the specifically religious sense. 
By the very fact that it is about esoterism and initiation, it is not a 
question of religion, but of pure knowledge and ‘sacred science,’ which, 
to have this sacred character (which is not monopolized by religion, as 
some wrongly seem to believe), is no less essentially scientific, although 
in a sense significantly different from that given to the word by the mod-
ern ones who know only of ‘profane science,’ devoid of any value from 
the traditional point of view and which proceeds from a more or less 
alteration of the very idea of science. Without a doubt, this is what makes 
the confusion in question possible, this esoterism has more connection, 
and in a more direct way, with religion than with anything else external; 
it can even in some cases take its base and fulcrum in a definite religious 
form, but it does not relate less to a whole other area than this one, with 
which, consequently, it cannot enter into opposition or competition. 
Moreover, this still results from the fact that this, by definition, is an or-
der of knowledge reserved for an elite, whereas, by definition, religionst cannot enter into opposition or competition. 
Moreover, this still results from the fact that this, by definition, is an or-
der of knowledge reserved for an elite, whereas, by definition, religions

--- PAGE BREAK ---

176 
The Veil of Isison. 
Moreover, this still results from the fact that this, by definition, is an or-
der of knowledge reserved for an elite, whereas, by definition, religions

--- PAGE BREAK ---

176 
The Veil of Isis

address all indistinctly; initiation, in the true sense of the word, involving 
particular qualifications, cannot be religious. Moreover, without even ex-
amining the essence of things, the supposition that an initiatic organiza-
tion could compete with a religious organization is truly absurd, because, 
by the very fact of its closed recruitment it would be too much at a dis-
advantage in this respect; but this is neither its role nor its purpose. 
We will then remark that whoever says ‘sect’ necessarily is saying, 
by the very etymology of the word, scission or division; effectively, 
‘sects’ are divisions engendered within a religion, by a more or less pro-
found divergences between its members. Thus, sects are necessarily of 
multiplicity,263 their existence implies a departure from the principle, 
whose esoterism is, on the contrary and by its very nature, closer than 
the exoteric religion, ever devoid of any deviation. In fact, it is through 
esoterism that all the traditional doctrines are united, beyond the neces-
sary differences and their external forms; from this point of view, not 
only are initiatic organization are not ‘sects,’ but they are the exact op-
posites. 
Further, ‘sects,’ schisms, or heresies always appear as deriving from a 
given religion, in which they originate and of which they are, so to speak, 
irregular branches. On the contrary, esoterism can in no way be derived 
from religion; even when it is taken as a medium, as a means of expres-
sion and realization, it is linked to its principle, and it represents, in rela-
tion to it, the Tradition prior to all particular religious forms. The interior 
cannot be produced from the exterior, neither the center from the cir-
cumference, nor the superior from the inferior, nor the spirit from the 
body; the influences which preside over traditional organizations always 
descend and never ascend, nor does a river return to its source. To pre-
tend that initiation could be derived from religion, let alone a ‘sect,’ is to 
overthrow all the normal relations which result from the very nature of 
things;264 so that, when a religion has lost all points of contact with eso-
terism, there remains only a ‘dead letter’ and a misunderstood formalism,l relations which result from the very nature of 
things;264 so that, when a religion has lost all points of contact with eso-
terism, there remains only a ‘dead letter’ and a misunderstood formalism,

263 This shows the falsity of the conceptions of those who speak of the ‘Sect,’ in 
the singular and with a capital letter, as a type of entity which their imagination 
attributes everything to what they hate; moreover, the fact that these words are 
able to completely lose their legitimate meaning is one of the characteristics of 
the mental disorder of our time. 
264 A similar, perhaps even worse, error is made by those who would like to take 
the initiation out of something which is exterior, for example, philosophy; the 
initiatic world exerts its influence on the profane world, directly or indirectly, 
but it can in no way be influenced by it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
177 
because what vivified it was the effective communication with the Spir-
itual Center of the world, and this can only be established and maintained 
by esoterism and a genuine and regular initiatic organization.

To explain how the confusion that we are currently trying to dissipate 
may have appeared with enough of a semblance of reason so that it 
makes itself accepted by those who only consider things from the exte-
rior, it must be said: it seems that in such cases, religious ‘sects’ may have 
arisen because of the thoughtless dissemination of fragments of esoteric 
doctrine which would be more or less misunderstood; but esoterism in 
itself cannot be held responsible for this kind of vulgarization, or ‘profa-
nation’ in the etymological sense of the word, which is contrary to its 
very essence, and which has never been able to cost its doctrinal purity.

In order for such a thing to happen, it was necessary for those who re-
ceived such teachings to understand them badly enough, for a lack of 
preparation or perhaps of qualification, to attribute to them a religious 
character which completely distorted to them; and does not the error al-
ways originate from a misunderstanding or distortion of the truth?

This 
was probably the case with the Albigenses; but if they were ‘heretics,’ 
Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amore,’ who stood upon strictly initiatic ground, 
were not; and this example will further aid to make clear the crucial dif-
ference between ‘sects’ and initiatic organizations.

Let us add, while cer-
tain ‘sects’ may have arisen from a deviation of initiatic teachings, this 
presupposes, of course, its pre-existence and its independence with re-
gards to the ‘sects’ in question; historically, as well as logically, the con-
trary opinion seems unsustainable.

One question remains to be examined: how and why could such de-
viations occur at times?--- PAGE BREAK ---

Let us add, while cer-
tain ‘sects’ may have arisen from a deviation of initiatic teachings, this 
presupposes, of course, its pre-existence and its independence with re-
gards to the ‘sects’ in question; historically, as well as logically, the con-
trary opinion seems unsustainable. One question remains to be examined: how and why could such de-
viations occur at times? This would risk taking us very far astray, be-
cause it goes without saying that, in order to answer this completely, we 
should examine each particular case closely. What can be said in a gen-
eral manner is that, firstly and from the most external point of view, it 
seems almost impossible to completely prevent any divulgations by tak-
ing precautions; and if these divulgations are in any case partial or frag-
mentary (because they can only relate to what is relatively most accessi-
ble), the distortions that ensue are all the more accentuated. According 
to another more profound point of view, one might perhaps say that such 
things must take place in certain circumstances as a means of acton re-
garding the course of events; ‘sects’ also have their role to play in the 
history of humanity, even if it is of an inferior role, and any apparent 
disorder is in fact only one element of the total order of the world; and is 
it not Saint Augustine who said: “Opportet haereses esse?” The quarrels of 
the exterior world lose much of their importance when we consider them 
from a point where the oppositions which arouse them are reconciled;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

178 
The Veil of IsisThe quarrels of 
the exterior world lose much of their importance when we consider them 
from a point where the oppositions which arouse them are reconciled;

--- PAGE BREAK ---

178 
The Veil of Isis

but precisely for this reason it would not be the role of the initiatic or-
ganizations to mingle in these quarrels, while, on the contrary, ‘sects’ are 
inevitably involved in it, and this perhaps is what forms their raison 
d’être. 
We will simply submit these reflections to people of good faith, so 
that they know what to say regarding a confusion which is too often 
concerned; as for others, we do not pretend, whatever we say, will cause 
them to change their attitude or language, but, after having restored the 
truth to the extent of our means, we have the right to neglect and ignore 
them. As far as the religious opponents of esoterism are concerned, be-
sides claiming to question an issue which is in no way within their com-
petence, since it is essentially ‘extra-religious,’ they answer without 
doubting their own condemnation, thereby showing their inability to 
pierce the peel of their tradition form and to penetrate into the core that 
is wrapped within; because the peel hides the core within, they claim that 
it does not exist. A blind man can just as well, and with as much reason, 
deny the existence of light, and it is probably impossible to convince him 
of it; but does this prevent the light from existing and does it prevent 
those who enjoy all their faculties from perceiving it? He who sees the 
light has no need to discuss his existence with the blind, and all philo-
sophical quibbles that they can invent will be null and void for him; the 
reasoning of the ‘profane,’ with regards to things of the initiatic order, 
are just as valuable and important as this, and we do not see why we 
should be concerned with it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

New Insights into the Secret Language 
of Dante 
Nouveaux aperçus sur le langage secret de Dante, July 1932.ortant as this, and we do not see why we 
should be concerned with it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

New Insights into the Secret Language 
of Dante 
Nouveaux aperçus sur le langage secret de Dante, July 1932.

Several months ago while speaking here (March 1932, The Secret Lan-
guage of Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’) of the last book of Mr. Luigi Valli, 
we mentioned the work that followed the same guiding ideas, Mr. 
Gaetano Scarlata devoted his treaty to the De vulgari eloquentia of Dante, 
or rather as he prefers to name it (for the title has never been exactly 
determined), De vulgaris eloquentiae doctrina, according to the expression 
used by Dante himself to define the subject from the beginning, and in 
order to highlight his intentions towards the doctrinal content of vernac-
ular poetry.265 Indeed, those whom Dante calls poeti volgari, are those 
whose writings had, as he says, verace intendimento, which is to say, con-
taining a hidden meaning according to the symbolism of the ‘Fedeli 
d’Amore,’ since what opposes them is litterali (and not litterati as it has 
sometimes been incorrectly read), or to those who write only in the lit-
eral sense. For him, the first are the real poets, and he also calls them 
trilingues doctores, which can be understood externally from the fact that 
such a poetry existed in the three languages Italian, Provençal (not 
‘French’ as Mr. Scarlata wrongly says), and Spanish, but in reality this 
means (no poet having ever written in all three languages) that it should 
be interpreted in a triple sense;266 and Dante, speaking further on the 
subject of the trilingues doctors, says that maxime conveniunt in hoc vo-
cabulo quod est Amor, which is a rather obvious allusion to the doctrine 
of the ‘Fedeli d’Amore.’ 
With regards to these, Mr. Scarlata makes a very true remark: he be-
lieves that they have never had to constitute an association according to 
rigorously defined forms, more or less similar to that of modern Masonry, 
as an example, with a central authority establishing ‘subsidiaries’ in thever had to constitute an association according to 
rigorously defined forms, more or less similar to that of modern Masonry, 
as an example, with a central authority establishing ‘subsidiaries’ in the

265 Le origini della letteratura italiana nel pensiero di Dante: Priulla, Palermo. 
266 Without a doubt this means that the three meanings superior to the literal 
meaning, so that with it we would have the four meanings of which Dante 
speaks in the Convito, as indicated at the beginning of our study on The Esoterism 
of Dante.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

180 
The Veil of Isisvarying localities; and we may add in support of this remark, that in Ma-
sonry itself nothing of this kind has ever existed before the constitution 
of the Grand Lodge of England in 1717.

Moreover, it does not seem that 
Mr.

Scarlata has grasped the full scope of this fact, which he believes 
must be attributed simply to circumstances, which are not favorable to 
the existence of an institution presenting itself under a more stable exte-
rior; in reality, as we have already said often, a truly initiatic organization 
cannot be a ‘society’ in the modern sense of the word, with all the exter-
nal formalism it implies; when statutes, written regulations, and the like 
come into being, we can be sure that there is a degeneration that gives 
the organization a ‘semi-profane’ character, if we can use such an ex-
pression.

But, as far as a properly initiatic order is concerned, Mr.

Scar-
lata has not reached the essence of things, and he seems to not have come 
as close as Mr.

Valli; he sees primarily the political side, which is alto-
gether incidental, and he speaks constantly of ‘sects,’ a point which we 
amply explained in our last article; in its development, it draws but a few 
consequences from the doctrine (esoteric and non-heretical) of the amor 
sapientiae, which is entirely essential, the rest being limited to historical 
contingencies.

It is also possible that the subject of this study lends itself 
quite easily to what appears to be an error of perspective: De vulgaris 
eloquentiae doctrina has a direct link with De monarchia, and conse-
quently is related to the portion of Dante’s work where social applica-
tions have the most important place; but can these applications them-
selves be understood if we do not constantly relate them to their princi-
ple?

The most unfortunate thing is that Mr.180 
The Veil of Isis

It is also possible that the subject of this study lends itself 
quite easily to what appears to be an error of perspective: De vulgaris 
eloquentiae doctrina has a direct link with De monarchia, and conse-
quently is related to the portion of Dante’s work where social applica-
tions have the most important place; but can these applications them-
selves be understood if we do not constantly relate them to their princi-
ple? The most unfortunate thing is that Mr. Scarlata, when he moves on 
to historical views, has let himself be led to more than questionable in-
terpretations: does it not go so far as to present Dante and the ‘Fedeli 
d’Amore’ as adversaries of the spirit of the Middle Ages and precursors 
of modern ideas, animated by a ‘secular’ and ‘democratic’ spirit which 
would, in reality, be all the more ‘anti-initiatic?’ Nevertheless, there are 
some interestings notes in the second part of his books, especially on the 
Oriental influences at Frederick II’s court and in the Franciscan move-
ment, which would be to begin again on bases which are more in line 
with the traditional sense; it is true that it is presented only as an ‘attempt 
at historical reconstruction,’ and who knows whether the author will not 
be led by this to further research which will impel him to rectify this? Perhaps, one of the causes of Mr. Scarlata’s mistake is the way in 
which Dante contrasts the use of the vulgare with that of Latin, the ec-
clestiastic language, and also the manner of symbolizing poets, according 
to the verace intendimento, contrasted to theologians (the latter being a 
way of mere allegory); but it is in the eyes of Dante’s adversaries, or 
(which is often the same in such cases) of those who do not understand

--- PAGE BREAK ---to theologians (the latter being a 
way of mere allegory); but it is in the eyes of Dante’s adversaries, or 
(which is often the same in such cases) of those who do not understand

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
181 
that the vulgare could be no more than the sermo laicus, whereas for him-
self it was something altogether different; furthermore, from the strictly 
initiatic point of view, is the function of initiates more truly ‘sacerdotal’ 
than that of an exoteric ‘clergy’ that possesses only the letter and stops 
at the rind of the doctrine?267 The essential point here is to know what 
Dante means by the expression vulgare illustre which may seem strange 
and even contradictory if we stick to the ordinary meaning of words, but 
which is explained if we notice that vulgare is synonymous with naturale: 
it is the language that man learns directly through oral transmission (as 
the child who, from the initiatic point of view, represents the neophyte, 
learning his mother tongue), which is to say symbolically, the language 
that serves as a vehicle for tradition, and which can, in this respect, be 
identified with the primordial and universal language. This is closely re-
lated, as we can see, to the question of the mysterious ‘Syriac language’ 
(loghah suryānīyyah) that we have discussed here in previous articles;268 
it is true that, for Dante, this ‘language of revelation’ seems to have been 
Hebrew, but as we said then, such an affirmation must not be taken lit-
erally, the same can be said of any language that has a ‘sacred’ character, 
which is to say any that serves to express a regular traditional form.269 
According to Dante, the language spoken by the first man, created im-
mediately by God, was continued by his descendants until the building 
of the tower of Babel; then, “hanc formam locutionis hereditati sunt filii 
Heber…; hiis solis post confusionem remansit;” but are not these ‘Sons of 
Heber’ all those who have retained the tradition, rather than a specific 
people? Has the name ‘Israel’ not often been used to refer to all initiates, 
irrespective of ethnic origins, and these, who in fact actually form the 
‘chosen people,’ do they not possess the universal language which ena-
bles them to understand each other, which is to say the knowledge of the 
unique tradition which is hidden under particular forms?270 Moreover, 
had Dante thought it was truly the Hebrew language, he could not have 
said that the Church (referred to by the enigmatic name Petramala) be-
lieved to speak Adam’s language, it speaks Latin, and not Hebrew, forhought it was truly the Hebrew language, he could not have 
said that the Church (referred to by the enigmatic name Petramala) be-
lieved to speak Adam’s language, it speaks Latin, and not Hebrew, for

267 According to the normal hierarchic order, the initiatie is above the ordinary 
‘cleric’ (even if they are theologians), while the ‘laity’ is naturally below this. 
268 The Science of Letters (February 1931), and The Language of Birds (November 
1931). 
269 It goes without saying that when one contrasts ‘vulgar languages’ with ‘sa-
cred languages,’ one takes the word ‘vulgar’ in the usual meaning; if it were 
taken in the meaning that Dante uses, this expression would no longer apply, 
rather ‘profane languages’ should be used to avoid any ambiguity. 
270 See our article on The Gift of Languages (special issue devoted to the Rose-
Cross, August-September 1927).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

182 
The Veil of Isisages’ should be used to avoid any ambiguity. 
270 See our article on The Gift of Languages (special issue devoted to the Rose-
Cross, August-September 1927).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

182 
The Veil of Isis

which it does not seem that anyone has ever claimed the quality of prim-
itive language; but if one understands by this that it believes to teach the 
true doctrine of revelation, everything becomes perfectly intelligible. In 
addition, even admitting that the first Christians, who possessed this true 
doctrine, had actually spoken Hebrew (which would be historically inac-
curate, because Aramaic is no more Hebrew than Italian is Latin), the 
‘Fedeli d’Amore,’ who considered themselves as their successors, never 
claimed to use this language in opposition to Latin, as they would logi-
cally have had to to according to this literal interpretation.271 
We see that this is all very far removed from a purely ‘philological’ 
meaning which is usually attributed to the treatise Dante, and that it is 
fundamentally something other than the Italian idiom; and even what 
really relates to it can also have at the same time a symbolic value. There-
fore, when Dante opposes one city or region to another, it is not simply 
a linguistic opposition, or, when citing certain names such as Petramala, 
Papienses, or Aquilegienses in this choice there is (even without going so 
far as to consider the properly named geographic symbolism) a rather 
transparent intention, as Rossetti has already remarked; of course, in or-
der to return to the true meaning of this or that seemingly insignificant 
word, it is often necessary to refer to the conventional terminology of 
the ‘Fedeli d’Amore.’ Mr. Scarlata correctly points out that it is almost 
always the examples (including those which seem to have only a purely 
rhetorical or grammatical value) which give the key to the context; in-
deed, this was an excellent way of diverting the attention of the ‘profane,’ 
who could only see sentences without any importance; one could say 
that these examples play a fairly similar role to that of the ‘myths’ in the 
Platonic dialogues, and one only has to see what the academic ‘critics’ 
makes of them to be convinced of the perfect efficiency of the process of 
offering a ‘hors-d’œuvre,’ in place of what is the most significant. 
In sum, what Dante seems to have essentially had in view is the for-
mation of a language capable, as far as is possible through the superpo-
sition of multiple meanings, of expressing the esoteric doctrine; and if 
the codification of such a language can be qualified as ‘rhetoric,’ it is in 
any case, a rhetoric of a very special type, as far removed from what is 
now understood by this word as the poetry of the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ is 
from the modern ones, whose predecessors are those litterali to whomrhetoric of a very special type, as far removed from what is 
now understood by this word as the poetry of the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ is 
from the modern ones, whose predecessors are those litterali to whom

271 Let us add that, as Mr. Scarlata notes, the idea of the continuation of the 
primitive language is contradicted by the words that Dante himself, in the Divine 
Comedy, attributes to Adam (Paradise 26, 124). These words can also be ex-
plained by the consideration of the cyclic periods: the original language was 
tutta spenta from the end of the Krita-Yuga, well before the enterprise of the 
‘people of Nimrod,’ which corresponds solely to the beginning of the Kali-Yuga.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
183 
Dante reproached for rhyming ‘stupidly’ (stoltamente) without enclosing 
in their verses any profound meaning.272 In the words of Mr. Valli which 
we have already quoted, Dante proposed quite something other than “to 
make literature,” and this amounts to saying that he was precisely the 
opposite of a modern; his work, far from being opposed to the spirit of 
the Middle Ages, is one of the most perfect syntheses, just as that of the 
builders of the Cathedrals; and the simplest initiatic data makes this easy 
to understand that there are some very profound reasons for this con-
nection.

272 It is in much the same manner that the predecessors of the contemporary 
chemists are not the true alchemists, but the ‘blowers;’ whether in the sciences 
or the arts, the purely ‘profane’ conception of the modern ones always results 
from a similar degeneration.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Taoism and Confucianism 
Taoïsme et Confucianisme, August-September 1932.the arts, the purely ‘profane’ conception of the modern ones always results 
from a similar degeneration.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Taoism and Confucianism 
Taoïsme et Confucianisme, August-September 1932.

Ancient peoples, for the most part, have done little to establish a rigorous 
chronology of their history; some even used, at least in the most remote 
epochs, only symbolic numbers which one could not, without commit-
ting a grave error, take as dates in the ordinary and literal sense of the 
word. In this respect, the Chinese are a rather remarkable exception: they 
are perhaps the only people who have constantly taken care to date their 
annals by means of precise astronomical observations since the very be-
ginning of their tradition, including the description of the state of the sky 
at the moment when they occurred, events whose memory has been pre-
served. Due to this, we can, in the case of China and its ancient history, 
be more affirmative than in many other cases; it is well known that the 
origin of this tradition which can properly be called Chinese dates back 
3,700 years before the Hebraic age; but for the latter, it is difficult in re-
ality to say what event this starting point relates to. 
Such an origin, so remote as it may seem when compared to that of 
the Greco-Roman civilization and the dates of so-called ‘classical’ antiq-
uity is, to tell the truth, still quite recent; what was the state of the yellow 
race before this time, which then presumably inhabited parts of Central 
Asia? It is impossible to be precise in the absence of sufficiently explicit 
data; it seems that this race has gone through a period of obscurity, of 
indefinite duration, and that it was drawn from sleep at a time which was 
marked by important changes for other parts of humanity. Therefore, it 
may be, and indeed it is the only thing which is affirmed quite clearly, 
that what appears as a beginning has really been nothing other than an 
awakening of a very ancient tradition, which must have existed in an-
other form, to adapt to new conditions. Be that as it may, the history of 
China or what it is so called today, begins properly only Fu-hsi, who is 
regarded as its first emperor; it must be added at once that this name Fu-
hsi, to which all knowledge which constitutes the very essence of the 
Chinese tradition is attached, is actually used to designate an entire pe-
riod, which extends over a duration of several centuries. 
Fu-hsi, to determine the principles of the tradition, made use of linear 
symbols as simple and simultaneously synthetic as possible: the contin-
uous line and the broken line, respective signs of yang and yin, which ise the principles of the tradition, made use of linear 
symbols as simple and simultaneously synthetic as possible: the contin-
uous line and the broken line, respective signs of yang and yin, which is

--- PAGE BREAK ---the tradition, made use of linear 
symbols as simple and simultaneously synthetic as possible: the contin-
uous line and the broken line, respective signs of yang and yin, which is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
185 
to say of the two active and passive principles which, proceeding from a 
type of polarization of the supreme metaphysical unity, gives rise to the 
whole of the universal manifestation. Combinations of these two signs, 
in all their possible arrangements, form the eight koua or ‘trigrams,’ 
which have always remained the fundamental symbols of the Far-East-
ern tradition. It is said that, “Before drawing the trigrams, Fu-hsi looked 
at Heaven, then looked down at Earth, observed its particularities and 
considered the character of the human body and of all external things.”273 
This text is particularly interesting in that it contains the formal expres-
sion of the Great Triad: Heaven and Earth, or the two complementary 
principles from which all beings are produced, and man, who, by their 
nature being apart of both, is the middle term of the Triad, the mediator 
between Heaven and Earth. It should be pointed out that the ‘true man,’ 
that is, the one who, having attained the full development of the higher 
senses, “can help Heaven and Earth in the upkeep and transformation of 
beings, and by this very fact, constitute a third power with Heaven and 
Earth.”274 It is also said that Fu-hsi saw a dragon emerging from the river, 
uniting in him the powers of Heaven and Earth, and bearing the trigrams 
inscribed on his back; this is just another way to symbolically express 
the same thing. 
The entire tradition was therefore first and foremost contained and 
germinated in the trigrams, symbols wonderfully suited to support in-
definite possibilities: it remains only to extract all the necessary develop-
ments, either in the field of pure metaphysical knowledge, or in that of 
its various applications to the cosmic order and the human order. For this 
reason, Fu-hsi wrote three books, the last of which, called I Ching or 
‘Book of Changes,’ has reached us alone; and the text of this book is still 
so synthetic that it can be understood in multiple meanings, perfectly 
concordant among them, according to whether we stick strictly to the 
principles or we wish to apply them to such or such determined order. 
Thus, aside from the metaphysical meaning, there is a multitude of con-
tingent applications, of unequal importance, which constitute as many 
traditional sciences: logical, mathematic, physiological, social applica-
tions, and so on; there is even a divinatory application, which is also re-
garded as one of the most inferior of all, and whose practice is abandoned 
to wandering jongleurs. Moreover, it is a characteristic common to all 
traditional doctrines to contain in themselves from the beginning, the 
possibilities of all conceivable developments, including those of an indef-
inite variety of sciences, of which the modern West has no idea, and of 
all the adaptations that may be required by subsequent circumstances.ll conceivable developments, including those of an indef-
inite variety of sciences, of which the modern West has no idea, and of 
all the adaptations that may be required by subsequent circumstances.

273 The Book of Rites of Li-chi. 
274 Zhongyong, ch. 22.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

186 
The Veil of Isisern West has no idea, and of 
all the adaptations that may be required by subsequent circumstances.

273 The Book of Rites of Li-chi. 
274 Zhongyong, ch. 22.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

186 
The Veil of Isis

Therefore, it is not surprising that the teachings contained within the I 
Ching, which Fu-hsi himself claimed to have taken from a very ancient 
past and which were very difficult to determine, have in turn become the 
common basis of the two doctrines in which the Chinese tradition has 
continued to this day, and which, due to their totally different domains 
to which they relate, may seem at first glance to have no point of contact: 
Taoism and Confucianism. 
What are the circumstances which, following around three thousand 
years, necessitated a re-adaptation of the traditional doctrine, which is to 
say an altered support, not on the substance which always remains 
strictly identical to itself, but on the forms in which this doctrine is some-
how incorporated? Again, this is a point which would no doubt be diffi-
cult to fully elucidate, for these things, in China as well as elsewhere, are 
among those which leave little trace in written history, where the exter-
nal effects are much more apparent than the root causes. In any case, 
what seems certain is that the doctrine, as it was formulated at the time 
of Fu-hsi, had ceased to be generally understood in what is most essen-
tial; no doubt, the applications which had been extracted from it for-
merly, in particular from the social point of view, did not correspond any 
more to the conditions of existence of the race, which had to change very 
appreciably in the interval. 
It was then in the sixth century B.C.; it is to be remarked that in this 
century there have been considerable changes in almost all peoples, so 
that what happened in China then seems to be related to a cause, which 
is perhaps difficult to define, whose action affected all terrestrial human-
ity. What is odd is that this sixth century can be considered, in a very 
general manner, as the beginning of the proper ‘historic’ period: when 
one wishes to go further, it is impossible to establish an even approxi-
mate chronology except in some exceptional cases, which is precisely the 
case with China; on the contrary, from this period the dates of events are 
known everywhere with great accuracy; assuredly, this is a fact that de-
serves some thoughts. The changes that take place are then presented 
different according to the characters of the country: for example, in India 
Buddhism was born, which is to say, a revolt against the traditional spirit, 
the negation of all authority to a veritable anarchy in the intellectual or-
der and the social order; on the other hand, in China it is strictly in line 
with tradition that the two new doctrinal forms were simultaneously 
constituted, to which the names Taoism and Confucianism are given. 
The founders of these two doctrines, Lao-tzu and K’ungtzu, whom the 
Westerners called Confucius, were therefore contemporary, and history 
tells us that they met one day. “Have you discovered Tao?,” Lao-tzu 
asked. “I have sought it for twenty-seven years,” replied K’ung-tzu, “andlled Confucius, were therefore contemporary, and history 
tells us that they met one day. “Have you discovered Tao?,” Lao-tzu 
asked. “I have sought it for twenty-seven years,” replied K’ung-tzu, “and

--- PAGE BREAK ---therefore contemporary, and history 
tells us that they met one day. “Have you discovered Tao?,” Lao-tzu 
asked. “I have sought it for twenty-seven years,” replied K’ung-tzu, “and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
187 
I have not found it.” Thereupon, Lao-tzu confined himself to giving his 
party these few counsels: “The sage loves darkness; he does not give him-
self up to all comers; he studies times and circumstances. If the moment 
is suitable, he speaks; otherwise, he is silent. Whoever has a treasure does 
not show it to everyone; thus, one who is truly wise does not reveal wis-
dom to everyone. This is all I have to tell you; make the most of it.” 
K’ung-tzu, returning from this meeting, said: “I saw Lao-tzu; he resem-
bles the dragon. As for the dragon, I know not how it can be carried by 
winds and clouds and rise to Heaven.” 
This anecdote, reported by the historian Ssu-ma Ch’ien, perfectly de-
fines the respective positions of the two doctrines, rather we should say 
of the two branches of doctrine in which the Far Eastern tradition would 
now be divided: one with essentially pure metaphysics, to which all the 
traditional sciences having a speculative or, to put it better, ‘cognitive’ 
scope are added; the other confined to the practical field and standing 
exclusively in the field of social applications. K’ung-tzu himself admitted 
that he was not “born in Knowledge,” which is to say, he had not reached 
the knowledge par excellence, which is that of the metaphysical and su-
pra-rational order; he knew the traditional symbols, but he had not pen-
etrated their deepest meaning. This is why his work must necessarily be 
limited to a special and contingent domain, which was his competence 
alone; but at least he was careful to not deny what was beyond him. In 
this, his more or less distant disciples did not always imitate him, and 
some, by a flaw that is widespread among ‘specialists’ of all kinds, some-
times showed a narrow exclusivism which attracted to them some re-
sponses of their scathing irony, from the great Taoist commentators of 
the fourth century B.C., the Lieh-tzu and above all Chuang-tzu. However, 
the discussions and quarrels that occurred at certain times should not 
make Taoism and Confucianism look like two rival schools, they never 
were, and they cannot be, since each has his own domain which are 
clearly distinct. Therefore, there is in their coexistence, nothing but per-
fectly ordinary and regular, and in some respects their distinction corre-
sponds quite exactly to, in other civilizations, are spiritual authority and 
temporal power. 
Moreover, we have already said that the two doctrines have a com-
mon root, which is the anterior tradition; K’ung-tzu, no more than Lao-
tzu, has never intended to expose conceptions which would have been 
exclusively his own, and which, by the same token, would have been de-
prived of all authority and any real significance. “I am,” said K’ung-tzu, 
“a man who loved the elders and who has made every effort to acquireown, and which, by the same token, would have been de-
prived of all authority and any real significance. “I am,” said K’ung-tzu, 
“a man who loved the elders and who has made every effort to acquire

--- PAGE BREAK ---

188 
The Veil of Isistheir knowledge;”275 this attitude, which is the opposite of the individu-
alism of modern Westerners and their claim to ‘originality’ at any price, 
is the only one that is compatible with the constitution of a traditional 
civilization.

The word ‘re-adaptation,’ which we used previously, is 
therefore the correct one here; and the resulting social institutions are 
endowed with a remarkable stability, having lasted for twenty-five cen-
turies and have survived all the periods of troubles that China has expe-
rienced so far.

We do not wish to dwell on these institutions, moreover, 
which are quite well known in their broad outlines; we will only recall 
that their essential trait is to take as a basis the family, and to extend 
from there to the race, which is the set of families attached to the same 
original stock; indeed, one of the characteristics of Chinese civilization is 
to be based on the idea of race and solidarity uniting its members with 
each other, while other civilizations, which generally include men be-
longing to diverse or poorly defined races, are based on principles of 
unity which is quite different from this one.

Ordinarily in the West when one speaks of China and its doctrines, 
one thinks almost exclusively of Confucianism, which, does not mean 
that one interprets it always correctly; it is sometimes claimed to be a 
kind of Eastern ‘positivism,’ whereas it is something else in reality, firstly 
because of its traditional character, and also because, as we have said, it 
is an application of higher principles, while positivism implies, on the 
contrary, the negation of such principles.

As for Taoism, it is generally 
passed over in silence, and many seem to ignore its existence, or at least 
believe that it has long since disappeared and that it is of only historical 
or archaeological interest; we will see the reason for this mistake later.188 
The Veil of Isis

Ordinarily in the West when one speaks of China and its doctrines, 
one thinks almost exclusively of Confucianism, which, does not mean 
that one interprets it always correctly; it is sometimes claimed to be a 
kind of Eastern ‘positivism,’ whereas it is something else in reality, firstly 
because of its traditional character, and also because, as we have said, it 
is an application of higher principles, while positivism implies, on the 
contrary, the negation of such principles. As for Taoism, it is generally 
passed over in silence, and many seem to ignore its existence, or at least 
believe that it has long since disappeared and that it is of only historical 
or archaeological interest; we will see the reason for this mistake later. Lao-tzu wrote only a single treatise, concisely, the Tao-te-Ching, or 
the ‘Book of the Way and Rectitude;’ all other Taoist texts are either 
commentaries of this fundamental book or more or less later writings of 
some complementary teaching which firstly had been purely oral. Tao, 
literally translated as ‘Way,’ and which gave its name to the doctrine 
itself, is the Supreme Principle, viewed strictly from a metaphysical point 
of view: it is the origin and the end of all beings at once, as is clearly 
indicated by the idiographic character which represents it. Te, which we 
prefer to render as ‘Rectitude’ rather than ‘Virtue’ as is sometimes done, 
in order not to appear to give it a ‘moral’ meaning which is not in the 
spirit of Taoism, Te, we say, is what we could call a ‘specification’ of the 
Tao with respect to a specific being, such as the human being for exam-
ple: it is the direction that this being must follow so that his existence, in 
the state in which he is currently, is according to the Way, or in other 
words, in conformity with the Principle. Lao-tzu therefore places himself

275 Lun-yu, ch. 7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
189 
first in the universal order, and then descends down to an application; 
but this application, although properly aimed at the case of man, is by no 
means made from a social or moral point of view; what is envisaged is 
always and exclusively the attachment to the Supreme Principle, and so, 
in reality, we do not exit from the metaphysic domain.

Thus it is not external action that Taoism accords importance; in sum, 
it holds it indifferent to itself, and it expressly teaches the doctrine of 
‘non-action,’ which Westerners in general have little difficulty in under-
standing the true meaning, although they may be helped by the theory 
of the Aristotelian ‘prime mover,’ whose meaning is the same in sub-
stance, but they do not seem to have ever developed the consequences.

‘Non-action’ is not inertia, on the contrary, it is the fullness of activity, 
but it is a transcendent and entirely interior activity, unmanifest, in un-
ion with the Principle, therefore beyond all distinctions and appearances 
that the vulgar wrongly take for reality itself, whereas they are only a 
more or less distant reflection of it.

Moreover, it is to be remarked that 
Confucianism itself, whose point of view is that of action, nevertheless 
speaks of the ‘invariable middle,’ which is, of a state of perfect balance, 
subtracted from the incessant vicissitudes of the exterior world; but, for 
it, this can only be the expression of a purely theoretical ideal, and he 
can at most, in his contingent domain, grasp only a mere image of the 
true ‘non-action,’ while for Taoism it is a question of something com-
pletely different, a fully effective realization of this transcendent state.‘Non-action’ is not inertia, on the contrary, it is the fullness of activity, 
but it is a transcendent and entirely interior activity, unmanifest, in un-
ion with the Principle, therefore beyond all distinctions and appearances 
that the vulgar wrongly take for reality itself, whereas they are only a 
more or less distant reflection of it.

Moreover, it is to be remarked that 
Confucianism itself, whose point of view is that of action, nevertheless 
speaks of the ‘invariable middle,’ which is, of a state of perfect balance, 
subtracted from the incessant vicissitudes of the exterior world; but, for 
it, this can only be the expression of a purely theoretical ideal, and he 
can at most, in his contingent domain, grasp only a mere image of the 
true ‘non-action,’ while for Taoism it is a question of something com-
pletely different, a fully effective realization of this transcendent state.

Placed within the center of the cosmic wheel, the perfect sage moves in-
visibly, by its mere presence, without participating in its movement, and 
without having to worry about exerting any action; his absolute detach-
ment makes him master of all things, because he can no longer be af-
fected by anything.

“He has reached perfect impassability; life and death 
being equally indifferent to him, the collapse of the universe would not 
cause him any emotion.

By scrutinizing, he has arrived at the immutable 
truth, the knowledge of the unique Universal Principal.

He lets beings 
evolve according to their destinies, and he stands at the immobile center 
of all destinies… The external sign of this inner state is imperturbability; 
not that of the brave man who, alone for the sake of glory, approaches 
an army arrayed in battle; but that of the spirit which, superior to heaven, 
to heaven, to all beings, dwells in a body to which it is not held, does not 
care about the images that its sense prove it, knows everything by a 
global knowledge in its immobile unity.--- PAGE BREAK ---

By scrutinizing, he has arrived at the immutable 
truth, the knowledge of the unique Universal Principal. He lets beings 
evolve according to their destinies, and he stands at the immobile center 
of all destinies… The external sign of this inner state is imperturbability; 
not that of the brave man who, alone for the sake of glory, approaches 
an army arrayed in battle; but that of the spirit which, superior to heaven, 
to heaven, to all beings, dwells in a body to which it is not held, does not 
care about the images that its sense prove it, knows everything by a 
global knowledge in its immobile unity. This spirit, absolutely independ-
ent, is the master of men; if it pleased him to summon them en masse, on 
the appointed day they would all come running; but he does not wish to 
be served.”276 “If a true sage had, in spite of himself, taken charge of the

276 Chuang-tzu, ch. 5.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

190 
The Veil of Isisay they would all come running; but he does not wish to 
be served.”276 “If a true sage had, in spite of himself, taken charge of the

276 Chuang-tzu, ch. 5.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

190 
The Veil of Isis

empire, remaining in non-action, he would use the leisure of his non-
intervention to give free rein to natural propensities. The empire would 
be well off having been handed over to this man. Without putting his 
organs into play, without using his bodily senses, sitting motionless, he 
would see everything from his transcendent eye; absorbed in contempla-
tion, he would shake everything just as thunder does; the physical 
heaven would move meekly to the movements of his mind; all beings 
would follow the impulse of his non-intervention, as dust follows the 
wind. Why would this man manipulate the empire, when letting go is 
sufficient?”277 
We insist especially on this doctrine of ‘non-action;’ aside from being 
one of the most important and characteristic aspects of Taoism, there are 
more special reasons for this, which the following will make clear. But a 
question arises: how can one reach the state that is described as that of 
the perfect sage? Here, as in all similar doctrines found in other civiliza-
tions, the answer is very clear: it is achieved exclusively by knowledge; 
but this knowledge is the very knowledge that K’ung-tzu confessed to 
not having obtained, it is of quite a different order than ordinary or ‘pro-
fane’ knowledge, it has no relation with the external knowledge of the 
‘letters,’ nor, with science as understood by modern Westerners. This is 
not an incompatibility, although ordinary science, by the limits it estab-
lishes and by the mental habits it makes, can often be an obstacle to the 
acquisition of true knowledge; but whoever possesses the latter must 
necessarily regard the relative and contingent speculations in which 
most men indulge as negligible, the analysis and detailed research in 
which they are embarrassed, and the inevitable consequences of the mul-
tiple differences of opinion. “Philosophers are lost in their speculations, 
the sophists in their distinctions, the researchers in their investigations. 
All these men are captive within the limits of space, blinded by particular 
beings.”278 The sage, on the contrary, has gone beyond all distinctions 
inherent in the external points of view; at the central point where he 
stands, all opposition has disappeared and resolved in perfect equilib-
rium. “In the primordial state, these oppositions do not exist. All are de-
rived from the diversification of beings, and their contacts caused by the 
universal gyration. They would cease if diversity and movement ceased. 
They immediately cease to affect the whole being who has reduced his 
distinct ego and his particular movement to almost nothing. This being 
no longer conflicts with any being, because he is established in the infi-
nite, erase in the indefinite. He has arrived and stands at the starting 
point of transformations, the neutral point where there are no conflicts.th any being, because he is established in the infi-
nite, erase in the indefinite. He has arrived and stands at the starting 
point of transformations, the neutral point where there are no conflicts.

277 Ibid., ch. 11. 
278 Ibid., ch. 14.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rase in the indefinite. He has arrived and stands at the starting 
point of transformations, the neutral point where there are no conflicts.

277 Ibid., ch. 11. 
278 Ibid., ch. 14.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
191 
By concentrating his nature, by feeding his vital spirit, by gathering all 
his power, he has united with the principle of all genesis. His nature be-
ing complete, his vital spirit being intact, no being can harm him.”279  
It is for this reason, and not by any kind of skepticism, which of course 
excludes the degree of knowledge in which he has arrived, that the wise 
man stands entirely outside of the discussions which stir the common 
people; indeed, for him all contrary opinions are equally valueless, be-
cause, by the very fact of their opposition, they are all equally relative. 
“His point of view is a point from where this and that, yes and no, still 
seem indistinguishable. This point is the pivot of the norm; it is the im-
movable center of a circumference, on the contour of which rolls all con-
tingencies, distinctions, and individualities; from which we see only an 
infinite, which is neither this nor that, neither yes nor no. To see every-
thing in the primordial unity which is not yet differentiated, or of a dis-
tance such that everything merges into one is the true intelligence… Let 
us not distinguish, but see everything within the unity of the norm. Let 
us not argue to win, but rather use with others the process of monkey 
trainers. This man says to the monkeys that he was raising: I will give 
you three taros in the morning, and four in the evening. The monkeys 
were all malcontent. So, he said, I’ll give you four taros in the morning, 
and three in the evening. The monkeys were all content. With the ad-
vantage of having satisfied them, this man finally gave them the seven 
taros which he had originally intended for them. And so does the sage; 
he says yes or no, for the sake of peace, and remains quiet in the center 
of the universal wheel, indifferent to the meaning in which it turns.”280 
It is scarcely necessary to say that the state of the perfect sage, with 
all that it implies and upon which we cannot insist here, cannot be at-
tained with a single stroke, and even degrees lower than this one, and 
which are like so many preliminary stages, are accessible only at the cost 
of efforts of which very few men are capable. Moreover, the methods 
employed for this purpose by Taoism are particularly difficult to follow, 
and the assistance they provide is much smaller than that which can be 
found in the traditional teachings of other civilizations, India for exam-
ple; in any case, they are practically impassable for men belonging to 
races other than that to which they are more particularly suited. Moreo-
ver, even in China, Taoism has never been widely disseminated, nor has 
it ever aimed to, always refraining from propaganda; this reserve is im-
posed by its very nature; it is an extremely closed and essentially ‘initi-
atic’ doctrine, which as such is intended only for an elite, and which can-refraining from propaganda; this reserve is im-
posed by its very nature; it is an extremely closed and essentially ‘initi-
atic’ doctrine, which as such is intended only for an elite, and which can-

279 Ibid., ch. 19. 
280 Ibid., ch. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

192 
The Veil of Isisn extremely closed and essentially ‘initi-
atic’ doctrine, which as such is intended only for an elite, and which can-

279 Ibid., ch. 19. 
280 Ibid., ch. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

192 
The Veil of Isis

not be proposed to all indistinctly, for not all are capable of understand-
ing it, and especially of ‘realizing’ it. It is said that Lao-tzu confided his 
teaching only to two disciples, who then trained ten others; following 
writing the Tao-te-ching, he disappeared to the West; no doubt he took 
refuge in some almost inaccessible retreat of Tibet or the Himalayas, and, 
as the historian Ssu-ma Ch’ien says, “we do not know where or how he 
ended his days.” 
The doctrine which is common to all, the one that all, to the extent of 
their means, must study and put into practice is Confucianism, which 
embraces all that concerns social relations is fully sufficient for the needs 
of ordinary life. Yet, since Taoism represents the principal knowledge 
from which all the rest derives, Confucianism in reality is only an appli-
cation of a contingent order, it is subordinated in law by its very nature; 
but this is something that the mass does not have to worry about, that it 
cannot even fathom, since only the practical application falls within their 
intellectual horizon; and, in the mass of which we speak, it is certainly 
necessary to understand the great majority of Confucian ‘scholars’ them-
selves. This de facto separation between Taoism and Confucianism, be-
tween the inner doctrine and the external doctrine constitutes, apart 
from any form of questioning, one of the most notable difference be-
tween the civilization of China and that of India; in the latter, there is but 
one singly body of doctrine, Brahmanism, comprising both the principle 
and all its applications, and, from the lowest to the highest, there is no 
continuum, so to speak. This difference is largely due to the mental con-
ditions of the two peoples; however, it is very probably that the continu-
ity which has been maintained in India, and no doubt in India alone, has 
existed as long ago in China, from the time of Fu-his to that of Lao-tzu 
and K’ung-tzu. 
We now see why Taoism is so unknown to Westerners: it does not 
appear on the outside as Confucianism does, whose action is manifested 
visibly in all circumstances of social life; it is the exclusive prerogative of 
an elite, perhaps more restricted in number today than it has ever been, 
and which does not wish to communicate externally the doctrine of 
which it is the guardian; finally, its very point of view, its mode of ex-
pression, and its mode of teachings are all that is foreign to the modern 
Western mind. While some know of the existence of Taoism and realiz-
ing that this tradition is still alive, imagine that, because of its closed na-
ture, its influence on the whole of Chinese civilization is practically neg-
ligible, otherwise being absolutely null; again, this is a serious mistake, 
and it remains for us to explain, to the extent that is possible to do so 
here, what is true in this respect.tically neg-
ligible, otherwise being absolutely null; again, this is a serious mistake, 
and it remains for us to explain, to the extent that is possible to do so 
here, what is true in this respect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, otherwise being absolutely null; again, this is a serious mistake, 
and it remains for us to explain, to the extent that is possible to do so 
here, what is true in this respect.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
193 
If we refer to the few texts we quoted above regarding ‘non-action,’ 
we can understand without too much difficulty, at least in principle if 
not in the modes of application, what the role of Taoism must be, the role 
of an invisible leadership, dominating the events instead of taking a di-
rect part in them, and which, to not be clearly visible in external mo-
ments, is only more profoundly effective. Taoism fulfills, as we have said, 
the function of the ‘prime mover:’ he does not seek to mingle with action, 
he is even entirely disinterested insofar as he sees in action only a tran-
sient and momentary modification, a minute element of the ‘current of 
forms,’ a point of the circumference of the ‘cosmic wheel;’ on the other 
hand, it is like the pivot around which the wheel turns, the norm on 
which its movement is regulated, precisely because it does not participate 
in this movement, and without even having to expressly intervene in it. 
All that is involved in the revolutions of the wheel changes and passes; 
all that remains, being united to the Principle, invariably stands at the 
center, immutable as the very Principle; and the center, which nothing 
can affect in its undifferentiated unity, is the starting point of the indefi-
nite multitude of modifications which constitute the universal manifes-
tation. 
It must be added at once that what we have just said concerning what 
is essentially the state and function of the perfect sage, since it is the 
latter who has actually reached the center, applies strictly only to the 
supreme degree of the Taoist hierarchy; the other degrees are such as the 
intermediaries between the center and the exterior world, and, as the 
spokes of the wheel leave its hub and connect to the circumference, they 
assure, without any discontinuity, the transmission of the influence em-
anating from the invariable point where the ‘non-acting activity’ lies. 
The term influence, not action, is the correct term here; we could also 
say, if you will, that it is a ‘action of presence;’ and even the inferior 
degrees, though far removed from the fullness of ‘non-action,’ still par-
ticipate in some way. Moreover, the modes of communication of this in-
fluence necessarily escape those who only see the outside of things; they 
would be just as unintelligible to the Western mind, and for the same 
reasons, as the methods which allow the accession to the varying degrees 
of hierarchy. It would be perfectly useless to insist on the so-called ‘tem-
ples without doors,’ the ‘colleges where we do not teach,’ or on what 
could be the constitution of organizations which do not have the charac-
ter of a ‘society’ in the European sense of the word, which have no defi-
nite external form, and which sometimes do not even have a name, and 
yet creates between their members the most effective and indissolubleiety’ in the European sense of the word, which have no defi-
nite external form, and which sometimes do not even have a name, and 
yet creates between their members the most effective and indissoluble

--- PAGE BREAK ---

194 
The Veil of Isisich have no defi-
nite external form, and which sometimes do not even have a name, and 
yet creates between their members the most effective and indissoluble

--- PAGE BREAK ---

194 
The Veil of Isis

link that can exist; all this cannot represent anything to the Western im-
agination, which is familiar with it, providing no valid term of compari-
son here. 
At the most exterior level, there are, without a doubt, organizations 
which, being engaged in the field of action, seem easier to grasp although 
they are still far more secretive than all Western associations which have 
some more or less justified pretensions in possessing this character. 
These organizations usually only have a temporary existence; formed for 
a special purpose, they disappear without a trace as soon as their mission 
is accomplished; they are merely simple emanations from other deeper 
and more permanent organizations, from which they receive their real 
direction, even though their apparent leaders are entirely alien to the 
Taoist hierarchy. Some of them, who have played a considerable role in 
the more or less distant past, have left in the minds of the people, mem-
ories which are expressed in a legendary form: thus, we have heard that 
formerly the masters of such secret associations took a handful of pins 
and threw it on the ground, and that from these pins were born so many 
armed soldiers. This is exactly the story of Cadmus sowing the dragon’s 
teeth; and these legends, which the vulgar have wrongly taken as literal, 
under their naïve appearances, a very real symbolic value. 
In many cases, it can also happen that the associations in question, or 
at least the most external, are in opposition and even in struggle with 
each other; superficial observers would not fail to draw an objection 
against what we have just said, and to conclude that, under such condi-
tions, the unity of direction cannot exist. They would only forget one 
thing, which is that the direction in question is ‘beyond’ the opposition 
which they see, and not in this field in which this opposition asserts itself 
and for which it alone is valid. If we had to answer such contradictors, 
we would confine ourselves to reminding them of the Taoist teaching on 
the equivalent of the ‘yes’ and the ‘no’ in the primordial indistinction, 
and, as for the placing into practice of this teaching, we would simply 
return them to the apologue of the monkey trainer. 
We think that we have said enough to make it clear that the real in-
fluence of Taoism can be extremely important, while always remaining 
invisible and hidden; it is not only in China that there are things such as 
this, but they seem to be more consistently applied here than anywhere 
else. It will also be understood that those who have some knowledge of 
the role of this traditional organization must be suspicious of appear-
ances and be very reserved in the estimation of events such as those cur-
rently unfolding in the Far East, which are too often assimilated with 
what is happening in the Western world, which makes them appear in a 
completely false light. Chinese civilization has gone through many otherng in the Far East, which are too often assimilated with 
what is happening in the Western world, which makes them appear in a 
completely false light. Chinese civilization has gone through many other

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
195 
crises in the past, and has always found its balance; in sum, there is noth-
ing to indicate that the present crisis is much more serious than the pre-
ceding ones, and, even if it were admitted, it would not be a reason to 
suppose that it must necessarily reach where there is something much 
more profound and essential in the tradition of the race, and a very small 
number of men may be sufficient to preserve it intact in periods of trou-
ble, for things of this order do not rely on the brute force of the multitude. 
Confucianism, which represents only the exterior side of the tradition, 
can even disappear if social conditions change to the point of requiring 
the constitution of an entirely new form; but Taoism is beyond these 
contingencies. Let it be remembered that the sage, following the Taoist 
teachings we have reported, “remains quiet in the center of the cosmic 
wheel,” whatever the circumstances may be, and that even “the collapse 
of the universe would not cause him any emotion.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---have reported, “remains quiet in the center of the cosmic 
wheel,” whatever the circumstances may be, and that even “the collapse 
of the universe would not cause him any emotion.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Conditions of Initiation 
Des conditions de l’initiation, October 1932. 
The confusion between the esoteric, initiatic domain and the mystic do-
main seems to have never been as widespread as it is today, and the find-
ings we have had the opportunity to make recently in this regard has 
committed us to formulate some considerations that seem appropriate 
and even necessary. Indeed, it is now fashionable, if we may say so, to 
call the Eastern doctrines ‘mystic,’ including those where there is not 
even a shadow of an appearance which could give rise to such a qualifi-
cation; this is a fact that appears to be quite new and it may be interesting 
to look at what tendencies or intentions it corresponds with. The origin 
of this false interpretation is naturally attributable to certain Orientalists, 
who may not have been brought to this conclusion by an ulterior motive, 
but only by the more or less unconscious bias which is ordinary for them 
to bring everything back to Western viewpoints.281 But others came then, 
seizing this assimilation, and who, seeing the part they could extract for 
purposes which do not seem entirely selfless, strive to spread the idea 
outside of the special world all in all in a quite limited way, reaching only 
the Orientalists and their clientele; and this is more serious because it is 
not difficult to perceive unequivocal marks of an ‘annexationist’ attempt, 
against which it is important to guard against; moreover, we have re-
cently given two examples of this here. 
We do not propose to expose all the differences which separate the 
two initiatic and mystic points of view here, because it would necessitate 
a whole volume, or even to specify the essential distinction of the do-
mains to which they correspond or give access to respectively. For the 
moment, our intention is only to insist on what may be called a difference 
of ‘modality,’ according to which initiation, in its very process, presentsrespond or give access to respectively. For the 
moment, our intention is only to insist on what may be called a difference 
of ‘modality,’ according to which initiation, in its very process, presents

281 Especially since the English orientalist Nicholson thought to translate taṣaw-
wuf as mysticism, it is agreed in the West that Islamic esoterism is essentially 
‘mystical;’ in this case, one does not even speak any more of esoterism, but only 
of mysticism, which is to say that one arrived at a true substitution of view-
points. The most beautiful thing is that, regarding questions of this kind, the 
opinion of the Orientalists, who know of these things only through books, is 
clearly much more important to the vast majority of Westerners than the opin-
ion of those who have a direct and effective knowledge!

--- PAGE BREAK ---o know of these things only through books, is 
clearly much more important to the vast majority of Westerners than the opin-
ion of those who have a direct and effective knowledge!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
197 
characters which are quite different from those of mysticism; this suffices 
to show at least that there are two very distinct ‘paths’ here, although it 
remains to be established, despite some apparent analogies which may 
delude the observer ‘from outside,’ that these two paths do not lead to 
the same goal. 
What is most often said in this regard is that mysticism is ‘passive,’ 
while initiation is ‘active;’ this is true, on the condition of specifying in 
what sense it is precisely understood. Above all, this means that, in the 
case of mysticism, the individual confines himself to simply receiving 
what is presented to him and as such he presents himself without himself 
being there; let us say that it is in this that the principal danger lies for 
him, because it is thus ‘open’ to all influences of whatever order and that, 
in general, he does not have the preparation that would be necessary to 
allow him to establish any discrimination between them.282 On the con-
trary, in the case of initiation it is to the individual that an initiative of 
‘realization’ belongs, which will continuing methodically under rigorous 
and incessant control, and will ordinarily lead to overcoming the possi-
bilities of the individual; it is essential to add that this initiative is not 
enough, because it is quite obvious that the individual cannot surpass 
himself by his own means, but it is he who necessarily constitutes the 
starting point of any ‘realization’ for the initiate, while the mystic has 
none, even for things which go no farther than the realm of individual 
possibilities. 
This distinction may already appear clear enough, but it will not suf-
fice; we could even say that it answers only the most ‘exoteric’ aspect of 
the question, and in any case, it is too incomplete with regards to initia-
tion, from which it is very far from including all the necessary conditions. 
Let us say first of all, although it goes without saying, that the first of 
these conditions is a certain natural aptitude or disposition, without 
which all effort is in vain, for the individual can develop only the possi-
bilities he carries within himself from the beginning; this aptitude, which 
may be called ‘initiability,’ properly constitutes the ‘qualification’ re-
quired by all initiatic traditions. Moreover, this condition is the only one 
which is, in a certain sense, common to initiation and mysticism, for it is 
clear that the mystic must also have a special natural disposition, though 
it is entirely different from that of the ‘initiable,’ it is even opposed in 
some aspects; but this condition, for him if it is also necessary, is suffi-
cient; there is nothing else which must be added to it, and circumstances 
alone can do the rest, passing at their pleasure from ‘power’ to ‘deed’ indition, for him if it is also necessary, is suffi-
cient; there is nothing else which must be added to it, and circumstances 
alone can do the rest, passing at their pleasure from ‘power’ to ‘deed’ in

282 It is also this character of ‘passivity’ which explains, if it does not justify 
them, the modern errors which tend to confound the mystics, either with ‘me-
diums’ and other ‘sensitives,’ or even with simply maladies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

198 
The Veil of Isist does not justify 
them, the modern errors which tend to confound the mystics, either with ‘me-
diums’ and other ‘sensitives,’ or even with simply maladies.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

198 
The Veil of Isis

the possibilities of the provision in question. This is a direct result of the 
character of ‘passivity’ of which we have just spoken: in such a case, it 
cannot be an effort or personal work of any kind which the mystic will 
never have to perform, and of which he must even carefully guard him-
self from, as something which would be in opposition to its ‘way,’ 
whereas, for initiation, due to its ‘active’ character, such work constitutes 
another condition which is no less strictly necessary than the first, and 
without which the passage of ‘power’ to ‘deed’ cannot be accomplished 
in any other way.283 
However, this is not all: in sum, we have only developed the first dis-
tinction, to draw the consequences, for initiation, there is a condition 
which does not exist with regards to mysticism; but there is another con-
dition, which is no less necessary, of which we have not spoken and 
which is placed between those just mentioned. This condition is even the 
most characteristic of all, that which makes it possible to preclude any 
misunderstanding of initiation and to avoid confusing it for something 
else altogether; in this case, initiation is much better determined than 
that which place themselves in the conditions required to obtain it; one 
of these conditions is precisely the one of which we speak, as another 
condition is an effort of which the men of the first ages did not have any 
need for, since spiritual development was fulfilled in them just as natu-
rally as physical development. 
Therefore, it is a necessary condition in accordance with the laws that 
govern our world today; to make it easier to understand, we can resort 
here to an analogy: all the beings that will develop during a cycle are 
contained from the beginning, in the state of subtle germs, within the 
‘Egg of the World;’ thenceforth, why should they not be born to the cor-
poreal state on their own and without parents? This is no longer an ab-
solute impossibility, and one can conceive of a world where it may be so; 
but, in fact, this world is not ours. Of course, we do not deal with ques-
tions of anomalies; there may be exceptional cases of ‘spontaneous gen-
eration,’ and in the spiritual order we have applied this very expressionorld is not ours. Of course, we do not deal with ques-
tions of anomalies; there may be exceptional cases of ‘spontaneous gen-
eration,’ and in the spiritual order we have applied this very expression

283 It follows from this, among other consequences, that doctrinal knowledge, 
which is indispensable to the initiate and whose theoretical understanding for 
him is a precondition of any ‘realization,’ may be entirely lacking to the mystic; 
hence, in addition to the possibility of multiple errors and confusions, there is 
often a strange incapacity to express oneself intelligibly. Moreover, it must be 
understood that the knowledge in question has absolutely nothing to do with all 
which is external teachings or secular knowledge, which is of no value here, and 
which would be an obstacle than an aid in many cases; a man may not know 
how to read or write, and yet he may reach the highest levels of initiation, while 
he who is a ‘savant’ and even a ‘genius’ according to the method of seeing the 
profane world, is not ‘initiable’ to any degree.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
199 
to the case of the mystic, but we have also said that it is ‘irregular,’ while 
initiation is essentially a ‘regular’ thing, which has nothing to do with 
anomalies.

It would still be necessary to know exactly how far they can 
go; they must also finally enter into some law, for all things can exist 
only as elements of the total and universal order.

If one is willing to think 
about this, it may suggest that the states realized by the mystic are not 
exactly the same as those of the initiate, and that, if their realization is 
not subject to the same laws, it is actually something else entirely; but 
this is a question of the distinction between the two initiatic and mystic 
domains themselves, a question which we have declared from the begin-
ning as not wishing to tackle here; and besides, we can now leave the 
case of mysticism entirely, on which we have said enough for what we 
propose to establish, so as to not consider initiation exclusively.

What remains for us is to specify the role of attachment to a tradi-
tional organization, which cannot exempt the internal work which each 
must accomplish by oneself, but which is required for this work itself in 
order for it to bear fruit.

It must be understood that those who have been 
made the depositories of initiatic knowledge cannot communicate it in a 
way which is more or less comparable to that which the teacher, in pro-
fane education, communicates to his pupils in bookish formulas that they 
will only have to store in their memory; the question here is of something 
which, in its very essence, is properly ‘incommunicable,’ since they are 
states which are realized internally.What remains for us is to specify the role of attachment to a tradi-
tional organization, which cannot exempt the internal work which each 
must accomplish by oneself, but which is required for this work itself in 
order for it to bear fruit.

It must be understood that those who have been 
made the depositories of initiatic knowledge cannot communicate it in a 
way which is more or less comparable to that which the teacher, in pro-
fane education, communicates to his pupils in bookish formulas that they 
will only have to store in their memory; the question here is of something 
which, in its very essence, is properly ‘incommunicable,’ since they are 
states which are realized internally.

What can be taught are only prepar-
atory methods to obtain these states; what can be provided from the out-
side in this regard, in sum, is an aid, a support which greatly facilitates 
the work to be done, and also a control that removes obstacles and dan-
gers that may arise; all this is far from being negligible, and the one who 
is deprived of it runs a great risk of failure, but even that would not fully 
justify what we said when we spoke of a necessary condition.

This is not 
what we had in mind, at least in an immediate way; all this intervenes 
only secondarily, and to some extent as consequences, after initiation 
understood in the strictest sense, as we indicated above, and when it 
comes to effectively developing the virtuality that it constitutes; but it is 
still necessary that this virtuality pre-exists.--- PAGE BREAK ---

What can be taught are only prepar-
atory methods to obtain these states; what can be provided from the out-
side in this regard, in sum, is an aid, a support which greatly facilitates 
the work to be done, and also a control that removes obstacles and dan-
gers that may arise; all this is far from being negligible, and the one who 
is deprived of it runs a great risk of failure, but even that would not fully 
justify what we said when we spoke of a necessary condition. This is not 
what we had in mind, at least in an immediate way; all this intervenes 
only secondarily, and to some extent as consequences, after initiation 
understood in the strictest sense, as we indicated above, and when it 
comes to effectively developing the virtuality that it constitutes; but it is 
still necessary that this virtuality pre-exists. It is therefore otherwise that 
the initiatic transmission must be properly understood, and we can char-
acterize it better only by saying that it is essentially the transmission of 
a ‘spiritual influence;’ we propose to return to this amply in future stud-
ies, for the moment, we will confine ourselves to more precisely deter-
mining the role played by this influence, between the natural aptitude 
previously inherent to the individual and the work of realization which 
he will accomplish later. We have remarked elsewhere that the phases of 
initiation, as well as those of the Hermetic ‘Great Work’ which is at its

--- PAGE BREAK ---

200 
The Veil of Isision which 
he will accomplish later. We have remarked elsewhere that the phases of 
initiation, as well as those of the Hermetic ‘Great Work’ which is at its

--- PAGE BREAK ---

200 
The Veil of Isis

essence only one of the symbolic expressions, that replicate those of the 
cosmogonic process; this analogy, which is based directly on that of the 
‘microcosm’ with the ‘macrocosm,’ allows, better than any other anal-
ogy, to shed light on the present question. Indeed, it can be said that the 
aptitudes or possibilities included in the individual nature are firstly, in 
themselves, only a materia prima, which is to say, a pure potentiality, 
where there is nothing developed or differentiated;284 it is then the cha-
otic and tenebrous state that initiatic symbolism corresponds precisely 
to the profane world, and in which is found the being who has not yet 
arrived at the ‘second birth.’ For this chaos to begin taking shape and 
organizing itself, an initial vibration must be communicated to it by the 
spiritual powers, which the Hebrew Genesis designates as the Elohim; 
this vibration is the Fiat Lux which illuminates the chaos, and which is 
the necessary starting point for all subsequent developments; and, from 
the initiatic point of view, this enlightenment is precisely constituted by 
the transmission of the ‘spiritual influence’ of which we have just spo-
ken.285 Henceforth, and by the virtue of this influence, the spiritual pos-
sibilities of being are no longer the mere potentiality they once were; 
they have become a virtuality ready to develop in action the various 
stages of initiatic realization. 
We can summarize all this by saying that the legitimate initiation im-
plies three conditions that present themselves in successive modes, and 
that we can respectively correspond them to the three terms ‘potential-
ity,’ ‘virtuality,’ and ‘actuality:’ 1. The ‘qualification’ constituted by cer-
tain possibilities inherent in the proper nature of the individual, and are 
the materia prima upon which the initiatic work will have to take place. 
2. The transmission, through the attachment to a traditional organiza-
tion, of a ‘spiritual influence’ giving to the being the ‘enlightenment’ 
which will enable it to order and develop these possibilities that it carries 
within itself. 3. The interior work by which, with the help of ‘adjuvants’ 
or ‘external supports,’ if there is a link especially in the early stages, this 
development will be carried out gradually, passing the being from stepior work by which, with the help of ‘adjuvants’ 
or ‘external supports,’ if there is a link especially in the early stages, this 
development will be carried out gradually, passing the being from step

284 Strictly speaking, it is a materia prima only in a relative sense, and not in the 
absolute sense; but this distinction does not matter from the point of view which 
we have placed ourselves. 
285 Hence such expressions such as ‘to give Light,’ used to designate initiation 
in the most restricted sense, which is to say, the very transmission that we are 
dealing with here. It should also be noted, as far as the Elohim are concerned, 
that the septenary number attributed to them is closely related to the constitu-
tion of the initiatic organizations, which must effectively be an image of the 
cosmic order.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
201 
to step through the various stages of the initiatic hierarchy, to lead it to 
the final goal of ‘Deliverance’ or ‘Supreme Identity.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---c order.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
201 
to step through the various stages of the initiatic hierarchy, to lead it to 
the final goal of ‘Deliverance’ or ‘Supreme Identity.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Regularity 
De la régularité initiatique, November 1932. 
We said in our previous article that initiation implies as a necessary con-
dition the attachment to a regular traditional organization; it is this very 
connection which constitutes initiation in the strictest meaning, as de-
fined by the etymology of the word which designates it, and it is it which 
is everywhere represented as a ‘second birth’ or as a ‘regeneration:’ a 
‘second birth’ because it opens the being up to a world other than the 
one where the activity of the corporeal mode is exercised, a world which 
will be for him the field of development for possibilities of a superior 
order; a ‘regeneration’ because it thus restores the being to its preroga-
tives that were natural and normal in the early ages of humanity, where 
it had not moved away from the original spirituality, towards materiality 
as it is in subsequent eras, and because it must lead it foremost as an 
essential step in its realization, to the restoration of the ‘primordial state’ 
within itself, which is the fullness and perfection of human individuality 
residing at the unique and invariable central point from which the being 
can rise to higher states. 
We must now insist upon a crucial point in this respect: it is that the 
attachment in question must be real and effective, and that a so-called 
‘ideal’ attachment, as some people have sometimes like to considerate in 
our time, as entirely in vain and effectively null. This is easy to under-
stand, since it is properly the transmission of a ‘spiritual influence,’ 
which must be carried out according to defined laws; and these laws, 
which are obviously quite different from those that govern the forces of 
the physical world, are no less rigorous, and they even present them-
selves in spite of the profound differences separating them, a certain 
analogy, the virtue of the continuity and correspondence that exist be-
tween all states of the Universal Existence. It is this analogy that allowed 
us, for example, to speak of ‘vibration’ regard the Fiat Lux by which the 
chaos of spiritual potentialities is illuminated and ordered, although it is 
by no means a vibration of a sensory order such as those studied by phys-
icists, any more than the ‘light’ in question can be identified by that 
which is grasped by the visual faculty of the corporeal organism; but 
these ways of speaking, while necessarily are symbolic since they are 
based upon analogy, are none the less strictly legitimate, for this analogyby the visual faculty of the corporeal organism; but 
these ways of speaking, while necessarily are symbolic since they are 
based upon analogy, are none the less strictly legitimate, for this analogy

--- PAGE BREAK ---y of the corporeal organism; but 
these ways of speaking, while necessarily are symbolic since they are 
based upon analogy, are none the less strictly legitimate, for this analogy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
203 
exists in the very nature of things and, in a certain sense, are much more 
distant than one might assume.286 We will return to these considerations 
more fully when we discuss, in the following studies, initiatic rites and 
their efficacy; for the moment, it is sufficient to remember that there are 
laws that must be taken into account, otherwise the desired result could 
no more be achieved than a physical effect cannot be obtained if one does 
not work within the conditions required by the laws which govern the 
productions of its subject; since it is a question of a transfer to operated 
effectively, it obviously implies a real contact, whatever the manner may 
be in which it is established, terms which will naturally be determined 
by these laws of action of the ‘spiritual influences’ which we have just 
alluded to. 
It follows from the necessity of an effective attachment there are sev-
eral extremely important consequences, either in regards to the individ-
ual who aspires to initiation, or in regards to the initiatic organizations 
themselves; these are the consequences which we intend to presently ex-
amine. We know that there are some, even many, to whom these consid-
erations will appear unpleasant, because they will disturb the idea which 
is too convenient and ‘simplistic’ that they had formed of initiation, or 
because it will destroy certain unjustified pretensions and certain more 
or less self-interested assertions, but which are devoid of any authority; 
but these are things to which we cannot stop, having, here as always, no 
concern other than the truth. 
Firstly, as far as the individual is concerned, it is clear from what has 
just been said that his intention is to be initiated, even admitting for him 
this intention to be attached to a tradition of which he may have some 
‘exterior’ knowledge, cannot by itself be sufficient to assure him an ef-
fective initiation. Indeed, it is not a question of ‘erudition,’ which, like all 
that concerns profane knowledge, is without any value here; it is no more 
a question of dreams and imaginations, nor of sentimental aspirations. If 
it were sufficient to simply read books in order to be called initiated, even 
if they were Sacred Scriptures of an authentic orthodox tradition, or to 
reflect on more or less vague past or present organizations to which oneply read books in order to be called initiated, even 
if they were Sacred Scriptures of an authentic orthodox tradition, or to 
reflect on more or less vague past or present organizations to which one

286 It is the misunderstanding of this analogy, which they base their identity 
upon, combined with the finding of a certain similarity in modes of action and 
their external effects which has led some people to make for themselves an er-
roneous conception which is more or less grossly materialized ‘spiritual influ-
ences,’ assimilated to pure and simple physical forces, such as electricity and 
magnetism; and this misunderstanding may have come also, at least in part, from 
the all too common idea of trying to draw parallels between traditional 
knowledge and the points of view of modern profane science, since these are 
two things which do not belong in the same domain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

204 
The Veil of Isisindulges his own ‘ideal’ (this word, which is used at all times nowadays, 
and which signifies all that one wants, does not mean anything at its 
essence), would be all too easy; the preliminary question of ‘qualification’ 
would therefore be entirely abolished, since everyone is naturally in-
clined to call themselves ‘well and duly qualified,’ and thus being both 
judge and party in his own case, would undoubtedly discover without 
any difficulty excellent reasons (excellent, at least, in his own eyes and 
according to the ideas he has forged) with which to consider himself an 
initiate without formality, and we do not even see why he would hesitate 
to claim himself in one fell swoop as being of the most transcendent de-
grees.

Do those who imagine that one ‘initiates’ oneself, as we have said 
before, have ever thought of the rather unfortunate consequences of their 
affirmation?

In these conditions, there is no more selection or control, no 
more ‘means of recognition,’ in the sense that we have already used this 
expression, there is no more possible hierarchy, and, of course, no more 
transmission of anything; in a word, nothing that essentially character-
izes initiation and what constitutes it in fact; yet this is what some, with 
astonishing unconsciousness, dare to present as a ‘modernized’ concept 
of initiation (well modernized indeed, and well worthy of lay, democratic, 
and egalitarian ‘ideals’), without even doubting that, instead of having at 
least ‘virtual’ initiates, which after all is something altogether, we would 
no longer have simple laymen who would undeservedly pose as initiates.

But let us leave these ramblings, which may seem negligible, if we 
have thought it our duty to speak only of it a little, it is because the mis-
understanding and the intellectual disorder which unfortunately charac-
terizes our time allows them to propagate with deplorable ease.In these conditions, there is no more selection or control, no 
more ‘means of recognition,’ in the sense that we have already used this 
expression, there is no more possible hierarchy, and, of course, no more 
transmission of anything; in a word, nothing that essentially character-
izes initiation and what constitutes it in fact; yet this is what some, with 
astonishing unconsciousness, dare to present as a ‘modernized’ concept 
of initiation (well modernized indeed, and well worthy of lay, democratic, 
and egalitarian ‘ideals’), without even doubting that, instead of having at 
least ‘virtual’ initiates, which after all is something altogether, we would 
no longer have simple laymen who would undeservedly pose as initiates.

But let us leave these ramblings, which may seem negligible, if we 
have thought it our duty to speak only of it a little, it is because the mis-
understanding and the intellectual disorder which unfortunately charac-
terizes our time allows them to propagate with deplorable ease.

What 
must be understood is, since it is a question of initiation, that it is about 
earnest things and ‘positive’ realities, we would say so willingly if the 
profane ‘scientist’ had not abused this word; that one accepts these 
things as they are, or that one no longer speaks of initiation at all; we do 
not see any possible middle way between these two attitudes, and it 
would be better to frankly renounce any initiation than to attribute to 
the name what would be nothing more than a vain parody, without even 
the external appearances that at least seek to safeguard other counter-
feits we have spoken of earlier.204 
The Veil of Isis

But let us leave these ramblings, which may seem negligible, if we 
have thought it our duty to speak only of it a little, it is because the mis-
understanding and the intellectual disorder which unfortunately charac-
terizes our time allows them to propagate with deplorable ease. What 
must be understood is, since it is a question of initiation, that it is about 
earnest things and ‘positive’ realities, we would say so willingly if the 
profane ‘scientist’ had not abused this word; that one accepts these 
things as they are, or that one no longer speaks of initiation at all; we do 
not see any possible middle way between these two attitudes, and it 
would be better to frankly renounce any initiation than to attribute to 
the name what would be nothing more than a vain parody, without even 
the external appearances that at least seek to safeguard other counter-
feits we have spoken of earlier. To return to what was the starting point of this digression, we will 
say that the individual must not only intend to be initiated, but ‘accepted’ 
by a regular organization, having the quality to confer to him initiation, 
which is to say to transmit to him the ‘spiritual influence’ of which with-
out it would be impossible for him, in spite of all of his efforts, to never 
exit from the limitations and obstacles of the profane world. It may hap-
pen that, due to his lack of ‘qualification,’ his intention is met with no

--- PAGE BREAK ---f all of his efforts, to never 
exit from the limitations and obstacles of the profane world. It may hap-
pen that, due to his lack of ‘qualification,’ his intention is met with no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
205 
response, however sincere it may be, because that is not the question, 
and in all this it is not question of ‘morality,’ but of ‘technical’ rules re-
ferring to ‘positive’ laws (we repeat this word for want of finding another 
more adequate one), and which are an inescapable necessity as, in an-
other order, the physical conditions are indispensable for the exercise of 
certain professions.287 In such a case, he will never be able to consider 
himself an initiate, whatever theoretical knowledge he may acquire; 
moreover, it is to be presumed that, even in this regard, he will never go 
very far (we speak naturally of a true understanding, though still exter-
nal, and not of mere erudition, that is, of an accumulation of memory-
based notions, as it occurs in profane education), because theoretical 
knowledge itself, going beyond certain degrees, already presupposes the 
‘qualification’ required to obtain the initiation which will allow to be 
transformed, by internal ‘realization,’ into true knowledge, so no one can 
be prevented from developing the possibilities he really carries within 
himself; in the end, only those who deceive themselves on their own ac-
count are excluded, believing that they can obtain something which, in 
reality, has been incompatible with their individual nature.288 
Continuing on to the other side of the question, which is to say the 
one which refers to the initiatic organizations themselves, we will say 
this: it is too obvious that one can only transmit what one possesses one-
self; therefore, an organization must necessarily have a ‘spiritual influ-
ence’ in order to communicate it to the individuals attached to it; and this 
immediately excludes all pseudo-initiatic organizations which are so nu-
merous in our time, and which are devoid of any authentic traditional 
character. Indeed, under these conditions an initiatic organization mustudes all pseudo-initiatic organizations which are so nu-
merous in our time, and which are devoid of any authentic traditional 
character. Indeed, under these conditions an initiatic organization must

287 Perhaps we will return to this question of initiatic ‘qualifications’ someday, 
among which are not only intellectual qualifications, but also psychic and even 
physical ones (in the corporeal sense, as this word is taken most commonly); it 
should be noted that the latter do not differ substantially from this which are 
required; even in the exoteric regions, for the access to the sacerdotal functions; 
and this is easily understandable since it is also, in both cases, the ability to re-
ceive and use ‘spiritual influences,’ and some organisms may be useless instru-
ments in this regard. 
288 For those who would be tempted to see any contradiction with what we in-
dicated in our previous note, we will add this: strange as it may seem, because 
most of our contemporaries are in complete ignorance of all that is traditionally 
scientific, psychic, and even what is corporeal generally correspond to intellec-
tual limitations, of which they are in some sort external signs. Moreover, there 
are secondary ‘qualifications’ whose absence does not constitute an impediment 
for admission to the various degrees of initiation, but only for the exercise of 
certain functions in initiatic organizations; and these are two very different 
things, that we must be very careful not to confuse, as often is done.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

206 
The Veil of Isisse of 
certain functions in initiatic organizations; and these are two very different 
things, that we must be very careful not to confuse, as often is done.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

206 
The Veil of Isis

not be the product of an individual fantasy; it cannot be founded, like a 
profane association, on the initiative of some people who decide to meet 
by adopting a form; and even if these forms are not invented from 
scratch, but borrowed from truly tradition rites, whose founders would 
have had by knowledge of ‘erudition,’ they will not be any more valid 
due to this, because, in the absence of a regular filiation, the transmission 
of the ‘spiritual influence’ is impossible and non-existence, so that in all 
cases we are dealing only with a vulgar counterfeit of initiation. This is 
even more the case when we are dealing only with pure hypotheticals, 
not to say imaginary reconstructions of traditional forms that have dis-
appeared since a more or less remote time, for example, such as those of 
ancient Egypt of Chaldea; and even if, in the use of such forms, there was 
a serious desire to be attached to the tradition to which they belonged, 
they would not be more efficacious, for one can only relate something to 
reality which has a present existence, and yet it is necessary for that, as 
we said with regards to individuals, to be ‘accepted’ by the authorized 
representations of the tradition to which we are referring, so that an ap-
parently new organization can only be legitimate if it is an extension of 
a pre-existing organization, so as to maintain without interruption a con-
tinuity of the initiatic ‘chain.’ 
In all this, we only are expressing in other words, what we have al-
ready said above about the need for an effective and direct attachment 
and the vanity of an ‘ideal’ connection; we must not be deceived in this 
respect by the denominations attributed to certain organizations which 
have no right to them, but who try to give to themselves an appearance 
of authenticity. Thus, to take as an example, there is a multitude of 
groups, of recent origin, called ‘Rosicrucians,’ without having ever had 
any contact with those of the Rose-Cross, even by some indirect and di-
verted means, and without even knowing what they were in reality, since 
they almost invariably represent them as having constituted a ‘society,’ 
which is a gross error, as we have explained on a variety of occasions. It 
is necessary to see there, most often, the need to adorn itself with a title 
that will have an effect or the will to impose on the naïve; even if one 
considers the most favorable cases, which is to say one that admits that 
the constitutions of some of these groups proceed from a desire to attach 
oneself ‘ideally’ to the Rose-Cross, it will still be, from the initiatic point 
of view, a pure nothingness. What we say about this particular example 
applies equally to all the organizations invented by the ‘occultists’ and 
other ‘neo-spiritualists’ of every kind and denomination, organizations 
which, whatever their pretensions, can in all truth be described as 
‘pseudo-initiatic,’ because they have absolutely nothing authentic tospiritualists’ of every kind and denomination, organizations 
which, whatever their pretensions, can in all truth be described as 
‘pseudo-initiatic,’ because they have absolutely nothing authentic to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
207 
transmit, and what they present is only a counterfeit, or even too often a 
parody or caricature of initiation.289 
Let us add, another consequence of the preceding is that, even though 
it is an authentic initiatic organization, its members do not have the 
power to change its forms at will or to alter them in their own essential 
way; this does not exclude certain possibilities of adaptation to circum-
stances which are imposed on individuals rather than deriving from their 
will, but which are limited in any case by the condition of not undermin-
ing the means by which the preservation and transmission of the ‘spir-
itual influence’ of which the depository organization in question is en-
sured; if this condition were not observed, it would result in a real break 
with tradition, which would cause the organization to lose its ‘regular-
ity.’ Moreover, an initiatic organization cannot validly incorporate into 
its rites elements which are borrowed from traditional forms other than 
the one in which it is regularly constituted; such elements, the adoption 
of which would have an entirely artificial character, would only repre-
sent mere superfluous fantasies, without any efficiency from the initiatic 
point of view, and which consequently would add absolutely nothing 
real, but whose presence would be, because of their heterogeneity, a 
cause of disorder and disharmony. The laws which preside over the han-
dling of ‘spiritual influences’ are too complex and too delicate a matter 
for those who do not have complete knowledge of it to be able to afford, 
with impunity, more or less arbitrary modifications to ritual forms, 
where everything has its raison d’être, and whose exact scope is likely to 
escape them.te knowledge of it to be able to afford, 
with impunity, more or less arbitrary modifications to ritual forms, 
where everything has its raison d’être, and whose exact scope is likely to 
escape them.

289 Investigations that we have made on this subject in the distant past, has led 
us to a formal and unmistakable conclusion that we must express here clearly, 
without worry about the anger that it risks raising on various sides: it we put 
aside the case of the possible survival of some rare groups of Christian Hermet-
ism in the Middle Ages, which are extremely limited in any case, it is a fact that, 
of all organizations with initiatic pretensions which are now widespread in the 
Western world, there are only two of them, who, however fallen they are due to 
their ignorance and misunderstanding of the vast majority of their members, 
can claim an authentic traditional origin and a real initiatic transmission; these 
two organizations, which moreover, to tell the truth, were originally one, albeit 
with multiple branches, are the Compagnonnages and Masonry. Everything else 
is only fantasy or charlatanism, even when it is not used to hide something 
worse; and, in this order of ideas, there is no invention so absurd or extravagant 
that in our time there is no chance of success and of being taken seriously, even 
from occultist reveries on ‘initiations in the astral’ to the American system, 
whose intentions are chiefly ‘commercial,’ so-called ‘initiation by correspond-
ence!’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

208 
The Veil of Isisltist reveries on ‘initiations in the astral’ to the American system, 
whose intentions are chiefly ‘commercial,’ so-called ‘initiation by correspond-
ence!’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

208 
The Veil of Isis

What clearly results from all this is the nullity of individual initiatives 
concerning the constitution of initiatic organizations, either in regard to 
their origin or in terms of their forms; and it may be remarked in this 
connection that there are no traditional ritual forms to which particular 
individuals can be assigned as authors. It is easy to understand that this 
is, if we recall that the essential and final goal of initiation goes beyond 
the realm of individuality and its particular possibilities, which would be 
imposed if we were to reduce it to purely human means; from this simple 
remark, and without even diving deeper into things, we can immediately 
conclude that the presence of a ‘non-human’ element is necessary, and 
as such is the character of the ‘spiritual influence,’ whose transmission 
constitutes a proper initiation. What remains for us to specify, as far as 
possible, the conditions under which this transmission can actually take 
place, which is to say, in sum, to give a clearer idea of what the different 
traditions agree to designate as the initiatic ‘chain,’ and this will be sub-
ject of a future article.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Transmission 
De la transmission initiatique, December 1932.ent 
traditions agree to designate as the initiatic ‘chain,’ and this will be sub-
ject of a future article.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Transmission 
De la transmission initiatique, December 1932.

We have said previously that proper initiation is essentially the trans-
mission of a ‘spiritual influence,’ a transmission that can only be made 
by means of a regular traditional organization, so that one cannot speak 
of initiation outside of the attachment to such an organization. We also 
specified that ‘regularity’ should be understood as excluding all pseudo-
initiatic organizations, which is to say all those, whatever their preten-
sions and whatever appearances they take, which are not actually depos-
itories of any ‘spiritual influence,’ and therefore cannot in reality convey 
anything. Therefore, it is easily understood the paramount importance 
that all traditions place on what is designated as the initiatic ‘chain,’ 
which is to say, a succession ensuring the transmission of what acts in 
an uninterrupted way; without this succession, the very observation of 
ritual forms would be in vain, because there is no vital element which is 
vital to their efficacy. 
We propose to return more specifically to the question of initiatic 
rites later, but we must now answer an objection that may arise here: 
These rites, it will be said, do they not themselves have an efficacy which 
is inherent to them? They do indeed have an efficacy, since, if they are 
not observed, or if they are altered in one of their essential elements, no 
real result can be obtained; but, if it is a necessary condition for the effi-
cacy of rites, it is not sufficient, moreover, it is necessary for these rites 
to have their effect, to be accomplished by those who have the capacity 
to accomplish them. This is by no means peculiar to initiatic rites, but 
applies equally to religious rites which are equally efficacious in their 
own right, but which cannot be validly performed by anyone; thus, if a 
religious rite requires a priestly ordination, he who has not received this 
ordination will not be able to observe all the forms and bring the desired 
intention,290 he will not obtain any result from it, because he does not 
carry the ‘spiritual influence’ which must operate by taking these ritualable to observe all the forms and bring the desired 
intention,290 he will not obtain any result from it, because he does not 
carry the ‘spiritual influence’ which must operate by taking these ritual

290 We expressly formulate here the condition of ‘intention’ to make it clear that 
rites cannot be an object of ‘experiences’ in the profane sense of the word; who-
ever wishes to accomplish a rite, of whatever order, by a mere curiosity, and to 
experience its effect, could of course be assured that the effect will be null and 
void.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

210 
The Veil of Isisaccomplish a rite, of whatever order, by a mere curiosity, and to 
experience its effect, could of course be assured that the effect will be null and 
void.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

210 
The Veil of Isis

forms as support. Even in rites of a very inferior order, of a magical order 
for example, in which an influence intervenes which is not spiritual, but 
which is merely psychic (understanding that, in the most general sense, 
it means that which belongs to the domain of the subtle elements of hu-
man individuality), the production of a real effect is conditioned in many 
cases by a certain transmission; and the most vulgar country sorcery 
would suffice for a number of examples. We do not have to insist on this 
final point, which is entirely outside our current subject; we indicate this 
only to make it clearer that, ‘a fortiori,’ a regular transmission is indis-
pensable to enable the rites involving the action of an influence of a su-
perior order, which may be properly said to be ‘non-human,’ of which is 
the case with both initiatic rites and religious rites. 
Indeed, this is the essential point, and we must insist upon it: we have 
already said that the formation of regular initiatic organizations is not at 
the disposal of individual initiates, and the same can be said for religious 
organizations, because in both cases, it requires the presence of some-
thing that cannot originate from individuals, being beyond the realm of 
human possibilities. We can even combine these two cases by saying that 
we are talking here of all organizations that can truly be described as 
‘traditional;’ it will be understood then why we refuse, as we have said 
on many occasions, to apply the name ‘tradition’ to what is only purely 
human, as profane language does this profusely; and it will not be with-
out interest to remark that this very word ‘tradition,’ in its original mean-
ing, expresses nothing but the very idea of transmission which we are 
currently considering. 
Now, for the sake of convenience, we can divide traditional organiza-
tions into the ‘exoteric’ and ‘esoteric,’ although these two terms, if we 
wished to understand them in their most precise meaning, may not apply 
everywhere with equal accuracy, but for what we have in mind, it will 
suffice to understand by ‘exoteric,’ the organizations which, in a certain 
form of civilization, are open to all indistinctly, and by ‘esoteric,’ those 
which are reserved for an elite or, in other words, where only those who 
have a particular ‘qualification’ are admitted. The latter are properly in-
itiatic organizations; as for the others, they do not include only religious 
organizations, but also, as can be seen in Oriental civilizations, social or-
ganizations that do not carry a religious character, while simultaneously 
being attached to a principle of a higher order, which the essential con-
dition for them to be recognized as being traditional. Since we do not 
have to consider exoteric organizations in themselves here, only to com-
pare their case with that of esoteric or initiatic organizations, we can 
limit ourselves to the consideration of religious organizations, becauseoteric organizations in themselves here, only to com-
pare their case with that of esoteric or initiatic organizations, we can 
limit ourselves to the consideration of religious organizations, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---in themselves here, only to com-
pare their case with that of esoteric or initiatic organizations, we can 
limit ourselves to the consideration of religious organizations, because

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
211 
they are the only ones of the type known in the West, and so what is 
related to it will be more immediately understandable. 
We will say this: all religion, in the true sense of the word, has a ‘non-
human’ origin and is organization in such a way as to preserve the de-
posit of an element which is also ‘non-human’ in that it derives from this 
origin; this element, which is order of the order of what we call ‘spiritual 
influences,’ exerts its effective action by means of appropriate rites, and 
the fulfillment of these rites, to be valid, provide a real support for the 
influence in question, requires direct and uninterrupted transmission 
within the religious organizations. If this is true in the purely exoteric 
order (and it is well understood that what we say is not addressed to 
denying ‘critics’ who claim to reduce religion to a ‘human fact,’ while we 
do not take this opinion into consideration), then it is even more so in 
the higher order, such as in the esoteric order. The terms which we have 
just used are broad enough to apply here without change, replacing only 
the word ‘religion’ with that of ‘initiation;’ the entire difference is in the 
exact nature of the ‘spiritual influences’ that come into play (for there 
are many distinctions to be made in this domain, where we understand, 
in sum, all that pertains to supra-individual possibilities), and especially 
the respective ends of the action they perform in each case. 
If we make ourselves better understood, we refer more specifically to 
the case of Christianity in the religious order, we can add this: the rites 
of initiation, aiming at the transmission of the ‘spiritual influence’ from 
one individual to another who can then transmit it in turn, are exactly 
comparable to ordination rites in this respect;291 and it may even be re-
marked that both are similarly susceptible to several degrees, since the 
fullness of the ‘spiritual influence’ is not necessarily communicated at 
once with all the prerogatives that it implies, especially with regards to 
the current aptitude to perform such and such functions within the tra-
ditional organization.292 Now we know how important the question of 
‘apostolic succession’ is to the Christian churches, and this is under-
standable without any difficult, since, if this succession were to be inter-
rupted, no ordination would be valid, and consequently most of the rites’ is to the Christian churches, and this is under-
standable without any difficult, since, if this succession were to be inter-
rupted, no ordination would be valid, and consequently most of the rites

291 We say ‘in this respect’ because, from another point of view, the first initia-
tion, as ‘second birth,’ would be comparable to the rite of baptism; it goes with-
out saying that the correspondences that can be envisaged between orders as 
different as these must be necessarily rather complex and cannot be reduced to 
a sort of unilinear scheme. 
292 We say ‘current aptitude’ to make it clear that this is something other than 
the prior ‘qualification,’ which can also be referred to as aptitude; thus, it may 
be said that an individual is fit for the exercise of priestly functions if he has no 
impediments which forbid access to it, but he will be able to do so only if he has 
actually received the ordination.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

212 
The Veil of Isisise of priestly functions if he has no 
impediments which forbid access to it, but he will be able to do so only if he has 
actually received the ordination.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

212 
The Veil of Isis

would be nothing more than vain formalities without any real impact.293 
Those who rightly admit the necessity of such a condition in the religious 
order should not have the slightest difficult in understanding that it does 
not impose itself any less rigorously in the initiatic order, or, in other 
terms, that a regular transmission, constituting the ‘chain’ of which we 
spoke above, is just as strictly indispensable. 
We said earlier that initiation must have a ‘non-human’ origin, for 
otherwise it could not achieve its ultimate goal in any way, which goes 
beyond the realm of individual possibilities; that is why the true initiatic 
rites, as we have indicated before, cannot be related to human authors, 
and, in fact, we never know such authors,294 any more than we know the 
inventors of traditional symbols, and for the same reason, because these 
symbols are also ‘non-human’ in their origin and essence.295 It can be 
said in all seriousness that in cases like these there is no ‘historical’ 
origin, since the real origin is in a world to which the conditions of time 
and place, which define historical facts, do not apply; and this is why 
these things will always inevitably escape the profane methods of re-
search, which can give valid results only in the purely human order.296ch define historical facts, do not apply; and this is why 
these things will always inevitably escape the profane methods of re-
search, which can give valid results only in the purely human order.296

293 In fact, Protestant churches which do not admit sacerdotal functions have 
suppressed almost all rites or have kept them only as mere ‘commemorative’ 
simulacra; and they cannot be anything more in such a case. On the other hand, 
discussions of the question of ‘apostolic succession’ gives rise to questions of 
legitimacy for the Anglican church; and it is curious to note that the Theoso-
phists themselves, when they wished to constitute their ‘Liberal Catholic’ 
church, sought above all to ensure the benefit of a regular ‘apostolic succession.’ 
294 Certain attributions to legendary, or more specifically symbolic, characters 
cannot in any way be regarded as having a ‘historical’ character, but on the con-
trary they fully confirm what we say here. 
295 The esoteric Muslim organizations transmit to themselves a sign of recogni-
tion which, according to tradition, was communicated to the Prophet by the 
archangel Gabriel himself; the ‘non-human’ origin of initiation cannot be more 
clearly indicated. 
296 It would be noted in this connection that those who, with ‘apologetic’ inten-
tions, insist on what they call, by a rather barbaric term, the ‘historicity’ of a 
religion, which they see through to their very essential and subordinate doctri-
nal considerations (whereas, on the contrary, the historical facts themselves are 
really worth anything as they are taken as symbols of spiritual realities), which 
commits a serious error to the detriment of the ‘transcendence’ of the religion. 
Such an error, which bears witness to a rather strongly ‘materialized’ conception 
and the inability to rise to a higher order, can be regarded as an unfortunate 
concession from the ‘humanist’ point of view, which is individualistic and anti-
traditional, which properly characterizes the modern Western spirit.a higher order, can be regarded as an unfortunate 
concession from the ‘humanist’ point of view, which is individualistic and anti-
traditional, which properly characterizes the modern Western spirit.

--- PAGE BREAK ---be regarded as an unfortunate 
concession from the ‘humanist’ point of view, which is individualistic and anti-
traditional, which properly characterizes the modern Western spirit.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
213 
Under such conditions, it is easy to understand that the role of the 
individual who confers initiation on another takes the role of ‘transmit-
ter,’ in the most precise meaning of the word; he does not act as an indi-
vidual, but as a support for an influence that does not belong to the indi-
vidual order; it is only a ring of the ‘chain’ whose starting point is outside 
and beyond humanity. This is why he cannot act in his own name, but 
in the name of the organization to which he is attached and whose pow-
ers he possesses, or, more specifically, in the name of the principle that 
this organization visibly represents. This explains that the efficacy of the 
rite performed by an individual is independent of the value of the indi-
vidual and as such is also true of religious rites; and we do not mean this 
in the ‘moral’ sense, which would be too obviously irrelevant in a ques-
tion which is in fact exclusively ‘technical’ in nature, but in the sense 
that, even if the individual does not possess the degree of knowledge 
necessary to understand the profound meaning of the rite and the essen-
tial reason for its various elements, this rite will have its full effect if, 
being regularly invested with the function as ‘transmitter,’ he performs 
it in observing all the proscribed rules, and with an intention sufficient 
to determine the consciousness of his attachment to the traditional or-
ganization. From this comes the immediate consequences, that even an 
organization where it would not be at a certain moment more than we 
can call ‘virtual’ initiates would still be able to continue to transmit the 
‘spiritual influence’ of which it is a depository; it suffices for the ‘chain’ 
not to be interrupted; in this respect, the well-known fable of the ‘the ass 
bearing relics’ is likely to have an initiatic significance worthy of consid-
eration.297 
On the contrary, the complete knowledge of a rite, if it has been ob-
tained outside the regular conditions, is entirely devoid of any value; 
thus, to take a simple example (since the rite is reduced to the pronunci-
ation of a formula), in the Hindu tradition, a mantra that has been learned 
otherwise from the mouth of an authorized guru is without effect, be-
cause it is not ‘vivified’ by the presence of the ‘spiritual influence’ of 
which it is only intended to serve as the vehicle.298 This extents to onemouth of an authorized guru is without effect, be-
cause it is not ‘vivified’ by the presence of the ‘spiritual influence’ of 
which it is only intended to serve as the vehicle.298 This extents to one

297 It is remarkable that, in this connection, that relics are precisely a vehicle of 
‘spiritual influences;’ this the true reason for worship of which they are not the 
object, even if this reason is not always conscious among the representatives of 
the exoteric religions, who sometimes seem to not realize the very ‘positive’ 
character of the forces they handle, which does not prevent these forces from 
actually acting, even without their knowledge, although perhaps with less than 
if they were better ‘technically’ directed. 
298 Note in passing, regarding ‘vivification,’ if we can say this, that the consecra-
tion of temples, images, and ritual objects has the essential purpose of making it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

214 
The Veil of Isispassing, regarding ‘vivification,’ if we can say this, that the consecra-
tion of temples, images, and ritual objects has the essential purpose of making it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

214 
The Veil of Isis

degree or another, to all that is attached to a ‘spiritual influence:’ thus, 
the study of the sacred texts of a tradition, made in books, can never 
supplement their direct communication; and this is why, even where the 
traditional teachings have been more or less completely written down, 
they nevertheless continue to regularly be the subject of oral transmis-
sion, which, at the same time is essential to give them their full effect 
(since it is not a question of adhering to merely theoretical knowledge), 
which ensures the perpetuation of the ‘chain’ to which the very life of 
tradition is linked. Otherwise, we would only be dealing with a dead tra-
dition, to which no actual attachment is possible; and if the knowledge 
of what remains of such a tradition may still have some theoretical inter-
est (apart, of course, from the point of view of mere profane erudition, 
whose value here is null, and as it may help to understand certain doc-
trinal truths), it cannot be of any direct benefit for any ‘realization.’299 
In all this, it is so completely a matter of communicating something 
‘vital’ that, in India, no disciple can ever sit facing the guru, in order that 
the action of prana, which is linked to the breath and the voice, is not 
exercised too directly so that it produces a violent shock which, conse-
quently, could be without danger, both psychically and even physi-
cally.300 This action is all the more powerful in the prana itself, in such a 
case, it is only the vehicle or the support of the ‘spiritual influence’ which 
is transmitted from the guru to the disciple; and the guru, in the exercise 
of his own function, must not be considered as an individuality (which 
then disappears truly, except as a mere support), but only as the repre-
sentative of the very tradition, which he embodies in a way in relation to 
his disciple, which is indeed the role of ‘transmitter’ as we spoke above. 
We think that we have said enough to show, as clearly as possible, 
the necessity of the initiatic transmission, and to make it clear that these 
are not more or less vague and nebulous things, but extremely precise 
and well-defined things. In order to complete what we have said on this 
question, we would still have to speak a little regarding the spiritual cen-
ters from which any regular transmission proceeds, directly or indirectly; 
although we have already had occasion to give many notes elsewhere in 
this regard,301 this subject is rather important from the point of viewy regular transmission proceeds, directly or indirectly; 
although we have already had occasion to give many notes elsewhere in 
this regard,301 this subject is rather important from the point of view

the effective receptacle of ‘spiritual influences,’ without which the presence and 
action of the rites to which they are to serve would be ineffective. 
299 This completes and clarifies what we said in our last article about the vanity 
of an alleged ‘ideal’ attachment to the forms of a vanished tradition. 
300 There is also the explanation of the special arrangements of seats in a Ma-
sonic lodge, which most current Masons, are certainly far from suspecting. 
301 See our study on The King of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
215 
where we place ourselves, so that it is not without benefit to return to it 
in another article.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Centers 
Des centres initiatiques, January 1933.---

René Guénon 
215 
where we place ourselves, so that it is not without benefit to return to it 
in another article.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Centers 
Des centres initiatiques, January 1933.

All regular initiations transmissions proceed more or less directly, as we 
have said, from spiritual centers which are themselves attached to the 
supreme center which preserves the repository of the Primordial Tradi-
tion, from which all particular traditional forms are derived by adapta-
tion to specific circumstances of time and place. We have indicated in 
our study on The King of the World, how these spiritual centers are con-
stituted in the image of the supreme center, of which they are in a way 
like so many reflections; we will not return to this here, and we will only 
consider some points which are more immediately related to the ques-
tions we have dealt with in our preceding articles. 
Firstly, it is easy to understand that the attachment to the supreme 
center is indispensable to ensure the continuity of transmissions of ‘spir-
itual influences’ from the very origin of present humanity (we should 
even say beyond these origins, since what is involved is ‘non-human’) 
and throughout the duration of its cycle of existence; this is true of eve-
rything that has a truly traditional character, even for exoteric, religious, 
or other such organizations, at least at their onset; this is even more so 
in the initiatic order. At the same time, it is in this connection which 
maintains the inner and essential unity existing under the diversity of 
formal appearances, and, therefore, is the guarantee of ‘orthodoxy,’ in 
the true meaning of the word. It must be understood that this attachment 
may not always remain conscious, and this is all too obvious in the exo-
teric order; on the contrary, it seems that it should always be so in the 
case of initiatic organizations, one of whose fundamental reasons, by tak-
ing a certain traditional form, is to go beyond this form and rise from 
diversity to unity. Naturally, this does not mean that such a conscious-
ness must exist in all the members of an initiatic organization, which is 
obviously impossible and would make the existence of a hierarchy of de-
grees useless, but it should exist at the peak of this hierarchy, if all those 
who have reached it were truly ‘adepts,’ that is, beings who have actually 
realized the fullness of initiation; such ‘adepts’ would constitute an initi-
atic center which would constantly be in conscious communication with 
the supreme center. However, in reality, this may not always be so, if 
only because of a certain degeneration that makes the removal of originsch would constantly be in conscious communication with 
the supreme center. However, in reality, this may not always be so, if 
only because of a certain degeneration that makes the removal of origins

--- PAGE BREAK ---be in conscious communication with 
the supreme center. However, in reality, this may not always be so, if 
only because of a certain degeneration that makes the removal of origins

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
217 
possible, and which can reach the point, as we said earlier, where an or-
ganization would come to only understand what we have called ‘virtual 
initiates,’ yet it still transmits, even if they do not realize it, the ‘spiritual 
influence’ of which this organization is the depository. In such a case, 
the attachment still remains, so that the transmission has not been inter-
rupted, and it is sufficient for some who have received the ‘spiritual in-
fluence’ in these conditions to be able to regain consciousness if he has 
within him the required possibilities; even in this case, belonging to an 
initiatic organization is far from representing only a mere formality 
without real meaning, such as those who do not reach the essence of 
things. 
Furthermore, it is important to note that an initiatic organization can 
proceed from the supreme center, not directly, but through secondary 
and subordinate centers, which is the most common case; as there is in 
each organization a hierarchy of degrees, there are also, among the or-
ganizations themselves, what may be called degrees of ‘interiority’ and 
of relative ‘externality;’ it is clear that those which are the most external, 
which is to say the furthest from the supreme center, are also those 
where the consciousness of attachment can be lost most easily. Although 
the purpose of all initiatic organizations is essentially the same, there are 
some who are at different levels of participation within the Primordial 
Tradition (which, by the way, does not mean that among their members 
there cannot be those who have personally attained the same degree of 
effective knowledge); there is no reason to be astonished, if we observe 
that the different traditional forms themselves do not all immediately de-
rive from the original source; the ‘chain’ can count a greater or lesser 
number of intermediate rings, without being any solution of continuity. 
The existence of this superposition is not one of the least reasons among 
all those that make up the complexity and difficulty of a somewhat in-
depth study of the constitution of initiatic organizations; it must be added 
that such a superposition can also be found within the same traditional 
form, and we have had occasion to give a particularly clear example here 
with respect to the Far-Eastern tradition.302 This example is perhaps one 
of those which best allows us to understand how continuity is ensured 
through the multiple echelons constituted by so many superimposed or-
ganizations, since those engaged in the field of action are only temporary 
formations destined to play a relatively external role, as opposed to those 
of the most profound order, which, while being a resident of the ‘non-
action’ principal, by this very fact, they give all others their real direction. 
In this connection, we must draw special attention to the fact that, even, which, while being a resident of the ‘non-
action’ principal, by this very fact, they give all others their real direction. 
In this connection, we must draw special attention to the fact that, even

302 See our article on Taoism and Confucianism, in the special issue on China 
(August-September 1932).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

218 
The Veil of Isise must draw special attention to the fact that, even

302 See our article on Taoism and Confucianism, in the special issue on China 
(August-September 1932).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

218 
The Veil of Isis

if some of the most external organizations, find themselves in opposition 
to each other, this cannot in any way prevent the unity of direction from 
existing, because the direction in question is beyond any opposition, and 
not in the field where it asserts itself. In short, there is something com-
parable to the roles played by different actors in the same play, and 
which, even as they are opposed, do not contribute any less to the march 
of the whole; each organization plays the same role as it is intended, and 
this can even extend to the exoteric domain, where the elements that 
fight against each other adhere to a single direction of which they do not 
even suspect of existing, albeit quite unconsciously and involuntarily.303 
These considerations also show, within the same organization, how 
there may be a kind of dual hierarchy, and this especially is the case 
where the apparent leaders are not themselves are aware of the attach-
ment to a spiritual center; there may then be, outside of the visible hier-
archy that they form, another invisible hierarchy whose members, with-
out fulfilling any ‘official’ function, will be those who effectively ensure, 
by their very presence, an effective liaison with the center. These repre-
sentatives of the spiritual centers, in the most relatively external organi-
zations, obviously do not have to make themselves known as such, and 
they can take such a look as is best suited to the ‘action of presence’ that 
they fulfill, that is that of the simple members of the organizations if they 
must play a fixed and permanent role, or if it is a momentary influence 
before being transported to different points, that of the mysterious ‘trav-
elers’ whose history has guarded more than one example, and whose ex-
ternal attitude is often chosen in the best way to either baffle investiga-
tors, whether it is to get attention for special reasons or to otherwise go 
completely unnoticed.304 It is also possible to understand what role thoseosen in the best way to either baffle investiga-
tors, whether it is to get attention for special reasons or to otherwise go 
completely unnoticed.304 It is also possible to understand what role those

303 According to the Islamic tradition, every being is a muslim, which is to say 
the subject of divine will, from which nothing can escape; the difference be-
tween beings consists in that, while some consciously and voluntarily conform 
to the universal order, the others ignore it or even claim to oppose it (see The 
Symbolism of the Cross, ch. 25). To fully comprehend the relationship of this with 
what we have just said, it must be noted that the true spiritual centers must be 
considered as representing the Divine Will in this world; those who are effec-
tively attached to it can be regarded as collaborating consciously in the realiza-
tion of what the Masonic initiation refers to as the ‘plan of the Great Architect;’ 
as for the two other categories which we alluded to, those who are pure and 
simply ignorant are the profane, and those who have the illusory pretension of 
being against the pre-established order, belong to ‘counter-initiation,’ of which 
we will have to speak later. 
304 In this final case, which necessarily escapes historians, but which is likely the 
most frequent, we will cite only two typical examples, which is well known in

--- PAGE BREAK ---o speak later. 
304 In this final case, which necessarily escapes historians, but which is likely the 
most frequent, we will cite only two typical examples, which is well known in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
219 
who, without belonging to any known organization (and we mean an 
organization with external graspable forms), presided in some cases over 
the formation of such organizations, or, afterwards, inspired and directed 
them visibly; such was the role of the Rose-Cross in the Western world, 
and this is also the true meaning of what Masonry of the eighteenth cen-
tury referred to as the ‘Unknown Superiors.’ 
All this makes it possible to foresee certain possibilities of actions of 
the spiritual centers, apart from the means which one can consider as 
normal, and that especially when the circumstances are abnormal, we 
mean in such conditions that do not allow the use of more direct routes 
and a manifest regularity. Therefore, without even mentioning the im-
mediate intervention of the spiritual center, which is possible always and 
everywhere, a spiritual center, whatever it may be, can act outside of its 
normal zone of influence, either in favor of particularly ‘qualified’ indi-
viduals, but who is isolated in an environment where the obscuration has 
reached such a point that nothing traditional remains in it and initiation 
can no longer be achieved, either in view of a more general purpose, and 
also something more exceptional, such as that which would consist in 
renewing an initiatic ‘chain’ which was broken accidently. Such an ac-
tion occurs more specifically in a period or in a civilization where spirit-
uality is completely lost, and where, therefore, things of the initiatic or-
der are more hidden than in any other case, it should not be surprising 
that its modes are extremely difficult to define, especially since the ordi-
nary conditions of place and sometimes even time become virtually non-
existent. We will not insist on this anymore; what is essential to remem-
ber is that, even if an apparently isolated individual happens to have a 
real initiation, this initiation can never be spontaneous in appearance, 
and that, in fact, it will always imply the attachment to an existing center 
by some means, apart from such an attachment, it can in no way be a 
question of initiation. 
If we return to the considerations of normal cases, we must say this 
again to avoid any ambiguity on what precedes: in alluding to certain 
oppositions, we are not considering the multiple paths that can be repre-
sented by so many special initiatic organizations, either in correspond-
ence with different traditional forms, or in the same traditional form. 
This multiplicity is made necessary by the very fact of the differences of 
nature which exist between individuals, so that each can find that which, 
being in conformity with it, will permit him to develop his own possibil-
ities; if the goal is the same for all, the starting points are indefinitely 
diversified and comparable to the multitude of points of a circumference,it, will permit him to develop his own possibil-
ities; if the goal is the same for all, the starting points are indefinitely 
diversified and comparable to the multitude of points of a circumference,

the Taoist tradition and whose equivalent can even be found in the Occident: 
that of the jongleurs and that of the horse traders.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

220 
The Veil of Isisoints of a circumference,

the Taoist tradition and whose equivalent can even be found in the Occident: 
that of the jongleurs and that of the horse traders.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

220 
The Veil of Isis

from which departs so many rays which end in the single center, and 
which are thus the image of the very paths in question. There is no op-
position in all this, but on the contrary a perfect harmony; in fact, there 
can be opposition only when certain organizations are, by reason of con-
tingent circumstances, called upon to a sort of accidental role, which is 
external to the essential purpose of initiation and not affecting it in any-
way. However, it may be supposed from certain appearances, and it is 
often believed in fact, that there are initiations which are, in themselves, 
opposed to each other; but this is a mistake and it is easy to understand 
why it cannot be so. Indeed, since there is in principle only one Unique 
Tradition, from which every orthodox traditional form is derived, there 
can be only one initiation that is equally unique in its essence, albeit in 
various forms and with multiple modalities; where ‘regularity’ is lacking, 
which is to say, where there is no attachment to a traditional orthodox 
center, we are no longer dealing with true initiation, and it is only abu-
sively that this word can still be used in such a case. In this we do not 
mean to speak only of the pseudo-initiatic organizations which have al-
ready been mentioned before, and which are really nought; but there is 
something else which presents a more serious character, and which is 
precisely what can give an appearance of reason to the illusions which 
we have just pointed out: if it seems that there are opposing initiations, 
it is because, apart from true initiation, there is what may be called, albeit 
with certain reservations, the ‘counter-initiation;’ we will have to explain 
ourselves smore completely on this point, which is too often misunder-
stood or misinterpreted, so that further developments will be necessary 
to dispel the confusions which give rise and makes things appear in their 
true form.this point, which is too often misunder-
stood or misinterpreted, so that further developments will be necessary 
to dispel the confusions which give rise and makes things appear in their 
true form.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiation and Counter-Initiation 
Initiation et contre-initiation, February 1932.necessary 
to dispel the confusions which give rise and makes things appear in their 
true form.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiation and Counter-Initiation 
Initiation et contre-initiation, February 1932.

We have said to conclude our previous article, that there is something 
that may be called ‘counter-initiation,’ which is something that it pre-
sents itself as an initiation and which can give this illusion, but which 
goes against true initiation. Yet, we added that this designation calls for 
some reservations; indeed, if taken in the strictest sense, it could force us 
to believe in a sort of symmetry, or an equivalence, so to speak (albeit in 
the opposing direction), which, is in the claims of those who are attached 
to it, but which does not exist and cannot exist. It is on this point that it 
is necessary to insist, because many, being deceived by appearances, im-
agine that there are in the world two opposing organizations fighting for 
supremacy, a wrong conception which corresponds to that which, in the-
ological language, puts Satan on the same level as God, and that, rightly 
or wrongly, is commonly attributed to the Manichaeans. This concep-
tion, let us note, amounts to affirming a radically irreducible duality, or 
in other words, to denying the Supreme Unity which is beyond all oppo-
sitions and antagonisms; there is no reason to be surprised that such a 
negation is the result of the very adherents of ‘counter-initiation,’ but, at 
the same time, it shows that the metaphysical truth, even in its most el-
ementary principles, is totally alien to them, and thus their claim de-
stroys itself. 
It is important to note before everything else, in its very origins, 
‘counter-initiation’ cannot stand as something independent and autono-
mous: if it had been spontaneously formed, it would be nothing but a 
human invention, and thus would not be distinguished from pure and 
simple ‘pseudo-initiation.’ To be more than this, as it is in fact, it must 
necessarily proceed from the sole source to which all initiation is at-
tached, in a way, and, more generally, all that manifests in our world as 
a ‘non-human’ element; it proceeds through degeneration to go so far as 
this ‘reversal’ which constitutes what can properly be called ‘Satanism.’ 
Therefore, it appears that this is, in fact, a deviated and distorted initia-
tion, which, by the same token, no longer has the right to be truly de-
scribed as initiation since it no longer leads to the essential goal of the 
latter, and even removes it instead of coming closer to it. It is not enough 
to speak here of a truncated and reduced initiation at its most inferiorit no longer leads to the essential goal of the 
latter, and even removes it instead of coming closer to it. It is not enough 
to speak here of a truncated and reduced initiation at its most inferior

--- PAGE BREAK ---

222 
The Veil of Isisf the 
latter, and even removes it instead of coming closer to it. It is not enough 
to speak here of a truncated and reduced initiation at its most inferior

--- PAGE BREAK ---

222 
The Veil of Isis

part, as it may happen in certain cases; the alteration is much deeper, but 
there are two different stages in the same process of degeneration. The 
point of departure is always a revolt against legitimate authority, and the 
claim to independence that cannot exist, as we have had the opportunity 
to explain elsewhere;305 what immediately results is the loss of all effec-
tive contact with a true spiritual center, thus the impossibility of reach-
ing the supra-human states; in what still subsists, the deviation can then 
only worse, passing through different degrees, to arrive in extreme cases, 
at the ‘reversal’ of which we have just spoken. 
A premier consequence of this is that the ‘counter-initiation,’ what-
ever its pretentions may be, is nothing but a dead end, since it is incapa-
ble of leading the being beyond the human state; in this very state, be-
cause of the ‘reversal’ which characterizes it, the modes which it devel-
ops are those of the lowest order. In Islamic esoterism, it is said that who-
ever brings himself to a certain ‘door,’ without having reached it in a 
normal and legitimate way sees the door close before him and is obliged 
to turn back, not however as a mere layman, which is now impossible, 
but as sāḥir (sorcerer or magician); we cannot give a clearer expression 
of what this is. 
Another related consequence of this is that, due to the link with the 
center being broken, the ‘spiritual influence’ is lost; this would be enough 
for us to be able to speak truly of initiation, since this, as we have ex-
plained previously, is essentially constituted by the transmission of this 
influence. However, there is something else which is transmitted, with-
out which we would have reduced it to the case of ‘pseudo-initiation,’ 
devoid of all efficacity; but it is no more than an influence of a lower 
order, ‘psychic’ and no longer ‘spiritual,’ and which, thus abandoned to 
itself and without control of a transcendent element, inevitably takes on 
a ‘diabolic’ character.306 It is also easy to understand that this psychic 
influence can imitate spiritual influences in its external manifestations, 
to the point that those who stop at appearances will be mistaken, since 
it belongs to the order of reality in which these manifestations occur (and 
do we not say proverbially, in a sense comparable to this, “Satan is the 
monkey of God?”); but it imitates it, one could say, just as the elements 
of the same order evoked by the necromancer imitate the conscious being 
to which they belonged.307 Let us say by the way, this fact is one of thoset imitates it, one could say, just as the elements 
of the same order evoked by the necromancer imitate the conscious being 
to which they belonged.307 Let us say by the way, this fact is one of those

305 See Spiritual Authority and Temporal Power. 
306 According to the Islamic doctrine, it is by the nafs (the soul) that the Shayṭān 
takes over man, while the rūḥ (the spirit), whose essence is pure light, is beyond 
his attacks; moreover, this is why ‘counter-initiation’ can in no way affect the 
metaphysical domain, which is prohibited through its purely spiritual character. 
307 See our work on The Spiritist Fallacy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s is why ‘counter-initiation’ can in no way affect the 
metaphysical domain, which is prohibited through its purely spiritual character. 
307 See our work on The Spiritist Fallacy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
223 
which show that identical phenomena in themselves can differ entirely 
as to their root causes; this is one of the reasons why, from an initiatic 
point of view, there should be no importance attributed to such phenom-
ena for whatever they may be, they cannot prove anything in relation to 
pure spirituality. 
That being said, we can specify the limits within which ‘counter-ini-
tiation’ is likely to oppose true initiation: it is obvious that these limits 
are those of the human state within its multiple modes; in other words, 
the opposition can only exist in the field of ‘lesser mysteries,’ while that 
of the ‘greater mysteries,’ which relates to supra-human states, is, by its 
very nature, beyond such opposition, as it is so completely closed to all 
that is not true initiation according to traditional orthodoxy.308 As for the 
‘lesser mysteries’ themselves, there will be between initiation and ‘coun-
ter-initiation,’ this fundamental difference: in one, there will only be a 
preparation for ‘greater mysteries;’ in the other, they inevitably will be 
taken as an end in themselves, the access to the ‘greater mysteries’ being 
forbidden. It goes without saying that there may be other differences of 
a more special character; but we shall not enter into these considerations 
here, of which are a secondary importance from the point of view in 
which we place ourselves, and which would require a detailed examina-
tion of the whole variety of forms that ‘counter-initiation’ may take. 
Naturally, centers may be set up by organizations which are linked to 
‘counter-initiation;’ but it will then be purely ‘psychic’ centers, and not 
spiritual centers, although they may, by reason of what we have indi-
cated above as to the action of corresponding influences, take completely 
external appearances. It will not be surprising is that these centers them-
selves, and not just some of the organizations subordinated to them, may 
in many cases be in conflict with one another, for the field in which they 
are situated is one in which all oppositions are given free rein, when they 
are not harmonized and brought back to unity by the direct action of a 
principle of a higher order. Hence, as far as the manifestations of these 
centers or of what emanates from them, there is often an impression of 
confusion and incoherence which is not illusory; they agree only nega-
tively, one could say, in the struggle against the true spiritual centers, 
insofar as they are at a level that allows such a struggle to engage, which 
is to say, according to what we have just explained in regards to the fielde struggle against the true spiritual centers, 
insofar as they are at a level that allows such a struggle to engage, which 
is to say, according to what we have just explained in regards to the field

308 We have been reproached for not considering the distinction between ‘lesser 
mysteries’ and ‘greater mysteries’ when we spoke of the conditions of initia-
tions; it was that this distinction did not have to intervene then, since we envis-
aged initiation in general, and that besides there being only different stages or 
degrees of one and the same initiation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

224 
The Veil of Isisto intervene then, since we envis-
aged initiation in general, and that besides there being only different stages or 
degrees of one and the same initiation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

224 
The Veil of Isis

of exclusively ‘lesser mysteries.’ All that pertains to the ‘greater myster-
ies’ is exempt from such opposition, and even more so the supreme spir-
itual center, the source and principle of all initiation, can it not be at-
tained or affected to any degree by any struggle whatsoever (and this is 
why it is said to be ‘elusive’ or ‘inaccessible to violence’); this leads us to 
point out yet another point which is of particular importance. 
Representatives of ‘counter-initiation’ have the illusion of opposing 
the supreme spiritual authority, which nothing can oppose, because it is 
obvious that then it would not be supreme: supremacy admits no duality, 
and such an assumption is contradictory in itself; but their illusion stems 
from the fact that they cannot know its true nature. We can go further: 
despite themselves and without their knowledge, they are subordinated 
to this authority, in the same way that, as we said before, everything is, 
even unconsciously and involuntarily, subject to the Divine Will, to 
which nothing can escape. They are therefore used, though against their 
own will, for the realization of the divine plan in the human world; like 
all other beings, they play the role that suits their own nature, but, in-
stead of being aware of this role as the true initiates are, they have fooled 
themselves, and in a way which is worse than the simple ignorance of 
the profane, since instead of remaining at the same extent from the same 
point, it results in rejecting even further from the principal center. But, 
if we consider things, no longer in relation to these beings themselves, 
but in relation to the whole world, we must say that, as well as the others, 
they are necessary in the place that they occupy, as elements of the en-
semble, and as ‘providential’ instruments, as one might say in theological 
language, of the march of the world in its cycle of manifestation; there-
fore, they are, in the last resort, dominated by the authority which man-
ifests the Divine Will by giving to this world its Law, and which makes 
them serve its ends in spite of themselves, all the partial disorders neces-
sarily having to contribute to the total order.309ifests the Divine Will by giving to this world its Law, and which makes 
them serve its ends in spite of themselves, all the partial disorders neces-
sarily having to contribute to the total order.309

309 To avoid any ambiguity on what we have said before concerning the state of 
initiatic and pseudo-initiatic organizations in the present West, we wish to make 
it clear that we have merely stated the ascertainment of facts where we gain 
nothing, with no other intention or concern than to speak the truth in this re-
gard, as completely disinterested as possible. Everybody is free to draw such 
consequences as will suit him; we are not responsible for leading or removing 
adherents to any organization whatsoever, we do not bind anyone to requesting 
initiation here or there, or to refrain from doing so, and we even take the view 
that this is none of our business.

--- PAGE BREAK ---y organization whatsoever, we do not bind anyone to requesting 
initiation here or there, or to refrain from doing so, and we even take the view 
that this is none of our business.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Rites 
Des rites initiatiques, March 1933. 
In our previous insights into the question of initiation, we have naturally 
been led to allusions to rites, since they are the essential element for the 
transmission of the ‘spiritual influence’ and the attachment to the initi-
atic chain, so that we can say, without rites, there can be, in any way, no 
initiation. We must return to this subject again to point out some partic-
ularly important points; of course, it is understood that we do not pretend 
to deal with rites completely in general here, their raison d’être, their role, 
the various types in which they are divided, for it would be necessary to 
complete, not an article, but an entire volume. 
It is important to note foremost that the presence of rites is a charac-
ter common to all traditional institutions, of whatever order, exoteric as 
well as esoteric, taking these terms in their broadest meaning, following 
the distinction we have already indicated. This character is a conse-
quence of the ‘non-human’ element involved in such institutions, be-
cause it can be said that the rites are always intended to place the human 
being in a relationship, directly or indirectly, with something that goes 
beyond individuality and belonging to other states of existence; moreo-
ver, it is evident that it is not necessary in all cases for the communication 
thus established to be conscious in order to be real, since it operates most 
commonly through certain subtle modes of the individual, in which most 
men are currently unable to transfer the center of their consciousness. In 
any event, whether or not the apparent effect is immediate or delayed, 
the rite is still effective in itself, provided, of course, that it is carried out 
in accordance with traditional rules which ensure its validity, and out of 
which it would be nothing more than an empty form and a vain simula-
crum; this efficacity is not ‘marvelous’ or ‘magic,’ as some people some-
times say with an intention of degradation and negation, because it re-
sults simply from the clearly defined laws according to the ‘spiritual in-
fluences,’ whose ritual technique is only the application and implemen-
tation.310f degradation and negation, because it re-
sults simply from the clearly defined laws according to the ‘spiritual in-
fluences,’ whose ritual technique is only the application and implemen-
tation.310

310 It is hardly necessary to say here that all the considerations which we expose 
here relate exclusively to the true rites, having a traditional character, and that 
we absolutely refuse to give this name rites to what is only a parody, which is 
to say, to ceremonies established by virtue of purely human customs, the effect

--- PAGE BREAK ---

226 
The Veil of Isisabsolutely refuse to give this name rites to what is only a parody, which is 
to say, to ceremonies established by virtue of purely human customs, the effect

--- PAGE BREAK ---

226 
The Veil of Isis

This consideration of the efficacy inherent within rites, and founded 
on laws which leave no room for fantasy or arbitrariness, is common to 
all cases without exception; this is true for exoteric rites as well as for 
initiatic rites, and with the former is true for traditional non-religious 
forms as well as for religious rites. We must again remember, for this is 
an important point, that, as already explained above, this efficacy is 
wholly independent of the worth of the individual who performs this 
rite; the function alone counts here, and as such not the individual; in 
other words, the necessary and sufficient condition is that he has regu-
larly received the power to perform such a rite; it does not matter if he 
does not understand its meaning, and even if he does not believe in its 
efficacy, it cannot prevent the rite from being valid if all the prescribed 
rules have been properly observed.311 
That being said, we can come to what especially concerns initiation, 
and we will first note that its ritual character highlights one of the fun-
damental differences which separate it from mysticism, for which there 
is no such thing, which is hardly understandable if we refer to what we 
have said regarding its ‘irregularity.’ One may be tempted to object that 
mysticism sometimes appear to have a more or less direct link with the 
observance of certain rites; these do not belong to it in their own right, 
being nothing more nor else than ordinary religious rites; moreover, this 
link has no character of necessity, for in fact it is far from existing in all 
cases, whereas, we reiterate, there is no initiation without special and 
appropriate rites. Initiation, indeed, is not like mystical realizations, 
something that falls from the clouds, if one can say, without knowing 
how or why; on the contrary, it relies on positive scientific laws and rig-
orous technical rules; this cannot be overemphasized to rule out any pos-
sibility of misunderstanding its true nature.312how or why; on the contrary, it relies on positive scientific laws and rig-
orous technical rules; this cannot be overemphasized to rule out any pos-
sibility of misunderstanding its true nature.312

of which, if they have any, cannot in any case go beyond the ‘psychological’ 
domain, in the most profane sense of this word. 
311 Therefore, it is a very grave mistake to employ, as some Masonic writers 
often do, apparently satisfied with this rather unfortunate ‘discovery,’ the ex-
pression ‘to play the ritual’ in speaking of the accomplishment of initiatic rites 
by individuals who do not know the meaning of it, and who do not even seek to 
penetrate such an expression, would be suitable only in the case of laymen who 
would simulate the rites, having no quality to perform them validly; but, in an 
initiatic organization, despite how degenerate the quality of the present mem-
bers may be, the ritual is not something that one plays, it is and always remains 
a serious and effective thing, even without the knowledge of those who take 
part. 
312 It is to this technique that expressions such as ‘sacerdotal art’ and ‘royal art’ 
properly relate to the handling of ‘spiritual influences;’ furthermore, it is a mat-
ter of sacred and traditional sciences, but which, being of a totally different order

--- PAGE BREAK ---yal art’ 
properly relate to the handling of ‘spiritual influences;’ furthermore, it is a mat-
ter of sacred and traditional sciences, but which, being of a totally different order

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
227 
As for the distinction between initiatic rites and exoteric rites, for the 
time being at least we can only point this out summarily, for if this be-
came a question of entering into detail, it would lead us too far astray. In 
particular, it would be appropriate to draw all the consequences from the 
fact that the former are reserved and concern only an elite with particular 
‘qualifications,’ while the latter are published and apply without distinc-
tion to all members of the group of a given social environment, which 
shows that, whatever apparent similarities may sometimes exist, their 
goal cannot be the same in reality.313 In fact, the purpose of exoteric rites 
is not, unlike initiatic rites, to open the being to certain possibilities of 
knowledge, to which all cannot fit; furthermore, it is essential to note 
that, although they necessarily also call upon the intervention of an ele-
ment of a supra-individual order, their action is never intended to lead 
beyond the realm of individuality. This is very visible in the case of reli-
gious rites, which we can take more specifically as a basis of comparison, 
because they are the only exoteric rites known in the West: every reli-
gion proposes only to assure the ‘salvation’ of its adherents, which is an 
end of the individual order, and, by definition, its point of view does not 
extend beyond this; the mystics themselves always envisage only ‘salva-
tion,’ and never ‘Deliverance,’ whereas this is, on the contrary, the final 
and supreme goal of initiation.314 
Another point of crucial important is the following: initiation, to 
whatever degree, represents for the being who has received it a perma-
nent acquisition, a state that, virtually or effectively, it has attained once 
and for all, and nothing henceforth may take it from him.315 We can note,nts for the being who has received it a perma-
nent acquisition, a state that, virtually or effectively, it has attained once 
and for all, and nothing henceforth may take it from him.315 We can note,

from profane science, is none the less ‘positive,’ and is much more so if taken in 
the true meaning of this word. 
313 In this connection, let us point out the error of ethnologists and sociologists 
who very improperly describe ‘rites of initiation’ as rites simply concerning the 
aggregation of the individual to an external social organization, and for which 
the fact of having reached certain ages is the only qualification required. 
314 If we say that this is true only of the ‘greater mysteries,’ we will respond that 
the ‘lesser mysteries,’ which stop at the limits of human possibilities, constitute 
in relation to them only a preparatory stage and not their own in themselves, 
while religion presents itself as a whole which is sufficient and does not require 
any further complement: in reality, this is only the three different successive 
stages of a single and actual initiation. 
315 More precisely, in order that there is no room for ambiguity, that this must 
be understood only as degrees of initiation, not functions, which may be con-
ferred only temporarily on an individual, or which may become unfit to practice 
for multiples reasons: these are two entirely distinct things, between which we 
must be careful to not confuse, the first being of a purely internal order, while 
the second relates to an activity that is external to the being, which explains the 
difference that we just indicated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

228 
The Veil of Isisng of a purely internal order, while 
the second relates to an activity that is external to the being, which explains the 
difference that we just indicated.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

228 
The Veil of Isis

without departing from teh current subject, that this is still a very clear 
difference with the ‘mystic states,’ which appear as something fleeting 
and even fugitive, whose beings goes out as he entered it, and he may 
never end find it again, which is explained by the ‘phenomenal’ character 
of these states, received from outside, as it were, instead of proceeding 
from an ‘interiority.’316 What immediately results from this is the conse-
quence, that the rites of initiation confer a definitive and ineffaceable 
character; it is also the same, in another order with certain religious rites, 
which, for this reason, can never be renewed for the same individual, and 
which are thereby those which present the most accentuated analogy 
with initiatic rites, so much so that one could, in a certain sense, consider 
them as a sort of transposition into the exoteric domain.317 
Another consequence of what we have just said is that the initiatic 
quality, once it has been received, is in no way attached to the fact of 
being an active member of this or that organization; since the attachment 
to a traditional organization has been carried out, it cannot be broken by 
anything, and it subsists even when the individual no longer has any ap-
parent relationship with that organization, which is of a secondary im-
portance. This alone would suffice, in the absence of any other consider-
ation, to explain how initiatic organizations differ profoundly from pro-
fane associations, to which they cannot be assimilated or compared in 
anyway: whoever withdraws from a profane association or who is ex-
cluded from it has no connection to it and becomes exactly what he was 
before becoming a part of it; on the contrary, the link established by the 
initiatic character does not depend on contingencies such as resignation 
or exclusion, which are of a merely ‘administrative’ order and only affect 
‘external’ relations; if they are all in the profane order, where an associ-
ation has nothing else to give its members, they are in the initiatic ordermerely ‘administrative’ order and only affect 
‘external’ relations; if they are all in the profane order, where an associ-
ation has nothing else to give its members, they are in the initiatic order

316 This touches on the question of the ‘duality’ maintained by the religious point 
of view, because it relates essentially to what the Hindu terminology refers to 
as the ‘non-Supreme.’ 
317 We know that among the seven sacraments of Catholicism, there are three 
in this case which can only be received once: baptism, confirmation, and ordi-
nation. The analogy of baptism with initiation, as a ‘second birth,’ is obvious, 
confirmations represents accession to a higher degree: as for ordination, we 
have already pointed out the similarities that can be found there in regards to 
the transmission of ‘spiritual influences,’ which are made even more striking by 
the fact that this sacrament is not received by all and requires certain special 
qualifications. Moreover, ordination is, in fact, only the exoteric substitute for 
sacerdotal initiation, and this point could later give rise to ample developments, 
in which it is not possible for us to consider at present, all the more so because 
they would inevitably touch on questions such as that of the ‘power of the keys,’ 
which we consider preferable to reserve until further notice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---t present, all the more so because 
they would inevitably touch on questions such as that of the ‘power of the keys,’ 
which we consider preferable to reserve until further notice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
229 
though an altogether incidental mean, which is in no way necessary, rel-
ative to the internal realities which alone are of a true import. We believe 
it is sufficient to think that this is all perfectly obvious; what is astonish-
ing to note, as we have had on many occasions to, the general ignorance 
of such simple and elementary notions.318 
To complete these few notes on the question of rites, we have yet to 
speak more precisely of what are called ‘initiatic trials;’ this is only a 
special case, but it is important enough to be treated separately, espe-
cially since it gives rise to many misconceptions which would be well to 
dispel at this opportunity; it will therefore be the subject of a future arti-
cle.

318 To take, as an application of what has been just said, the simple and most 
vulgar example with regards to initiatic organizations, it is totally inaccurate to 
speak of an ‘ex-Mason’ as is often done; a Mason who has resigned or even been 
excluded is no longer part of any Lodge or Obedience, but is none the less a 
Mason still; whether he likes it or not, it does not change anything, and the proof 
of this is that if he comes to be ‘reintegrated,’ he is not re-initiated, nor is he 
made to return to the ranks he has already received; the English expression un-
attached Mason can only exist in such a case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Trials 
Des épreuves initiatiques, April 1933.e to return to the ranks he has already received; the English expression un-
attached Mason can only exist in such a case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Trials 
Des épreuves initiatiques, April 1933.

We have concluded our previous article by saying that the question of 
‘initiatic trials,’ or what is thus called, gives rise to many misconceptions; 
the very word ‘trial,’ which can mean multiple things, may have some-
thing to do with these misunderstandings, unless some of the meanings 
it commonly adopts are already the result of prior confusions, which is 
also possible. Indeed, it is not clear why one commonly calls any painful 
event a ‘test,’ nor why one says of someone who suffers that he is 
‘tested;’ if one thinks on this even a little, apart from any preconceived 
idea, it is difficult to see anything more than an abuse of language, of 
which it might be of some interest to search for the origin of this. Be that 
as it may, this vulgar idea of the ‘trials of life’ exists, even if it does not 
correspond to anything that is clearly defined, it is especially that which 
gave rise to a false assimilations with regards to ‘initiatic trials,’ to such 
an extent that some have even seen in them only a symbolic image, 
which, by an odd reversal, would lead us to suppose that it is the facts of 
the profane life which have an effective value and which really matter 
from the initiatic point of view. It would be too simple if it were so, and 
then all men would, without even suspecting it, be candidates for initia-
tion; it would be enough for everyone to have gone through some diffi-
cult circumstances, which happens more or less to everyone, to reach 
this initiation, one would have difficulty to say by whom and in whose 
name it would be conferred. We believe we have already spoken enough 
of the true nature of initiation to not insist on the absurdity of such con-
sequences; the truth is, ordinary life has nothing to do with the initiatic 
order in itself; from a certain point of view, it is ordinary life that can, if 
we wish, be taken as a symbol and not the other way around. 
This point merits our attention for a moment: we have often had oc-
casion to point out that the symbol must always be of an inferior order 
than what is symbolized (which is enough to disregard all imagined ‘nat-
uralistic’ interpretations by the modern ones); the realities of the profane 
domain, being those of the most inferior order, cannot be symbolized by 
anything, moreover they do not even need it. On the contrary, any event 
or phenomenon, insignificant as it may be, can always be taken as a sym-
bol of a reality of a superior order, of which it is, in a way, a sensorythey do not even need it. On the contrary, any event 
or phenomenon, insignificant as it may be, can always be taken as a sym-
bol of a reality of a superior order, of which it is, in a way, a sensory

--- PAGE BREAK ---d it. On the contrary, any event 
or phenomenon, insignificant as it may be, can always be taken as a sym-
bol of a reality of a superior order, of which it is, in a way, a sensory

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
231 
expression, by the very fact that it is derived from it as a consequence of 
its principle; as such, as devoid and interest as it is in itself, it can present 
a profound meaning to the one who is able to see beyond immediate ap-
pearances. There is a transposition here which is the result of which has 
nothing in common with ordinary life, which has simply provided sup-
port for a being endowed with a special aptitude to escape from his lim-
itations; this point of support, we insist, may be anything depending on 
the nature of the being who will utilize it. Consequently, this brings us 
back to the idea of ‘trials,’ there is nothing that can be done that suffer-
ing, in some particular cases, is the opportunity or starting point for a 
development of latent possibilities, just as anything else can act in other 
cases; let us say it is an opportunity, and nothing more; this would not 
allow us to ascribe suffering in itself as a special and privileged virtue, in 
spite of all the accustomed declamations on this subject. Moreover, let us 
remark that this contingent and accidental role of suffering, even reduced 
to its proper proportions, seems to be much more restricted in the initi-
atic order than in certain other ‘realizations’ of a more external character; 
it is especially among the mystics that it becomes habitual and seems to 
acquire an importance which can be deluded, which is probably due to 
considerations of a specifically religious nature. It must be appended that 
profane psychology has certainly contributed to spreading the most con-
fused and erroneous ideas regarding this; but, in any case, whether sim-
ple psychology or mysticism, all this has absolutely nothing in common 
with initiation. 
That being the case, we must still indicate the explanation of a fact 
which might appear to be able to give rise to objections: although the 
difficult or painful circumstances are certainly common to the life of all 
men as we have just said, it often happens that those who follow an ini-
tiatic path see them multiple in an unusual way. This fact is simply due 
to a kind of unconscious hostility of the environment: it seems that this 
world, meaning the ensemble of beings and the very things that form the 
profane domain, strive to restrain the one who is close to escape; such 
relations are perfectly normal. These are properly obstacles created by 
opposing forces, and not, as is sometimes wrongly imagined, ‘trials’ ne-
cessitated by the powers that preside over initiation; it is necessary to 
put an end to these fables, which are much closer to ‘occultist’ revelries 
than to initiatic realities. 
What is called ‘initiatic trials’ is something quite different, and we 
will now need only one word to definitively put an end to any ambiguity: 
they are essentially rites, which the alleged ‘trials of life’ are not in any-
way; they cannot exist without this ritual character, nor be replaced byrd to definitively put an end to any ambiguity: 
they are essentially rites, which the alleged ‘trials of life’ are not in any-
way; they cannot exist without this ritual character, nor be replaced by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

232 
The Veil of Isissomething that does not possess this same character.

It can be seen im-
mediately that the aspects that are generally most emphasized are in fact 
quite secondary: if these ‘trials’ were really intended, according to the 
most ‘simplistic’ notions, to show whether a candidate for initiation pos-
sesses the requisite qualities; it must be admitted that they would be most 
inefficacious, and we understand that those who hold to this view are 
tempted to regard them as worthless, but, normally, he who is admitted 
to undergo them must already have been recognized as ‘well and duly 
qualified;’ so there must be something else.

It will then be said that these 
‘trials’ form a teaching given in symbolic form, which are intended to be 
meditated on later; this is true, but the same can be said of any other 
ritual, because all of them also have a symbolic character, meaning that 
it is up to each to deepen according to the measure of their own abilities.

The essential raison d’être of the rite is the efficacy inherent within it, as 
we have already explained; this efficacy is, of course, closely related to 
the symbolic meaning included in its form, nonetheless it is independent 
of the current understanding of the meaning among those who take part 
in the rite.

Therefore, it is from this point of view of the direct efficacy 
of the rite that it is necessary to place oneself first; the rest, no matter 
how important, can only come second, and all that we have said so far in 
these studies does not require us to dwell on this further.

To be more specific, we will say that ‘trials’ are preliminary or pre-
paratory rites for proper initiation; they constitute the necessary pream-
ble, so that initiation itself is like their conclusion or immediate result.232 
The Veil of Isis

Therefore, it is from this point of view of the direct efficacy 
of the rite that it is necessary to place oneself first; the rest, no matter 
how important, can only come second, and all that we have said so far in 
these studies does not require us to dwell on this further. To be more specific, we will say that ‘trials’ are preliminary or pre-
paratory rites for proper initiation; they constitute the necessary pream-
ble, so that initiation itself is like their conclusion or immediate result. It 
should be noted that they often take the form of symbolic ‘journeys;’ we 
only note this point in passing, because enough has been said here re-
garding the symbolism of the journey, on several occasion, so that it is 
not necessary to return to it. Let us only say, in this aspect, they present 
themselves as a ‘quest’ leading the being from the ‘darkness’ of the pro-
fane world into the initiatic ‘light;’ but this form, which is self-evident, 
however appropriate it may be for what is in question. ‘Trials’ are essen-
tially rites of purification; this is what gives the true explanation for the 
very word ‘trials,’ which here has a distinctly ‘alchemical’ meaning, and 
not the vulgare meaning which has given rise to the misconceptions we 
have pointed out. What is important in understanding the fundamental 
principle of the rite, is to consider that the purification is done by the 
elements, the reason for this can be expressed in a few words: to say 
element is to say simple, to say simple is to say incorruptible. Therefore, 
the ritual purification will always have for ‘material’ support the bodies 
which symbolize the elements and which carry the designation (because 
it must be understood that the elements themselves are in no way sup-
posedly ‘simple’ bodies, which is a contradiction, but rather that from

--- PAGE BREAK ---which carry the designation (because 
it must be understood that the elements themselves are in no way sup-
posedly ‘simple’ bodies, which is a contradiction, but rather that from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
233 
which all bodies are formed), or at least one of these bodies; this also 
applies in the traditional exoteric order, especially with regard to reli-
gious rites, where this mode of purification is used not only for human 
beings, but also for other living beings, for inanimate objects, and for 
places or buildings. Water seems to play a predominant role here com-
pared to other representative bodies of the elements, it must be said that 
this role is not exclusive; perhaps one could explain this predominance 
by remarking that water is, in all traditions, the symbol of the ‘universal 
substance.’ Be that as it may, it is scarcely necessary to say that the rites 
in question, lustrations, ablutions, or others, as well as fasts and the pro-
hibition of certain foods, which are equally ritualistic in character, has 
absolutely nothing to do with the prescriptions of hygiene or of corporeal 
cleanliness, according to the foolish conceptions of some modern people, 
who wish to bring all things back to a purely ‘human’ explanation, and 
who always like to choose the most gross interpretation that can be im-
agined. It is true that the alleged ‘psychological’ explanations, if they are 
more subtle in appearance, are no better in their essence; all equally ne-
glect to consider the only thing that truly matters, namely, the effective 
action of rites is not a ‘belief’ or theoretical view, but a positive fact. 
We can now understand why, when ‘trials’ take the form of succes-
sive ‘journeys,’ they are respectively related to the different elements; we 
only have to indicate in what sense, from the initiatic point of view, the 
very term ‘purification’ must be understood. It is a question of returning 
the being to a state of undifferentiated simplicity, comparable, as we said 
before, to that of the materia prima, so that it is fit to receive the vibration 
of the initiatic Fiat Lux; it is necessary that the ‘spiritual influence’ whose 
transmission will give him the initial ‘illumination’ must meet no obsta-
cle due to inharmonic ‘preformations’ originating in the profane world; 
this is why he must first be reduced to this state of materia prima, which, 
if we are to reflect on this for a moment, shows quite clearly that the 
initiatic process and the Hermetic ‘Great Work’ are in reality one and the 
same thing: the conquest of the Divine Light which is the unique essence 
of all spirituality.shows quite clearly that the 
initiatic process and the Hermetic ‘Great Work’ are in reality one and the 
same thing: the conquest of the Divine Light which is the unique essence 
of all spirituality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Qabbalah 
Qabbalah, May 1933.the Hermetic ‘Great Work’ are in reality one and the 
same thing: the conquest of the Divine Light which is the unique essence 
of all spirituality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Qabbalah 
Qabbalah, May 1933.

The term Qabbalah in Hebrew does not mean anything other than ‘tra-
dition’ in the most general sense; although it most usually designates the 
esoteric or initiatic tradition, when it is used less specifically, it some-
times also happens that it applies to the exoteric tradition as well.319 This 
term in itself is therefore capable of designating any tradition; but, as it 
belongs to the Hebrew language, it is normal when using another lan-
guage to reserve it to the Hebraic tradition alone, as we have already 
pointed out on other occasions, or if we wish to speak more precisely, to 
the specifically Hebrew form of tradition. If we insist on this, it is because 
we have seen in some people, a tendency to attribute another meaning 
to this word, to denominate it as a special kind of traditional knowledge, 
wherever it may be, because they believe that they have discovered in 
this word all sorts of extraordinary things that are not really there. We 
do not intend to waste our time on all these fanciful interpretations; it is 
more useful to specify the true original meaning of the word, which is 
enough to reduce their interpretations to nothing, and that is all we pro-
pose to do here. 
The root Q B L, in Hebrew and Arabic,320 essentially means the ratio 
of two things that are placed opposite each other; from there come all 
the different meanings of the words which are derived from them, as, for 
example, those of encounters and even oppositions. From this link also 
results the idea of a passage from one to the other, from which ideas such 
as receiving, hosting, accepting, are expressed in both languages by the 
verb qabal; and qabalah directly derives from this, which it to say ‘what 
is received’ or transmitted (in Latin traditum) from one to the other. Here 
we see, with this idea of transmission, that of a succession; it must be 
noted that the primary meaning of the root indicates a relation which 
can be simultaneous as well as successive, both spatial and temporal. Thisdea of transmission, that of a succession; it must be 
noted that the primary meaning of the root indicates a relation which 
can be simultaneous as well as successive, both spatial and temporal. This

319 This does not go without causing some misunderstandings: thus, we have 
seen some claim to relate the Talmud to the ‘Kabbalah,’ understood in the exo-
teric sense; in fact, the Talmud is ‘tradition,’ but purely exoteric, religious, and 
legal. 
320 We call attention to this fact that these two languages, which have most of 
their roots common to each other, can very often be illuminated by one another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---gious, and 
legal. 
320 We call attention to this fact that these two languages, which have most of 
their roots common to each other, can very often be illuminated by one another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
235 
explains the dual meaning of the preposition qabal in Hebrew and qabl 
in Arabic, meaning both ‘in front of’ (which is to say ‘in the face’ of 
space) and ‘before’ (in time); the close relationship of these two words 
‘in front of’ and ‘before,’ even in French, shows that a certain analogy is 
always established between these two different modes, one in simultane-
ity and one in succession. This also permits us to resolve an apparent 
contradiction: although the most common idea in respect to temporal re-
lations is that of anteriority and therefore relating to the past, it also hap-
pens that derivatives of the same root designate the future (in Arabic 
mustaqbāl, which is literally to say that towards which one goes, from 
istiqbāl, ‘to go toward’); do we not also say in French that the past is 
before us and that the future is in front of us? In sum, it suffices in all 
cases that one of these two terms are considered as ‘before’ or ‘in front’ 
of the other, whether it is a spatial relationship or a temporal relation-
ship. 
All these remarks can be further confirmed by the examination of an-
other root, also common to Hebrew and Arabic, which has very similar 
meaning, one could say for the most part, they are identical, although the 
point of departure is distinctly different, where the derived meanings 
manage to rejoin. It is the root Q D M, which expresses firstly the idea of 
‘to precede’ (qadam), whence all that refers, not only to a temporal ante-
riority, but to a priority of any order. Thus, we find, for the words origi-
nating in this root, besides the meaning of origin and antiquity (qedem 
in Hebrew, qidm or qidam in Arabic), that of primacy or precedence, and 
even that of walking, advancing, or progression (taqaddum in Arabic);321 
here again, the preposition qadam in Hebrew and qoddām in Arabic has 
the dual meaning of ‘in front of’ and ‘before.’ But the principal meaning 
here is what is primary, either hierarchically or chronologically; hence 
the most frequently expressed idea is that of origin or primordiality, and, 
by extension, of antiquity when it comes to the temporal order: thus, 
qadmon in Hebrew, qadīm in Arabic, signify ‘ancient’ in common usage, 
but when referred to the field of principles must be translated as ‘primor-
dial.’322 
It is also necessary with regards to these same words to point out 
other considerations which are not without interest: in Hebrew, the de-
rivatives of the root Q D M also server to designate the Orient, that is tossary with regards to these same words to point out 
other considerations which are not without interest: in Hebrew, the de-
rivatives of the root Q D M also server to designate the Orient, that is to

321 Hence the word qadam meaning ‘foot,’ that is to say, what is used for walk-
ing. 
322 Al-Insān al-Qadīm, which is to say the ‘Primordial Man,’ is, in Arabic, one of 
the designations of the ‘Universal Man’ (a synonym of al-Insān al-Kāmil, which 
is literally the ‘Perfect Man’ or ‘Complete Man’): this is exactly the Hebrew 
Adam Qadmon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

236 
The Veil of Isisns of the ‘Universal Man’ (a synonym of al-Insān al-Kāmil, which 
is literally the ‘Perfect Man’ or ‘Complete Man’): this is exactly the Hebrew 
Adam Qadmon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

236 
The Veil of Isis

say the side of ‘origin,’ in that it is where the rising sun appears (orians, 
from oriri, from which origo in Latin also comes), the starting point of 
the diurnal march of the sun; at the same time, it is also the point one 
has in front of oneself when one ‘orientates’ while turning towards the 
sun at its rising.323 Thus, qedem also means ‘Orient,’ and qadmon, ‘orien-
tal;’ but we should not wish to see in these designations the affirmation 
of a primordiality of the Orient from the point of view of earthly human-
ity, since, as we have often had occasion to say, the origin of the tradition 
is Nordic, ‘polar’ even, and not Oriental or Occidental. The explanation 
which we have just indicated seems to us entirely sufficient. We will add 
in this connection, that questions of ‘orientation’ have, in a general way, 
a rather great importance in traditional symbolism and in the rites which 
are based on this symbolism; they are more complex than one may think 
and may give rise to some misunderstandings, since in various tradi-
tional forms there are several different modes of orientation. When we 
turn to the rising sun as we have just said, the South is designated as the 
‘side of the right’ (yamīn or yaman, cf. the Sanskrit dakshina which has 
the same meaning), and the North as the ‘side of the left’ (shemol in He-
brew, shimāl in Arabic); but it also happens that the orientation is taken 
by turning to the sun at the meridian, and then the point we have before 
us is no longer the East, but the South: this is how in Arabic, the southern 
side still has, among other denominations, that of qiblāh, and the adjec-
tive qibli means ‘southern.’ These last terms bring us back to the root Q 
B L; we know that the same word qiblāh also designates in Islam the 
ritual orientation; it is, in all cases, the direction one has in front of one-
self. What is still curious is that the spelling of this word qiblāh is the 
same as that of the Hebrew qabbalah. 
Now, one can ask this question: why is tradition in Hebrew desig-
nated by a word coming from the root Q B L, and not from the root Q D 
M? One might be tempted to say in this regard, that, since the Hebrew 
tradition is only a secondary and derived from, a denomination evoking 
the idea of origin or primordiality cannot suit it; but this reason does not 
seem to us essential, because, directly or not, every tradition is connected 
with the origins and proceeds from the primordial tradition, and we havediality cannot suit it; but this reason does not 
seem to us essential, because, directly or not, every tradition is connected 
with the origins and proceeds from the primordial tradition, and we have

323 It is curious to note that Christ is sometimes called Oriens; this designation 
can no doubt be related to the symbolism of the rising sun; but, because of the 
dual meanings that we indicate here, it is possible that it should also, and espe-
cially, bring it closer to the Hebrew Elohi Qedem, or the expression designating 
the Word as the ‘Ancient of Days,’ which is to say the One who is before the 
days, or the Principle of the cycles of manifestations, represented symbolically 
as ‘days’ by various traditions (‘days of Brahma’ in the Hindu tradition, ‘days of 
the creation’ in the Hebrew Genesis).

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the cycles of manifestations, represented symbolically 
as ‘days’ by various traditions (‘days of Brahma’ in the Hindu tradition, ‘days of 
the creation’ in the Hebrew Genesis).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
237 
even seen elsewhere that every sacred language, including Hebrew itself 
and Arabic, is considered to represent in some way the primordial lan-
guage. The true reason, it seems, is that the idea that must be highlighted 
here is that of a regular and uninterrupted transmission, an idea which 
is what the very word ‘tradition’ itself expresses properly, as we indi-
cated at the beginning. This transmission constitutes the ‘chain’ 
(shelsheleth in Hebrew, silsilah in Arabic) which unites the present to the 
past and must continue from the present to the future: it is the ‘chain of 
tradition’ (shelsheleth ha-qabbalah), or the initiatic ‘chain’ of which we 
had occasion to speak of recently. It is also the determination of a ‘direc-
tion’ (here we find the meaning of the Arabic qiblāh) which, through the 
succession of time, directs the cycle towards its end and rejoins it at its 
origin, and which, even extending beyond these two extreme bridges by 
the fact that its principal source is timeless and ‘non-human,’ linking it 
harmoniously with other cycles, helping to form with them a larger 
‘chain,’ the one that some Oriental traditions call the ‘chain of worlds,’ 
where the order of the universal manifestation is integrated step by step.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Knowledge and Profane ‘Culture’ 
Connaissance initiatique et « culture » profane, June 1933.where the order of the universal manifestation is integrated step by step.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Knowledge and Profane ‘Culture’ 
Connaissance initiatique et « culture » profane, June 1933.

We have pointed out in passing in our previous articles, that we must be 
wary of any confusion between the doctrinal knowledge of the initiatic 
order, even while it is only theoretical and simply preparatory for ‘reali-
zation,’ and all that is external instruction or profane knowledge, which 
is unrelated to this knowledge. Some reflections that have been transmit-
ted to us from various sides have come to show us the need to insist more 
specifically on this point: we must put an end to the prejudice that is 
commonly called ‘culture,’ in the profound and ‘worldly’ sense, has any 
value, if only as a preparation vis-à-vis the initiatic knowledge, when it 
has and cannot have any real point of contact. 
In principle, this is, quite simply, a lack of rapport: profane instruc-
tion, to whatever degree it is contemplated, can serve no purpose in ini-
tiatic knowledge, and it is not compatible with it either; it appears only 
from this point of view as an indifferent thing, in the same way as the 
skill acquired in a manual trade or the ‘physical culture’ which is so fash-
ionable nowadays. At its core, all this is of the same order for those who 
take the point of view which we take; it is dangerous to allow oneself to 
be misled by the pretended ‘intellectuality’ which has nothing to do with 
pure and true intellectuality; the constant abuse of the word ‘intellectual’ 
by our contemporaries is enough to prove that this danger is all too real. 
It often results, among other consequences, in a tendency to want to 
unite, or rather, to mix together things that are of a totally different or-
der, we have had many occasions to point out the futility of all attempts 
to establish any link or comparison between modern and profane sci-
ences and traditional knowledge. Some even go so far as to claim to find 
in the former ‘confirmations’ of the second, as if that which rests on im-
mutable principles could derive the slightest benefit from an accidental 
and external conformity with some of the hypothetical and ever-chang-
ing results of this uncertain and tentative search that the modern ones 
are pleased to decorate with the name of ‘science!’ 
But it is not on this aspect of the question that we must insist upon, 
or even on the danger that there may be when we give undue importance 
to this inferior knowledge, but to devote all activity to the detriment of a 
superior knowledge, whose very possibility will thus be totally unknownr that there may be when we give undue importance 
to this inferior knowledge, but to devote all activity to the detriment of a 
superior knowledge, whose very possibility will thus be totally unknown

--- PAGE BREAK ---when we give undue importance 
to this inferior knowledge, but to devote all activity to the detriment of a 
superior knowledge, whose very possibility will thus be totally unknown

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
239 
or ignored. We know all too well that this case is the majority with our 
contemporaries; for these, the question of a relationship with initiatic or 
traditional knowledge no longer arises, since they do not even suspect 
the existence of such knowledge. But even without going so far, profane 
instruction can very often form, if not in principle, an obstacle to the 
acquisition of true knowledge, which is to say the very opposite of effec-
tive preparation, we will explain the various reasons for this now in a 
little more detail. 
Firstly, profane education imposes certain mental habits that can be 
difficult to discard afterwards; it is all too easy to see that the limitations 
and even the distortions which are the usual consequence of university 
education are often irremediable, and to escape entirely from this unfor-
tunate influence, special arrangements must be made which can only be 
exceptional. We speak here in a very general way and we will not dwell 
upon such particular inconveniences, as the narrow views which inevi-
tably result from ‘specialization;’ what is essential to observe is that, if 
profane knowledge in itself is simply indifferent, as we have said, the 
methods by which it is inculcated are the very negation of those which 
open the door to initiatic knowledge. 
Next, it is necessary to take into account an obstacle which is far from 
negligible, this kind of infatuation which is frequently caused by an al-
leged knowledge and which is even, in many people, all the more accen-
tuated as this knowledge is more elementary, inferior, and incomplete; 
besides, even without leaving the profane point of view and the contin-
gencies of ‘ordinary life,’ the misdeeds of primary education in this re-
spect are easily recognized by all those who are not blinded by certain 
preconceived ideas. It is evident that of two ignorant people, he who re-
alizes that he knows nothing is in a disposition much more favorable to 
the acquisition of knowledge than he who thinks he knows anything; the 
natural possibilities of the former are intact, while those of the latter are 
‘inhibited’ and can no longer freely develop. In any case, even admitting 
the same goodwill in the two individuals considered, it would still remain 
that one of them would first have to rid his ‘mind’ of the misconceptions 
that it is encumbered with, while the other is at least exempt from this 
preliminary and negative work, which represents one of the meanings of 
what the Masonic initiation symbolically designates as the ‘stripping of 
metals.’ 
This can easily be explained by the fact that we have frequently had 
occasion to observe the alleged ‘cultured’ people. We know what is com-
monly understood by this word. On another level, this ‘culture’ generally 
produces effects quite similar to those we recalled earlier with regards to 
primary education; there are certainly exceptions, for it may happen thatword. On another level, this ‘culture’ generally 
produces effects quite similar to those we recalled earlier with regards to 
primary education; there are certainly exceptions, for it may happen that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

240 
The Veil of Isisthe person who has received such a ‘culture’ is endowed with happy nat-
ural dispositions in order to appreciate it only to its true value and not to 
be deceived by it, but we are not exaggerating in saying that, apart from 
these exceptions, the great majority of ‘cultured’ people must be counted 
among those whose mental state is most unfavorable to the reception of 
true knowledge.

There is in them, vis-à-vis the latter, a kind of resistance 
which is often unconscious, sometimes deliberate; even those who do not 
formally deny, originating in a bias ‘a priori,’ all that is esoteric or initi-
atic, at least in this respect, they testify to a lack of complete interest, and 
they may even be affected to display their ignorance of these things, as 
if they were in their own eyes a mark of the superiority conferred on 
them by their ‘culture!’ Let it not be thought that there is on our part the 
least caricatural intention; we are only saying exactly what we have seen 
in many circumstances, not only in the West, but also in the East, indeed 
this type of ‘cultured’ man is of little importance, having made no ap-
pearance only as the product of a certain education that is more or less 
‘Westernized.’ The conclusion to be drawn from this is that the people 
of this type are simply the least ‘initiable’ laymen, and it would be per-
fectly unreasonable to take any account of their opinion if only to try to 
adapt the presentation of certain ideas; moreover, it should be added that 
the concern for ‘public opinion’ in general is an attitude as ‘anti-initiatic’ 
as is possible.

We must also at this point specify another point which is closely re-
lated to these considerations: that all knowledge that is exclusively 
‘bookish’ has nothing in common with initiatic knowledge, even consid-
ered at its merely theoretical stage.There is in them, vis-à-vis the latter, a kind of resistance 
which is often unconscious, sometimes deliberate; even those who do not 
formally deny, originating in a bias ‘a priori,’ all that is esoteric or initi-
atic, at least in this respect, they testify to a lack of complete interest, and 
they may even be affected to display their ignorance of these things, as 
if they were in their own eyes a mark of the superiority conferred on 
them by their ‘culture!’ Let it not be thought that there is on our part the 
least caricatural intention; we are only saying exactly what we have seen 
in many circumstances, not only in the West, but also in the East, indeed 
this type of ‘cultured’ man is of little importance, having made no ap-
pearance only as the product of a certain education that is more or less 
‘Westernized.’ The conclusion to be drawn from this is that the people 
of this type are simply the least ‘initiable’ laymen, and it would be per-
fectly unreasonable to take any account of their opinion if only to try to 
adapt the presentation of certain ideas; moreover, it should be added that 
the concern for ‘public opinion’ in general is an attitude as ‘anti-initiatic’ 
as is possible.

We must also at this point specify another point which is closely re-
lated to these considerations: that all knowledge that is exclusively 
‘bookish’ has nothing in common with initiatic knowledge, even consid-
ered at its merely theoretical stage.

This may appear obvious after what 
we have just said, for all that is bookish study is incontestably part of the 
most external education; if we insist on this, it is possible that we could 
be mistaken in the case where this study concerns books whose concerns 
are of the initiatic order.240 
The Veil of Isis

We must also at this point specify another point which is closely re-
lated to these considerations: that all knowledge that is exclusively 
‘bookish’ has nothing in common with initiatic knowledge, even consid-
ered at its merely theoretical stage. This may appear obvious after what 
we have just said, for all that is bookish study is incontestably part of the 
most external education; if we insist on this, it is possible that we could 
be mistaken in the case where this study concerns books whose concerns 
are of the initiatic order. Whoever reads such books in the same manner 
as ‘cultured’ people, or even the one who studies them in the same man-
ner as the ‘scholars’ and according to profane methods, will for this rea-
son not be any closed to true knowledge, because he introduces provi-
sions which do not allow him to neither penetrate the real meaning of it 
or be assimilated with it in any degree; the example of the Orientalists, 
with their total misunderstanding is a striking illustration of this. The 
opposite is true of the one who takes these same books as ‘supports’ for 
his inner work, which is the role to which they are essentially destined, 
knows how to see beyond words and finds in them an opportunity and a 
point of support for the development of his own possibilities. It can be 
easily understood that this has nothing in common with bookish study, 
although the books are the point of departure; the fact of piling up in

--- PAGE BREAK ---of his own possibilities. It can be 
easily understood that this has nothing in common with bookish study, 
although the books are the point of departure; the fact of piling up in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
241 
one’s memory verbal notions does not even conjure up the shadow of 
real knowledge; only the penetration of the mind enveloped in the exter-
nal forms counts, which implies that the being carries within itself cor-
responding possibilities, since all knowledge is identification. Without 
this inherent ‘qualification’ in the very nature of this being, the highest 
expressions of initiatic knowledge, to the extent that is possible, and the 
Sacred Scriptures themselves, will never be anything but a ‘dead letter.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

‘Fedeli d’Amore’ and ‘Corte d’Amore’  
« Fidèles d'Amour » et « Cours d'Amour », July 1933.ble, and the 
Sacred Scriptures themselves, will never be anything but a ‘dead letter.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

‘Fedeli d’Amore’ and ‘Corte d’Amore’  
« Fidèles d'Amour » et « Cours d'Amour », July 1933.

The research on the ‘Fedeli d’Amore,’ which we have had occasion to 
speak of here, continue to give rise to interesting works in Italy: Mr. Al-
fonso Ricolfi, who had already published various articles on the subject, 
has just published a study that others must follow where he affirms his 
intention to resume the yet unfinished work of Luigi Valli.324 Perhaps he 
does so, however if he does it is with some timidity, because he thinks 
that Mr. Valli has ‘exagerrated’ on certain points, notably by refusing a 
real existence to all the women sung of by the powers attached to the 
‘Fedeli d’Amore,’ which is opposed to the most commonly accepted opin-
ion; to tell the truth, this question is undoubtedly less important than he 
seems to believe, at least when one places oneself outside of the point of 
view of mere historical curiosity, which in no way affects the true inter-
pretation. There is nothing impossible for some who, through a feminine 
name for divine wisdom, have adopted the names of people who have 
actually lived in a purely symbolic manner, and even then there can be 
two reasons for this: firstly, as we have said again and again, anything 
can be the occasion and the starting point of a spiritual development de-
pending on the nature of the individual, this can also be true of an earthly 
love as well as of any other circumstance (especially, since it must not be 
forgotten that what we are dealing with here may in fact be characterized 
as a way of the Kshatriyas); secondly, the true meaning of the designation 
thus employed was all the more difficult for the profane, who naturally 
adhered to the letter, and this advantage, although contingent, was per-
haps not always entirely negligible. 
This note leads us to consider another point which has rather close 
links with this one: Mr. Ricolfi considers that we must distinguish be-
tween the ‘Corte d’Amore’ and the ‘Corte d’amore;’ this distinction is 
not, as one may think at first glance, a mere subtlety. Indeed, we must 
understand by ‘Corte d’Amore’ a symbolic assembly presided over by 
Love itself personified, while a ‘Corte d’amore’ is only a human meeting, 
constituting a kind of court called to pronounce on more or less complexCorte d’Amore’ a symbolic assembly presided over by 
Love itself personified, while a ‘Corte d’amore’ is only a human meeting, 
constituting a kind of court called to pronounce on more or less complex

324 Studi sui “Fedeli d’Amore”: in Francia ed i loro riflessi in Italia: Bibliotecha della 
Nuova Rivista Storica, Societa Editrice Dante Alighieri.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nounce on more or less complex

324 Studi sui “Fedeli d’Amore”: in Francia ed i loro riflessi in Italia: Bibliotecha della 
Nuova Rivista Storica, Societa Editrice Dante Alighieri.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
243 
cases; that these cases have been real or supposed, or in other words, 
whether it was an effective jurisdiction or a mere game (and it may have 
actually been both), regardless of the point of view that we stand. The 
‘Corte d’amore,’ if they really only dealt with questions concerning pro-
fane love, were not the assembles of the true ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ (unless 
they had taken some external appearances to better hide); but they may 
have been an imitation and a parody, born of the incomprehension of the 
uninitiated, just as there were unquestionably, at the same time, profane 
poets who, celebrating real women in their verses, placed no importance 
on anything but the literal meaning. In the same way, aside from the real 
alchemists, there were the ‘blowers;’ here too, we must be aware of any 
confusion between them, it is not always easy without a thorough exam-
ination, since, externally, their language may be the same; this confusion, 
in this case as well as in the other, may have sometimes served to confuse 
indiscreet inquiries. 
But what would be inadmissible is to attribute a kind of priority or 
anteriority to what is only a counterfeit and degeneration; Mr. Ricolfi 
seems inclined to admit all too easily that the profound meaning may 
have been added to something which, at its origins, would have had noth-
ing other than a profane character. In this regard, we will be content with 
recalling what we have said quite often regarding the initiatic origin of 
all science and art, whose purely traditional character could later be lost 
only be an effective misunderstanding of which we spoke earlier; more-
over, to suppose the opposite, is to admit an influence of the profane 
world on the initiatic world, which is to say a reversal of the real hierar-
chical relations which are inherent in the very nature of things. What 
may be an illusion in the present case is that the profane imitation must 
have always been more visible than the true organization of the ‘Fedeli 
d’Amore,’ an organization which we should be careful not to conceive of 
in the manner of a ‘society,’ as we have already explained for initiatic 
organizations in general: if it may seem exclusive to the ordinary histo-
rian, this is proof, not of its non-existence, but of its very serious and 
profound character.325 
One of the primary merits of Mr. Ricolfi’s work is to bring new indi-
cations as to the existence of the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ in northern Frnce; the 
little-known poem of Jacques de Baisieux on the Fiefs d’Amour (identified 
with the ‘celestial fiefs’ as opposed to the ‘terrestrial fiefs’), on which itf the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ in northern Frnce; the 
little-known poem of Jacques de Baisieux on the Fiefs d’Amour (identified 
with the ‘celestial fiefs’ as opposed to the ‘terrestrial fiefs’), on which it

325 In this regard, let us recall that there can be no question of a ‘sect:’ the initiatic 
domain is not that of exoteric religion, and the formation of religious ‘sects’ can 
only have been here another case of profane degeneration; we regret to find 
again in Mr. Ricolfi a certain confusion between the two areas, which greatly 
affects the understanding of what this is really about.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

244 
The Veil of Isison; we regret to find 
again in Mr. Ricolfi a certain confusion between the two areas, which greatly 
affects the understanding of what this is really about.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

244 
The Veil of Isis

extends at some length is particularly significant in this regard. The 
traces of such an organization are certainly much rarer in this region 
than in Languedoc and Provence;326 however, it must not be forgotten 
that there was a little later the Roman de la Rose, moreover there were 
close links with the ‘Chivalry of the Grail’ (to which Jacques de Baisieux 
himself makes explicit allusions) are suggested by the fact that Chrétien 
de Troyes translated Ovid’s Ars Amatoria, which could also have some 
meaning other than the literal meaning (and this would be no astonish-
ment on the part of the author of the Metamorphoses). Assuredly, all is 
far from being said about the organization of the ‘knights errants,’ whose 
very idea is related to that of the initiatic ‘journeys;’ for the moment we 
can only recall all that has already been written here on this last subject, 
and we will only add that the expression ‘savage knights,’ as pointed out 
by Mr. Ricolfi, alone deserves a specific study. 
There are also rather peculiar thinks in the book of André, the chap-
lain to the King of France; unfortunately, they have largely escaped Mr. 
Ricolfi, who relates some things without seeing anything extraordinary. 
Thus, it says that the palace of Love rises “in the middle of the Universe,” 
that this palace has four sides and four doors; the gate of the East is re-
served for the god, and that of the North always remains closed. But this 
is remarkable: Solomon’s Temple, which symbolizes the ‘Center of the 
World,’ also has, according to the Masonic tradition, the form of a quad-
rilateral or a ‘long square,’ and doors open on three of its sides, that of 
the North alone having no opening; if there is a slight difference (the 
absence of a door on the one, and the closed door on the other), the sym-
bolism is precisely the same, the North here being the dark side, the one 
that does not illuminate the light of the Sun.327 Moreover, Love appears 
here in the form of a king bearing on his head a crown of gold; is this not 
how we also see him represented in Scottish Masonry as the ‘Prince of 
Mercy,’328 and can we not say that he is then the ‘peaceful king,’ whicha king bearing on his head a crown of gold; is this not 
how we also see him represented in Scottish Masonry as the ‘Prince of 
Mercy,’328 and can we not say that he is then the ‘peaceful king,’ which

326 Is it mere coincidence that, in the Compagnnonage, the ‘Tour de France’ 
leaves out the entire northern region and includes only towns located south of 
the Loire, or should we see in this something whose origin can go back a long 
way and whose reasons, which is needless to say, are now completely out of 
sight? 
327 This is the side of yin in the Chinese tradition, while the opposite side is that 
of yang; this remark may help to resolve the controversial question of the re-
spective position of the two symbolic columns: that of the North should nor-
mally correspond to the feminine principle, and that of the South the masculine 
principle. 
328 See The Esoterism of Dante, ch. 3. – Mr. Ricolfi himself has studied in one of 
his articles on the Corriere Padano, the meaning given by the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’

--- PAGE BREAK ---line 
principle. 
328 See The Esoterism of Dante, ch. 3. – Mr. Ricolfi himself has studied in one of 
his articles on the Corriere Padano, the meaning given by the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
245 
is the very meaning of Solomon’s name? There is yet another approach 
that is no less striking: in various poems and fables, the ‘Corte d’Amore’ 
is described as composed entirely of birds, which in turn we see speak, 
but we have already said what was meant by the ‘language of the 
birds;’329 would it be permissible to see only a pure coincidence in the 
fact that, as we have said then, it is precisely in connection with Solomon 
that, in the Qurʾān, this ‘language of the birds’ is expressly mentioned? 
Let us add nother remark which is not without interest to establish other 
concordances: the principal roles in this ‘Corte d’Amore’ seem to be gen-
erally attributed to the nightingale and the parrot; we know the im-
portance given to the nightingale in Persian poetry, of which Luigi Valli 
has already pointed out the points of contact with the ‘Fedeli d’Amore,’ 
but what is perhaps less known is that the parrot is the vahana or sym-
bolic vehicle of Kama, which is to say that of the Hindu Eros; is all this 
not enough to give pause? While we are dealing with birds, is it not also 
curious that Francesco da Barberino in his Documenti d’Amore, repre-
sents Love itself with falcon or sparrow hawk feet, the emblematic bird 
of the Egyptian Horus, whose symbolism is closely related to that of the 
‘Heart of the World?’330 
On the subject of Francesco da Barberni, Mr. Ricolfi returns to the 
figure of which we have already spoken,331 and where six couples of 
characters arranged symmetrically and a thirteenth androgynous figure 
in the center visibly represents seven initiatic degrees; if its interpreta-
tion differs somewhat from that of Luigi Valli’s, it is only on points of 
detail which do not change the essential meaning. He also gives the re-
production of a second figure, a representation of a ‘Corte d’Amore’ 
where the characters are distributed in eleven tiers; this fact does not 
seem to have particularly attracted his attention, but if one is willing to 
refer to what we have said elsewhere about the role of the number 11 to 
Dante, in relation to the symbolism of certain initiatic organizations,332 
it would be easily understood how important this is. Moreover, it seems 
that the author of the Documenti d’Amore has not been a stranger evento the symbolism of certain initiatic organizations,332 
it would be easily understood how important this is. Moreover, it seems 
that the author of the Documenti d’Amore has not been a stranger even

to the word Merzè, which seems to have been one of the enigmatic designations 
of their organization. 
329 See our article on this subject in the Voile d’Isis issue of November 1931. 
330 Mr. L. Charbonneau-Lassay has devated a study towards this subject in the 
journal Regnabit. 
331 The Secret Language of Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ – Le Voile d’Isis, March 
1932. 
332 The Esoterism of Dante, ch. 7. – Moreover, Mr. Ricolfi seems inclined enough 
to admit the links of the ‘Fedeli d’Amore’ with the Templars, although he only 
makes a passing mention of it, this question being outside of the subject he has 
proposed to treat more specifically.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

246 
The Veil of Isis’ with the Templars, although he only 
makes a passing mention of it, this question being outside of the subject he has 
proposed to treat more specifically.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

246 
The Veil of Isis

to certain traditional knowledge of a rather special kind, such as the ex-
planation of the meaning of words by the development of their constitu-
ent elements; indeed, that one attentively reads this sentence by which it 
defines one of the twelve virtues to which corresponds the twelve parts 
of his work (and this number also has its raison d’être: it is a zodiac whose 
Love is the Sun), and that Mr. Ricolfi quotes without comment: “Docili-
tas, data novitiis notitia vitiorum, docet illos ab illorum vilitate ab-
stinere;” is this not reminiscent of Plato’s Cratylus, for example?333 
Let us point out again, without departing from Francesco da Bar-
berino, a rather curious mistake by Mr. Ricolfi about this androgynous 
figure, which is clearly Hermetic and is absolutely not ‘magical’ because 
these are two quite different things; he even speaks in this respect of 
‘white magic,’ whereas he would like to see ‘black magic’ in the Rebis of 
Basil Valentin, because of the dragon which, as we already said,334 simply 
represents the elementary world, which is also placed under the feet of 
the Rebis, dominated by him, and also, even more amusing due to the 
square and the compass, for reasons that are all too easy to guess, which 
undoubtedly raise much more political contingencies than considera-
tions of an initiatic order! Finally, to finish, since Mr. Ricolfi seems to 
have some doubt regarding the esoteric character of the figure where 
under the appearance of a simple ‘ornate letter,’ Francesco da Barberino 
was represented in adoration before the letter I, let us further specify the 
meaning of this, which according to Dante was the first name of God: it 
properly designates the ‘Divine Unity’ (and this is why this name is first, 
the unity of the essence necessarily preceding the multiplicity of attrib-
utes); indeed, not only is it the equivalent of the Hebrew iod, a hieroglyph 
of the Principle, and itself the principle of all other letters of the alphabet, 
and whose numerical value is 10 reduced to unity (this is the unit devel-
oped in the quaternary: 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 = 10, or the central point producing 
the circle of universal manifestation through its expansion). Not only 
does the letter I represent unity in Latin numeration, because of its 
straight line form, which is the simplest of all geometric forms (the pointersal manifestation through its expansion). Not only 
does the letter I represent unity in Latin numeration, because of its 
straight line form, which is the simplest of all geometric forms (the point

333 In a more recent period, we find a similar process again, and employed in a 
much more apparent way, in the Hermetic treatise of Cesare della Riviera, Il 
Mondo Magico degli Heroi (see our review in Le Voile d’Isis of October 1932). – 
Similarly, when Jacques de Baisieux says that a-mor means ‘without death,’ we 
must not hasten to declare, as Mr. Ricolfi does, that this is a ‘false etymology:’ 
in reality, this is not a question of etymology, but of a process of interpretation 
comparable to the nirukta of the Hindu tradition; without knowing anything 
about the poem in question, we ourselves had indicated this explanation, adding 
to it a comparison with the Sanskrit words a-mara and a-mrita, in the first article 
we have devoted to the works of Luigi Valli. (Le Voile d’Isis, February 1929 issue). 
334 Le Voile d’Isis, March 1932 issue.

--- PAGE BREAK ---anskrit words a-mara and a-mrita, in the first article 
we have devoted to the works of Luigi Valli. (Le Voile d’Isis, February 1929 issue). 
334 Le Voile d’Isis, March 1932 issue.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
247 
being ‘formless’); yet, in the Chinese language, the word i means ‘unity,’ 
and Tai-i is the ‘Great Unity,’ which is symbolically represented as resid-
ing in the polar star, which is yet full of meaning, because in returning 
to the letter I of the Western alphabets, one realizes that, being a vertical 
straight line, it is thus apt to symbolize the ‘Axis of the World,’ the im-
portance of which is well known in all traditional doctrines,335 and so 
this ‘first name of God’ also reminds us of the anteriority of ‘polar’ sym-
bolism in relation to ‘solar’ symbolism. 
Naturally, we have above all insisted on the points where the expla-
nations of Mr. Ricolfi are most obviously insufficient, because we think 
that this is what is most beneficial, but it goes without saying that it 
would be unfair to criticize specialists in ‘literary history,’ who have not 
been prepared to approach the esoteric domain, who lack the necessary 
data to discern and correctly interpret all the initiatic symbols. On the 
contrary, we must recognize the merit of daring to go against officially 
accepted opinions and anti-traditional interpretations imposed by the 
profane spirit that dominates the modern world, and their gratitude to 
place at our disposal, by impartially expounding the results of their re-
search, documents in which we can find what they themselves have not 
seen; we can only wish to see other works of the same kind appear again 
soon, bringing new light to the mysterious and complex question of the 
initiatic organizations of the Western Middle Ages.ot 
seen; we can only wish to see other works of the same kind appear again 
soon, bringing new light to the mysterious and complex question of the 
initiatic organizations of the Western Middle Ages.

335 In operative Masonry, the plumb line, the figure of the ‘Axis of the World,’ is 
suspended from the polar star, or the letter G which in this case holds the place, 
and which is itself as we have indicated, a substitute of the Hebrew iod (Le Voile 
d’Isis, March 1932 issue, see also a remark on the origins of the letter G in the 
reviews of the magazines in the December 1932 issue).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kabbalah and the Science of Numbers 
Kabbale et science des nombres, August-September 1933.e origins of the letter G in the 
reviews of the magazines in the December 1932 issue).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kabbalah and the Science of Numbers 
Kabbale et science des nombres, August-September 1933.

We have often insisted that the ‘sacred sciences’ of a given traditional 
form are integral to it, at least as much as subordinate and secondary 
elements can be, which are far from being mere additions that would 
have been attached artificially. It is indispensable to understand this 
point and to never lose sight of it if one wishes to penetrate, no matter 
what, the true spirit of a tradition; it is all the more necessary to draw 
attention to this fact, because among those who claim to study traditional 
doctrines it is found frequently in our times a tendency to disregard the 
sciences, either because of the special difficulties in their assimilation, or 
because, besides the impossibility of incorporating them into the frame-
work of modern classification, their presence is particularly embarrass-
ing for anyone who tries to reduce everything to the exoteric point of 
view and to interpret doctrines in terms of ‘philosophy’ or ‘mysticism.’ 
Without wishing to dwell further upon the vanity of such studies under-
taken ‘from the outside’ and with all profane intentions, we will never-
theless be referring to these again, because we see daily opportunities of 
the distorted conceptions which inevitably lead to what is worse than 
pure and simple ignorance. 
It sometimes happens that certain traditional sciences play a more 
important role than the one just mentioned, in addition to their own in-
herent value in their contingent order, they are taken as symbolic means 
of an expression for the higher and essential part of the doctrine, so that 
it becomes entirely unintelligible if it separated from it. This is particu-
larly the case with respect to the Hebrew Kabbalah, for the ‘science of 
numbers,’ which is largely identified with the ‘science of letters,’ as well 
as in Islamic esoterism; by virtue of the very constitution of the two He-
brew and Arabic languages, which, as we pointed out recently, are so 
close to each other in all respects.336 
The preponderant role of the science of numbers in Kabbalah is so 
evident than it cannot escape even the most superficial observer, and it 
is hardly possible for the most prejudiced and biased to deny or concealant role of the science of numbers in Kabbalah is so 
evident than it cannot escape even the most superficial observer, and it 
is hardly possible for the most prejudiced and biased to deny or conceal

336 See our article on Qabbalah in the May 1933 issue; we also ask readers to 
refer to our study on The Science of Letters, published in the February 1931 issue.

--- PAGE BREAK ---deny or conceal

336 See our article on Qabbalah in the May 1933 issue; we also ask readers to 
refer to our study on The Science of Letters, published in the February 1931 issue.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
249 
this. However, these latter do not fail to, at the least, make false interpre-
tations in order to make it best fit within the framework of their precon-
ceived ideas; we propose here above all to dispel these deliberate confu-
sions, due in no small measure to the abuses of the so-called ‘historical 
method,’ which has every intention of seeing ‘borrowing’ wherever it 
sees certain similarities. 
We know that it is fashionable in academic circles to pretend to con-
nect Kabbalah with Neo-Platonism, to diminish both antiquity and scope; 
is it not admitted, as an indisputable principle, that nothing can come but 
from the Greeks? Unfortunately, it is forgotten that Neo-Platonism itself 
contains many elements that are not specifically Greek, and that Judaism 
in particular had, in the Alexandrian milieu, an importance that was far 
from negligible, if there was truly borrowing, it might be that they had 
taken place in the opposite direction of what is claimed. This hypothesis 
would be even more probable, firstly due to the adoption of a foreign 
doctrine is hardly reconcilable with the ‘particularism’ which was always 
one of the dominant features of the Judaic spirit, and secondly because, 
Neo-Platonism is considered relatively to be an exoteric doctrine (even if 
it is based on esoteric data, it is only an ‘externalization’) and as such, 
could not exert any real influence on an essentially initiatic tradition, 
especially one that is ‘closed,’ as is and always was Kabbalah.337 Moreo-
ver, we do not see any particularly striking similarities between it and 
Neo-Platonism, nor do, in the form in which it is expressed, numbers play 
the role which is so characteristic of Kabbalah; the Greek language would 
not have allowed this, while this is, we repeat, something which is inher-
ent in the Hebrew language itself, which, consequently, must have been 
bound from the beginning to the traditional forms expressed by it. 
Of course, it is not that there is a reason to deny that a traditional 
science of numbers has also existed among the Greeks; it was the basis 
of Pythagoreanism, which was not a simple philosophy, but had a 
properly initiatic character. It is from there that Plato drew not only the 
cosmological part of his doctrine, as he expounds particularly in the Ti-
maeus, but his ‘theory of ideas,’ which is essentially only a transposition 
according to a different terminology of Pythagorean conceptions as num-
bers envisaged as principles of things. Therefore, if one really wanted to 
find a term of comparison with Kabbalah among the Greeks, it was Py-
thagorism that should be followed back; it is precisely here that theas principles of things. Therefore, if one really wanted to 
find a term of comparison with Kabbalah among the Greeks, it was Py-
thagorism that should be followed back; it is precisely here that the

337 This latter reason is also valid against the pretention of attaching Islamic 
esoterism to the same Neo-Platonism; among the Arabs, philosophy alone is of 
a Greek origin, as is everything to which the name ‘philosophy’ (in Arabic fal-
safāh) can properly apply, which is like a mark of this very origin, but here we 
are no longer speaking of that which is philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

250 
The Veil of Isisosophy’ (in Arabic fal-
safāh) can properly apply, which is like a mark of this very origin, but here we 
are no longer speaking of that which is philosophy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

250 
The Veil of Isis

whole futility of the ‘borrowing’ thesis appears most clearly: we are in-
deed in the presence of two initiatic doctrines which likewise give a cru-
cial importance to the science of numbers, but this science is presented 
on both sides in radically different forms. 
Some considerations here of a more general nature would not be use-
less: it is perfectly normal that the same science be found in various tra-
ditions, because the truth is that in any field, whatsoever, cannot be the 
monopoly of a single traditional forms to the exclusion of others; this 
fact cannot be a matter of astonishment, except with the ‘critics’ who do 
not believe the truth. Only the opposite would be, not only surprising, 
but rather difficult to conceive. There is nothing here that implies a more 
or less direction communication between two different traditions, even 
if one is undeniably older than the other: can we not find a certain truth 
and express it independently of those who have already expressed it pre-
viously, and is it not all the more probable that through this independ-
ence the same truth will be expressed in another way? It must be noted 
that this does not go against the common origin of all traditions, but the 
transmission of principles, starting from this common origin, does not 
imply in an explicit way that of all the developments which are implied 
within it and of all the applications to which they may give rise. Every-
thing that is a matter of ‘adaptation,’ in a word, can be considered as 
belonging to one or another particular traditional form, and if we find 
the equivalent elsewhere, it is because of the same principles, one should 
naturally draw the same consequences, whatever the special way in 
which way they have been expressed here or there (of course, this is sub-
ject to reservation when certain symbolic modes of expression which, 
being everywhere the same, must be regarded as going back to the Pri-
mordial Tradition). The differences of form will, in general, be all the 
greater as we move further away from the principles by descending to a 
more contingent order; this is one of the primary difficulties in under-
standing some of the traditional sciences. 
It will be easily understood that almost all interest is removed due to 
these consideration, in regards to the origins of the traditions or the ori-
gins of the elements which they contain, from the ‘historic’ point of view 
as it is understood in the profane world, since they perfectly render use-
less the supposition of any direct filiation; even where we notice a much 
loser similarity between two traditional forms, this similarity can be ex-
plained less by ‘borrowing,’ which is very often improbably, than by ‘af-
finities’ due to a certain set of similar or common conditions (race, type 
of language, way of life, etc.) among the peoples to whom these formsrrowing,’ which is very often improbably, than by ‘af-
finities’ due to a certain set of similar or common conditions (race, type 
of language, way of life, etc.) among the peoples to whom these forms

--- PAGE BREAK ---ery often improbably, than by ‘af-
finities’ due to a certain set of similar or common conditions (race, type 
of language, way of life, etc.) among the peoples to whom these forms

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
251 
are respectively addressed.338 As for the cases of real filiation, it does not 
mean that they must be entirely excluded, because it is obvious that all 
the traditional forms do not proceed directly from the Primordial Tradi-
tion, but that other forms have sometimes had to play the role of inter-
mediaries, but these latter are, in most cases, those which have entirely 
disappeared, and these transmissions generally hark back to times far too 
distant for ordinary history, whose field of investigation is very limited, 
so that they do not have the slightest knowledge of it, not to mention the 
means by which intermediaries are carried out are not of those which 
may be accessible for these research methods. 
All this is only leading us away from our subject in just appearance: 
if it cannot be directly derived from the it, even assuming that it is not 
really anterior to the other, and if only due to a great difference of form 
on which we will return later more specifically, could we at least consider 
for both a common origin, which would be, according to the views of 
some, the tradition of the ancient Egyptians (which, it is needless to say, 
this time would go well beyond the Alexandrian period)? Let us say im-
mediately, this is a theory which has been abused; as far as Judaism is 
concerned, it is impossible for us, despite certain more or less fanciful 
assertions, to discover the slightest connection with all that can be 
known of the Egyptian tradition (we are talking about the form which is 
alone to be considered in this, since the substance is necessarily identical 
in all traditions). No doubt it would have more real links with the Chal-
dean tradition, whether by derivation or mere affinity, and as far as it is 
possible to truly grasp something of those traditions which have been 
extinct for so many centuries. 
For Pythagorism, the question is perhaps more complex; the travels 
of Pythagoras, which must be understood literally or symbolically, do not 
necessarily imply borrowing from the doctrines of this or that people (atthe question is perhaps more complex; the travels 
of Pythagoras, which must be understood literally or symbolically, do not 
necessarily imply borrowing from the doctrines of this or that people (at

338 This may apply in particular to the similarity of expressions that we have 
already point out between Kabbalah and Islamic esoterism, in this regard there 
is, as far as the latter is concerned, a curious remark to be made: in Islam itself, 
‘exoterist’ adversaries have often sought to depreciate it by attributing it to a 
foreign origin, on the pretext that many of the best-known Ṣūfis were Persian, 
they wished to see borrowing from Mazdeism, even extending this gratuitous 
affirmation to the ‘science of letters,’ but there is no trace of anything like it 
among the ancient Persians, while, on the contrary, this science exists in an en-
tirely comparable form in Judaism, which is easily explained by the ‘affinities’ 
we are referring to, not to mention the community of a more distant origin that 
we will have to return to; this fact was the only one which could give any sem-
blance of verisimilitude to the idea of a borrowing made from a pre-Islamic and 
non-Arab doctrine, and it seems to have escaped them completely.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

252 
The Veil of Isisve any sem-
blance of verisimilitude to the idea of a borrowing made from a pre-Islamic and 
non-Arab doctrine, and it seems to have escaped them completely.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

252 
The Veil of Isis

least as for the essential, and whatever other points of detail may be in-
volved), but rather the establishment or strengthening of certain links 
with more or less equivalent initiations. Indeed, it seems that Pythago-
rism was above all the continuation of something which pre-dated 
Greece itself, and there is no reason to look elsewhere for its principal 
source: we wish to speak of the Mysteries, more particularly of Orphism, 
which was perhaps only a ‘rehabilitation,’ in the sixth century B.C., 
which, through a strange synchronism saw changes of form take place 
in the traditions of almost all peoples. It is often said that the Greek Mys-
teries were themselves of an Egyptian origin, but such a general assertion 
is far too ‘simplistic,’ and, while this may be true in some cases, such as 
that of the Eleusinian Mysteries (which we believe especially applies 
here), there are others where it would not be tenable.339 Thus, whether it 
is Pythagorism itself or the earlier Orphism, it is not at Eleusis that we 
must look for the ‘point of attachment,’ but at Delphi, and the Delphic 
Apollo is by no means Egyptian, but of a Hyperborean origin that is im-
possible to envisage for the Hebraic tradition;340 this brings us directly to 
the most important point with respect to the science of numbers and the 
different forms it has worn. 
In Pythagorism, this science of numbers appears closely related to 
that of geometric forms; and so, it is with Plato, who in this respect is 
purely Pythagorean. Here we could see the expression of a characteristic 
feature of the Hellenic mentality, attached above all to the consideration 
of visual forms; indeed, we know that among the mathematic sciences, it 
is geometry that the Greeks developed most particularly.341 However, 
there is something more, at least with regards to ‘sacred geometry,’ 
which is what this is about: the ‘geometric’ God of Pythagoras and Plato, 
understood in its most precise and, one could say, ‘technical’ meaning is 
none other than Apollo. We cannot dwell on this subject for too long for 
there are developments which would lead us too far astray, and perhaps 
we will return to this question on another occasion; it is enough for usollo. We cannot dwell on this subject for too long for 
there are developments which would lead us too far astray, and perhaps 
we will return to this question on another occasion; it is enough for us

339 It is scarcely necessary to say that certain accounts in which we see Moses 
and Orpheus receiving initiation at the same time in the temples of Egypt are 
only fantasies which rest upon nothing serious; what remains to be said of Egyp-
tian initiation since Abbé Terrasson’s Sethos? 
340 This is the direct derivation; even if the Primordial Tradition is hyperborean, 
and if all the traditional forms without exception are finally attached to this 
origin, there are cases, such as that of the Hebraic tradition, where it can only 
be indirectly and through a more or less long series of intermediaries, besides of 
which it would be very difficult to claim reconstitute precisely. 
341 On the contrary, algebra is of an Indian origin and was not introduced to the 
Occident until much later, through the intermediary of the Arabs, who gave it 
the name it has kept (al-jābr).

--- PAGE BREAK ---ntrary, algebra is of an Indian origin and was not introduced to the 
Occident until much later, through the intermediary of the Arabs, who gave it 
the name it has kept (al-jābr).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
253 
at present to point out that this fact is clearly opposed to the hypothesis 
of a common origin of Pythagorism and Kabbalah, and this is the very 
point we have sought above all to reconcile, and which is, to tell the truth, 
the only one which could have given the idea of such a comparison, 
which is to say, the apparent similarity of these two doctrines and the 
roles played by the science of numbers. 
In Kabbalah, this same science of numbers is in no way connected 
with geometric symbolism, and it is easy to understand that this is do, 
for this symbolism could not be suitable for nomadic peoples, as was 
originally the case for the Hebrews and the Arabs.342 On the contrary, we 
find here something which does not have its equivalent among the 
Greeks: the close union, one could even say the identification in many 
respects, of the science of numbers with that of letters, because of the 
digital correspondences of these; this is what is eminently characteristic 
of Kabbalah,343 and which is found nowhere else, at least in this aspect 
and with this development, if not, as we have already said, in Islamic 
esoterism, which is to say on the whole in the Arab tradition. 
It might seem surprising at first glance that considerations of this or-
der remained foreign to the Greeks,344 since letters have a numerical 
value for them as well (which is also the same in the Hebrew and Arabic 
alphabets for those which have their equivalents), and there were never 
other signs of numeration. However, the explanation of this fact is quite 
simple: it is that the Greek writing represents in reality only a foreign 
import (either ‘Phoenician’ as is most often said, or in any case ‘Cad-
mean,’ which is to say, ‘oriental’ without any more precise specification, 
and the varying names of the letters are proof of this), and which, in its 
numerical or other symbolism, has never really, if we can express it thus,riental’ without any more precise specification, 
and the varying names of the letters are proof of this), and which, in its 
numerical or other symbolism, has never really, if we can express it thus,

342 On this point, see our article on Cain and Abel (January 1932); it should not 
be forgotten that, as we said then, Solomon had to appeal to foreign workers for 
the construction of the Temple, which is particularly significant because of the 
intimate relationship between geometry and architecture. 
343 Let us recall in this connection that the word gematria (which, being of a 
Greek origin, must, like a certain number of other terms of the same provenance, 
have been introduced in a relatively recent period, which does not mean that 
what it designates did not exist previously), does not derive from geometria as is 
often claimed, but from grammateia, it is therefore still from the science of let-
ters that this is a question. 
344 It is only with Christianity that something like this can be found in writings 
of Greek expression, and then it is obviously a transposition of data whose origin 
is Hebraic; we mean, in this regard, to refer principally to Revelations, and one 
could probably also note things of the same order in what remains of writings 
related to Gnosticism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

254 
The Veil of Isiss regard, to refer principally to Revelations, and one 
could probably also note things of the same order in what remains of writings 
related to Gnosticism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

254 
The Veil of Isis

become one with the language itself.345 On the contrary, in languages 
such as Hebrew and Arabic, the meaning of words is inseparable from 
literal symbolism, and it would be impossible to give a complete inter-
pretation as to their most profound meanings, the one that really matters 
in the traditional and initiatic point of view (because we must not forget 
that these are essentially ‘sacred languages’), without taking into account 
the numerical values of the letters that compose them; the links existing 
between numerically equivalent words, and the substitutions to which 
they sometimes give rise, are, in this regard, a particularly clear exam-
ple.346 There is something which, as we said at the beginning, is essen-
tially due to the very formation of these languages, which is related in a 
strictly ‘organic’ way, far from having things added from without and 
afterwards, as in the case of the Greek language; since this element is 
found in both Hebrew and Arabic, it can legitimately be regarded as pro-
ceeding from the common source of these two languages and the two 
traditions they express, which is to say what may be called the ‘Abra-
hamic’ tradition. 
We can now draw from these considerations the necessary conclu-
sions: that if we consider the science of numbers among the Greeks and 
the Hebrews, we see it clothed in two very different forms, supported in 
one by a geometric symbolism, and in the other by a literal symbolism.347 
As a result, there can be no question of ‘borrowing,’ no more on one side 
than the other, but only equivalences as it necessarily occurs between all 
the traditional forms; we leave aside entirely any question of ‘priority,’ 
without any real interest in these conditions, and perhaps insoluble, the 
real point of departure being able to be well beyond the periods for whichleave aside entirely any question of ‘priority,’ 
without any real interest in these conditions, and perhaps insoluble, the 
real point of departure being able to be well beyond the periods for which

345 Even in the symbolic interpretation of words (for example in Plato’s Craty-
lus), the consideration of the letters of which they are composed does not inter-
fere; the same is true of nirukta for the Sanskrit language, and while there are 
certain aspects of the Hindu tradition which have a literal symbolism, which is 
even highly developed, it rests on principles entirely different from what we are 
dealing with here. 
346 This is one of the reasons why the idea, put forward by some under the pre-
text of ‘convenience,’ that writing Arabic with Latin characters is totally unac-
ceptable and even absurd (this without prejudice to other more contingent con-
siderations, like the impossibility of establishing a truly precise transcription, by 
the same reason that the Arabic letters do not have all their equivalents in the 
Latin alphabet). The true motives for which some Orientalists propagate this 
idea are quite different from those they claim, and must be seen with ‘anti-tra-
ditional’ intent in relation to political concerns, but this is another story… 
347 We say ‘supported’ because these symbolisms effectively constitute, in both 
cases, the sensible ‘support’ and the ‘body’ of the science of numbers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
255 
it is possible to establish a timeline that is somewhat rigorous. In addi-
tion, the hypothesis of an immediate common origin must also be re-
jected, because we see the tradition of which this science is an integral 
part, on the one hand, to an ‘Apollonian’ science, which is to say directly 
hyperborean, and, on the other, an ‘Abrahamic’ source, which is most 
likely related to (as the very names of the Hebrews and Arabs suggest) 
to the traditional stream of the ‘Lost Island of the West.’348rborean, and, on the other, an ‘Abrahamic’ source, which is most 
likely related to (as the very names of the Hebrews and Arabs suggest) 
to the traditional stream of the ‘Lost Island of the West.’348

348 We constantly use the expression ‘the science of numbers’ to avoid confusion 
with profane arithmetic; perhaps one could adopt a term such as ‘arithmology,’ 
but because of the ‘barbarism’ of its hybrid composition, it is necessary to reject 
that of ‘numerology’ of recent invention, and by which, some seem to want to 
designate above all a sort of ‘divinatory art’ which has little to do with the true 
traditional science of numbers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kundalini-Yoga 
Kundalinî-Yoga, October 1933.seem to want to 
designate above all a sort of ‘divinatory art’ which has little to do with the true 
traditional science of numbers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kundalini-Yoga 
Kundalinî-Yoga, October 1933.

The work of Arthur Avalon (Sir John Woodroffe), devoted to the one of 
the most obscure aspects of the Hindu doctrines, has been discussed sev-
eral times previously; what is called ‘Tantrism,’ because it is based on the 
treaties designated under the generic name tantras, and which is much 
more extensive and less clearly delimited than is commonly believed, has 
been almost entirely neglected by the Orientalists, who have been ex-
cluded both by the difficulty of understand it and by certain prejudices, 
which are the direct consequence of their misunderstanding. One of the 
principal works, entitled The Serpent Power, has recently been reissued;349 
we do not propose to make an analysis of it, which would be almost im-
possible and uninteresting nonetheless (it is better for those of our read-
ers who know English to refer to the volume itself, of which we would 
never give an incomplete idea), but rather to clarify the true meaning of 
what it deals with, without actually constraining us to follow the order 
in which the questions are subject.350 
Firstly, we must say that we cannot entirely agree with the author on 
the fundamental meaning of the word yoga, which, being literally that of 
‘union,’ could not be understood unless it applied essentially to the su-
preme goal of any ‘realization;’ he objects to this that there can be no 
question of a union except between two distinct beings, and that Jivatma 
is not really distinct from Paramatma. This is perfectly true, but the in-
dividual is in fact distinguished from the Universal in an illusory mode 
alone, it must not be forgotten that it is from the individual that neces-
sarily originates all ‘realization’ (this word would not have any raison 
d’être otherwise), and that, from his point of view, this presents the ap-
pearance of a ‘union,’ which, to tell the truth, is not something ‘which‘realization’ (this word would not have any raison 
d’être otherwise), and that, from his point of view, this presents the ap-
pearance of a ‘union,’ which, to tell the truth, is not something ‘which

349 The Serpent Power, 3rd edition review; Ganesh & Co., Madras. – This volume 
includes the translation of two texts: Shatchakra nirupana and Paduku-pan-
chaka, preceded by a long and important introduction: it is the content to which 
our study relates. 
350 On many points, we can do not better than to reference our own work. Man 
and His Becoming according to the Vedanta, for further explanations that are im-
possible for us to reproduce in the framework of an article, and that we must, 
therefore, suppose are already known.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ccording to the Vedanta, for further explanations that are im-
possible for us to reproduce in the framework of an article, and that we must, 
therefore, suppose are already known.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
257 
must be done,’ that is to say the ‘Supreme Identity.’ A term like that of 
yoga expresses the aspect that things take on the aspect of manifestation, 
and which is obviously illusory in the same way as manifestation itself; 
but it is the same, inevitably, of all the forms of the language, since they 
belong to the domain of the individual manifestation, and it is enough to 
be warned of not being misled by their imperfection, nor to see in their 
expression a real ‘dualism.’ It is only secondarily and by extension that 
this same word yoga can then be applied to all the various means imple-
mented to achieve ‘realization,’ means which are only preparatory and 
to which the name ‘union,’ in whatever way it may be understood, can-
not be properly understood; all this in no way affects the exposition of 
what it is about, because the word yoga is preceded by a determinative, 
so as to distinguish between several kinds, it is quite evident that it is 
used to designate the means, which alone are multiple, while the goal is 
necessarily one and the same in all cases. 
The kind of yoga we are dealing with here is related to what is called 
laya-yoga, which consists essentially of a process of ‘dissolution’ (laya), 
that is, resorption in the non-manifested of the different constitutive el-
ements of the individual manifestation, this resorption taking place grad-
ually in an order that is strictly opposite to that of the production (Srishti) 
or development (prapancha) of this same manifestation.351 The elements 
or principles in question are the tattwas that the Sankhya enumerates as 
production of Prakriti under the influence of Purusha: the ‘internal 
sense,’ that is to say the ‘mind’ (manas), joined to the individual con-
sciousness (ahamkara), and through it to the intellect (Buddhi or Mahat); 
the five tanmatras or subtle elemental essences; the five faculties of sen-
sation (jnanendriyas) and the five faculties of action (karmendriyas);352nd through it to the intellect (Buddhi or Mahat); 
the five tanmatras or subtle elemental essences; the five faculties of sen-
sation (jnanendriyas) and the five faculties of action (karmendriyas);352

351 It is regrettable that the author frequently uses, especially to translate srishti, 
the word ‘creation,’ which, as we have often explained, is not suitable for the 
point of view of the Hindu doctrine; we know all too well how many difficulties 
give rise from the necessity of using Western terminology, as inadequate as it is 
with questions of expression, but we think that this word is one of those which 
we can easily avoid, and in fact we have never used it ourselves. – While we are 
on this issue of terminology, let us also mention the impropriety of translating 
samadhi by ‘ecstasy;’ this last word is all the more unfortunate because it is nor-
mally used, in Western language, to designate mystic states, that is, something 
which is of a totally different order and with which it essentially imports to 
avoid any confusion; moreover, it means etymologically ‘to go out of oneself’ 
(which is well suited to the case of mystic states), whereas what the term ‘sa-
madhi’ refers to is, on the contrary, a ‘re-entry’ of the being into his own Self. 
352 The word indriya designates both a faculty and the corresponding organ, but 
it is preferable to translate it generally into ‘faculty,’ first because it is in keeping

--- PAGE BREAK ---

258 
The Veil of Isisindriya designates both a faculty and the corresponding organ, but 
it is preferable to translate it generally into ‘faculty,’ first because it is in keeping

--- PAGE BREAK ---

258 
The Veil of Isis

finally, the five bhutas or bodily elements.353 Each bhuta, with the tan-
matra to which it corresponds, and the faculties of sensation and action 
which proceed from it, is resorbed into the one immediately preceding it 
according to the order of production, so that the order of resorption is as 
follows: 1st the earth (prithvi), with the olfactory quality (gandha), the 
sense of smell (ghrana) and the faculty of locomotion (pada); 1st the wa-
ter (ap), with the quality of taste (rasa), the sense of taste (rasana) and 
the prehension faculty (pani); 3rd the fire (tejas), with the visual quality 
(rupa), the sense of sight (chakshus) and the faculty of excretion (payu); 
4th the air (vayu), with the tactile quality (sparsha), the sense of touch 
(twach) and the faculty of generation (upastha); 5th the ether (akasha), 
with the sound quality (shabda), the sense of hearing (shrotra) and the 
faculty of speech (vach); and finally, at the last stage, the whole thing is 
resorbed in the ‘internal sense’ (manas), the whole individual manifesta-
tion thus being reduced to its first term, and as at a point beyond which 
the being passes into another domain. Such will be the six preparatory 
stages that will have to be traversed successively by the one who follows 
this path of ‘dissolution,’ thus gradually freeing himself from the various 
limiting conditions of individuality, before reaching the supra-individual 
state where the total union with the Supreme Self (Paramatma) can be 
realized, in the pure and informal Consciousness (Chit), the union of 
which immediately results ‘Deliverance’ (Moksha). 
To fully understand what will follow, it is important to never lose 
sight of the notion of the constitutive analogy between the ‘Macrocosm’ 
and the ‘Microcosm,’ by virtue of which all that exists in the Universe is 
also found in man, what the Vishwasara Tantra expresses in these terms: 
“What is here is there, what is not here is nowhere” (yad ihasti tad an-
yatra, yan nehasti na tat kwachit). It must be added, because of the cor-
respondences that exist between all states of existence, each of them con-
tain in some way a reflection of all the other states, which makes it pos-
sible to ‘locate,’ by example, in the field of gross manifestation, whether 
contemplated elsewhere in the cosmic ensemble or in the human body, 
‘regions’ corresponding to various modes of subtle manifestation, ande,’ by example, in the field of gross manifestation, whether 
contemplated elsewhere in the cosmic ensemble or in the human body, 
‘regions’ corresponding to various modes of subtle manifestation, and

with its primitive meaning, which is that of ‘power,’ and also because the con-
sideration of the faculty here is more essential than that of the corporeal organ, 
because of the pre-eminence of the subtle manifestation in relation to the gross 
manifestation. 
353 We do not understand the objection made by the author to the use of the 
word, in designating the bhutas, ‘elements,’ which is a traditional term of ancient 
physics: there is no need to worry about the oblivion in which this meaning has 
fallen among the modern ones, to whom any conception of what is properly 
‘cosmological’ has become entirely foreign.

--- PAGE BREAK ---no need to worry about the oblivion in which this meaning has 
fallen among the modern ones, to whom any conception of what is properly 
‘cosmological’ has become entirely foreign.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
259 
even to a whole hierarchy of ‘worlds’ that represent so many different 
degrees in universal existence. 
That said, it is easy to conceive that there are in the human being 
‘centers’ corresponding respectively to each of the groups of tattwas that 
we have enumerated, and that these centers, although essentially belong-
ing to the subtle form (sukshma-sharira), may in a certain sense be ‘lo-
calized’ in the corporeal or gross form (sthula-sharira), or, rather, in re-
lation to the different parts of it, these ‘localizations’ being in reality 
nothing more than a way of expressing correspondences which involve 
a very special link between a certain subtle center and this particular 
portion of the corporeal organism. It is thus that the six centers in ques-
tion are referred to the division of the vertebral column, called Meru-
danda because it constitutes the axis of the human body, as well as, from 
a ‘macrocosmic’ point of view, the Meru is the ‘axis of the world:’354 the 
first five, in the ascending direction, correspond respectively to the coc-
cygeal, sacral, lumbar, dorsal, and cervical regions, and the sixth to the 
encephalic part of the central nervous system; it must be well understood 
that they are not nervous centers, in the physiological sense of the word, 
and we must in no way assimilate them with various plexuses, as some 
have claimed (which is in contradiction with their ‘localization’ inside 
the spinal column itself), because it is not an identity that is involved, but 
only a relation between two distinct orders of manifestation, a relation 
which is sufficiently justified by the fact that it is precisely by means of 
the nervous system that one of the most direction relations of the corpo-
real state with the subtle state is established.355 
Similarly, the subtle ‘channels’ (nadis) are no more nerves than they 
are blood vessels; these are, it may be said, ‘the lines of direction which 
the vital forces follows.’ Of these ‘channels,’ the three main ones are su-
shumna, which occupies the central position, ida and pingala, the two 
left and right nadis, the first feminine or negative, the second masculineows.’ Of these ‘channels,’ the three main ones are su-
shumna, which occupies the central position, ida and pingala, the two 
left and right nadis, the first feminine or negative, the second masculine

354 It is rather astonishing that the author did not report the relationship of this 
with the symbolism of the Brahmanic staff (Brahma-danda), all the more because 
he repeatedly refers to the equivalent symbolism of the caduceus. 
355 The author rightly remarks how erroneous are the interpretations ordinarily 
given by Westerners, who, confusing the two orders of manifestation, wish to 
reduce everything to a purely anatomical and physiological point of view: Ori-
entalists, ignorant of all traditional science, believe that this is only a more or 
less fantastic description of certain corporeal organs: Occultists, for their part, if 
they admit the distinct existence of the subtle organism, imagine it as a kind of 
‘double’ of the body, subject to the same conditions as this one, which is scarcely 
more exact and can only result in grossly materialized representations: the au-
thor shows in detail this final point how far the conceptions of the Theosophists, 
in particular, are removed from the true Hindu doctrine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

260 
The Veil of Isistations: the au-
thor shows in detail this final point how far the conceptions of the Theosophists, 
in particular, are removed from the true Hindu doctrine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

260 
The Veil of Isis

or positive, the latter two thus corresponding to a ‘polarization’ of vital 
currents. Sushumna is ‘located’ inside the cerebrospinal axis, extending 
to the orifice corresponding to the crown of the head (Brahma-randhra); 
ida and pingala are outside this same axis, around which they cross each 
other by a kind of double helical winding, leading respectively to the left 
and right nostrils, thus being related to the alternate breathing of one to 
the other nostril.356 It is on the path of sushumna, and even more exactly 
in its interior (because it is described as enclosing two other concentric 
and more tenuous ‘channels’ called vajra and chitra),357 what are the 
‘centers’ of which we have spoken? As sushumna is itself ‘localized’ in 
the medullary canal, it is quite evident that it can in no way be any body 
organs. 
These centers are called ‘wheels’ (chakras) and are also described as 
‘lotuses’ (padmas), each of which has a definite number of petals (radiat-
ing in the interval between vajra and chrita, which is to say, inside the 
first and around the second). The six chakras are: muladhara, correspond-
ing to the abdominal region; manipura, to the umbilical region; anahata, 
to the region of the heart; vishuddha, to the region of the throat; ajna, to 
the region between the two eyes, which is to say the ‘third eye;’ finally, 
at the crown of the head, around the Brahma-randhra, is a seventh ‘lotus,’ 
sahasrara or the ‘thousand-petalled lotus,’ which is not counted among 
the chakras, because, as we shall subsequently see, as a ‘center of con-
sciousness,’ to a state that is beyond the bounds of individuality.358 Ac-
cording to the descriptions given for meditation (dhyana), each lotus car-
ries in its pericarp the yantra or geometric symbol of the corresponding 
bhuta, in which is the bija-mantra of the latter, supported by its symbolic 
‘vehicle’ (vahana); there also resides a ‘deity’ (devata), accompanied by a 
particular shakti. The ‘deities’ who preside over the six chakras, and whomantra of the latter, supported by its symbolic 
‘vehicle’ (vahana); there also resides a ‘deity’ (devata), accompanied by a 
particular shakti. The ‘deities’ who preside over the six chakras, and who

356 In the symbol of the caduceus, the central rod corresponds to sushumna, the 
two serpents to ida and pingala: these are also sometimes represented, on the 
Brahmanic staff, by the outline of two helical lines winding in opposite direc-
tions from each other, so as to cross at each of the nodes which represent the 
different centers. – In cosmic correspondances, ida is related to the Moon, 
pingala to the Sun, and sushumna to the igneous principle; it is interesting to 
note the relationship this presents with the three ‘Great Lights’ of Masonic sym-
bolism. 
357 It is also said that sushumna corresponds by its nature to fire, vajra to the 
Sun, and chitra to the Moon: the interior of the final, forming the most central 
conduit, is called Brahma-nadi. 
358 The seven knots of the Brahmanic staff symbolize the seven ‘lotuses;’ in the 
caduceus, on the contrary, it seems that the terminal ball has to be brought back 
only to ajna, the two alleys accompanying it then identifying with the two petals 
of this ‘lotus.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---duceus, on the contrary, it seems that the terminal ball has to be brought back 
only to ajna, the two alleys accompanying it then identifying with the two petals 
of this ‘lotus.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
261 
are nothing other than the ‘forms of consciousness’ through which the 
being passes at the corresponding stages, are respectively, in ascending 
order, Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Isha, Sadashiva, and Shambhu, on the other 
hand, from the ‘macrocosmic’ point of view, their dwellings in the six 
‘worlds’ (lokas) are hierarchically superimposed: Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka, 
Swarloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Maharloka; at sahasrara presides Par-
amashiva, whose home is the Satyaloka; thus, all these worlds have their 
correspondence in the ‘centers of consciousness’ of the human being, 
following the analog principle that we have indicated previously. Finally, 
each of the petals of the different ‘lotuses’ bears one of the letters of the 
Sanskrit alphabet, or perhaps it would be more accurate to say that the 
petals are the very letters;359 but it would be of little use now to enter 
into more depth on this subject, and the necessary complements in this 
respect will find their place better in the second part of our study, fol-
lowing what we have said of Kundalini, of which we have not spoken 
yet.

359 The numbers of the petals are: 4 for muladhara, 6 for swadhishthana, 10 for 
manipura, 12 for anathata, 16 for vishuddha, 2 for ajna, or a total of 50, which is 
also the number of letters in the Sanskrit alphabet; all the letters are found in 
sahasrara, each of them being repeated 20 times (50 × 20 = 1000).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kundalini-Yoga II 
Kundalinî-Yoga II, November 1933.ters in the Sanskrit alphabet; all the letters are found in 
sahasrara, each of them being repeated 20 times (50 × 20 = 1000).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Kundalini-Yoga II 
Kundalinî-Yoga II, November 1933.

Kundalini is an aspect of Shakti considered as a cosmic force: one might 
say it is this force even as it resides in the human being, where it acts as 
a vital force; this name Kundalini means that it is represented as coiled 
on itself in the manner of a serpent, its most general manifestations tak-
ing place in the form of a spiral movement developing from a central 
point which is its ‘pole.’ The ‘winding’ symbolizes a state of rest, that of 
a ‘static’ energy from which all forms of manifested activity proceed; in 
other words, all the more or less specialized vital forces which are con-
stantly in action in human individuality, under its dual subtle and corpo-
real modes, are only secondary aspects of this same Shakti which in itself, 
in as long as Kundalini remains motionless in the ‘root center’ (mu-
ladhara) as the basis and support of all individual manifestation. When 
she is ‘awake,’ she unfolds and moves in an ascending direction, reshap-
ing in herself these various secondary Shaktis as she passes through the 
various centers we have spoken of before, until she finally unites with 
Paramashiva in the ‘thousand-petalled lotus’ (sahasrara). 
The nature of Kundalini is described as being both luminous 
(jyotirmayi) and sonorous (shabdamayi or mantramayi); we know that 
‘luminosity’ is considered to properly characterize the subtle state, and 
we also know the primordial role of sound in the cosmogonic process; 
from the same cosmogonic point of view, there is much to say about the 
close connection between sound and light.360 We cannot dwell on the 
extremely complex theory of sound (shabda) and its different modes 
(para or non-manifested, pashyanti and madhyama, both belonging to 
the subtle order, and finally vaikhari, which is the articulated word), the 
theory on which rests the entire science of the mantra (mantra-vidya); 
we will point out that this is the reason why only the presence of the 
bija-mantras of the elements inside the lotus, but also the letters on their 
petals, are explained. In fact, it must be understood that it is not a ques-
tion here of letters as written characters, nor even of articulated soundsinside the lotus, but also the letters on their 
petals, are explained. In fact, it must be understood that it is not a ques-
tion here of letters as written characters, nor even of articulated sounds

360 On this point, we will only recall, as a particularly striking concordance, the 
identification established at the beginning of the Gospel of Saint John between 
the terms Verbum, Lux, and Vita, stating that, to be fully understood, it must be 
brought back to the world of Hiranyagarbha.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
263 
perceived by the ears; these letters are regarded as the bija-mantras or 
the ‘natural names’ of all activities (kriya) in connection with the tattwa 
of the corresponding center, or as expressions in its gross subtle sounds 
(vaikhari-shabda) produced by the forces which constitutes these activi-
ties. 
Kundalini, as long as she remains in her resting state, resides in the 
muladhara chakra, which is, as we have said, the ‘localized’ center at the 
base of the spine, and that is the root (mula) of sushumna and all the 
nadis. There is the triangle (trikona) called Traipura,361 which is the seat 
of the Shakti (Shaktipitha); it is wrapped three and a half times362 around 
the symbolic linga of Shiva, designated as Swayambhu, covering with his 
head the Brahma-dwara, that is, the entrance of sushumna.363 There are 
two other lingas, one (Bana) in the anahata chakra, and the other (Itara) 
in the ajna chakra; they correspond to the main ‘vital nodes’ (granthis), 
the crossing of which constitutes what might be called the ‘critical 
points’ in the Kundalini-yoga process;364 and there is finally a fourth 
(Para) in sahasrara, the residence of Paramashiva. 
When Kundalini is ‘awakened’ by the appropriate practices, the de-
scription of which we will not enter, she enters sushumna and, during 
her ascent, successively ‘pierces’ the various ‘lotuses,’ which flourish asi is ‘awakened’ by the appropriate practices, the de-
scription of which we will not enter, she enters sushumna and, during 
her ascent, successively ‘pierces’ the various ‘lotuses,’ which flourish as

361 The triangle, like the yantra of the Shakti, is always traced with the base at 
the top and the top at the bottom: it would be easy to show the similarity with 
many other symbols of the feminine principle. 
362 We will give an analogy in passing between these three and a half turns of 
Kundalini’s winding and the three and a half days during which, according to 
various traditions, the mind still remains bound to the body after death, and 
which represents the time required for ‘Denouement’ of the vital force, remain-
ing in the ‘un-awakened’ state in the case of the ordinary man. One day is a 
cyclic revolution, corresponding to a turn of the spiral; since the process of re-
sorption is always the opposite of manifestation, this course of action is consid-
ered to be a summary of the entire life of the individual, but taken up by the 
course of the events which constituted it; it is scarcely necessary to add that 
these misunderstood data have too often engendered all sorts of fanciful inter-
pretations. 
363 The mandala or yantra of the Prithvi element is a square, corresponding as a 
plane figure to the cube, whose form symbolizes the ideas of ‘foundation’ and 
‘stability;’ one could say, in the language of the Islamic tradition, that here we 
have the correspondence in the human being of the Kaʿabah, within which is 
the ‘black stone,’ equivalent to the Hindu linga, and also to the omphalos which 
is, as we have explained elsewhere, one of the symbols of the ‘center of the 
world.’ 
364 These three lingas also relate to different situations, depending on the state 
of development of the being, the luz or ‘nucleus of immortality,’ which we have 
spoken about in The King of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

264 
The Veil of Isist situations, depending on the state 
of development of the being, the luz or ‘nucleus of immortality,’ which we have 
spoken about in The King of the World.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

264 
The Veil of Isis

it passes; as it reaches each center in this way, it reabsorbs into itself, as 
we have already said, the various principles of individual manifestation 
which are especially related to this center, and thus reduced to its poten-
tial state, are carried with it in its movement towards the higher center. 
These are all stages of laya-yoga; at each of these stages is also reported 
the obtaining of certain particular ‘powers’ (siddhis), but it is important 
to notice that it is by no means what constitutes the essential one, and 
even one cannot insist upon it too much, for the general tendency of 
Westerners is to attribute to these sorts of things, as indeed to all that is 
‘phenomena,’ an importance which they do not have and cannot have in 
reality. As the author rightly points out, the yogi (or to speak more pre-
cisely, the one who is about to become one) aspires to the possession of 
any conditioned state, be it a superior or ‘celestial’ state, so high as it 
may be, but uniquely ‘Deliverance;’ can he not attach himself to ‘powers’ 
whose exercise falls entirely within the sphere of the most external man-
ifestation. Whoever seeks these ‘powers’ for themselves and who makes 
them the goal of his development, instead of seeing only mere accidental 
results, will never be a true yogi, because they will constitute for him 
impassable obstacles, preventing him from continuing to follow the as-
cending path to its ultimate end; all his ‘realization’ will therefore consist 
only in certain extensions of human individuality, a result whose value 
is strictly nil with regard to the supreme goal. Normally, the ‘powers’ in 
question should be regarded only as signs that the being has actually 
reached a particular stage; it is, if you will, an external means of control, 
but what really matters, at any stage, is a certain ‘state of consciousness,’ 
represented, as we have said, by a ‘deity’ (devata) to which the being 
identifies himself at this degree of ‘realization;’ these states themselves 
are worth only as gradual preparatory to the supreme union, which has 
no common measure with them, for there can be nothing between the 
conditioned and the unconditioned. 
We will not repeat here the enumeration, which we have already 
given the first part of this study, of the centers corresponding to the five 
bhutas and their respective ‘localizations;’365 they relate to the different 
degrees of the corporeal manifestation, and, in the passage from the one 
to the other, each group of tattwas is ‘dissolved’ into the next higher 
group, the grossest always being resorbed into the must subtle (sthula-
nam sukshme layah). Finally, there comes the ajna chakra, where the sub-
tle tattwas of the ‘mental’ order are, and in the pericarp of which is thealways being resorbed into the must subtle (sthula-
nam sukshme layah). Finally, there comes the ajna chakra, where the sub-
tle tattwas of the ‘mental’ order are, and in the pericarp of which is the

365 It is important to note that anahata, referred to as the region of the heart, 
must be distinguished from the eight-petaled ‘heart lotus,’ which is the residence 
of Purusha: the latter is ‘located’ in the heart itself, considered as the ‘vital cen-
ter’ of individuality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nguished from the eight-petaled ‘heart lotus,’ which is the residence 
of Purusha: the latter is ‘located’ in the heart itself, considered as the ‘vital cen-
ter’ of individuality.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
265 
sacred monosyllable Om; this center is so called because it is there that it 
is received from above (which is to say from the supra-individual do-
main) the command (ajna) of the inner Guru, which is Paramashiva, to 
which the ‘Self’ is identical in reality.366 The ‘localization’ of this chakra 
is directly related to the ‘third eye,’ which is the ‘eye of Knowledge’ 
(Jnana-chakshus); the corresponding cerebral center is the pineal gland, 
which is not the ‘seat of the soul,’ according to Descartes’ truly absurd 
conception, but which nonetheless has a particularly important role as a 
connecting organ with the extra-corporeal mode of the human being. As 
we have explained elsewhere, the function of the ‘third eye’ refers essen-
tially to the ‘sense of eternity’ and the restoration of the ‘primordial state’ 
(of which we have also repeatedly reported the relationship with Hamsa 
in the form of which Paramashiva is said to manifest itself in this center); 
the stage of ‘realization’ corresponding to the ajna chakra thus implies 
the perfection of the human state, and there is the point of contact with 
the higher states, to which all that is beyond this stage is related.367 
On top of ajna are two secondary chakras called manas and soma,368 
and in the very pericarp of sahasrara is still a twelve-petalled lotus, con-
taining the supreme triangle Kamakala, which is the abode of Shakti.369 
Shabdabrahma, which is to say the ‘causal’ and unmanifested state of 
sound (shabda), is represented by the Kamakala, which is the ‘root’ 
(matla) of all mantras, and which has its inferior correspondence (which 
can be regarded as its reflection in relation to the gross manifestation) inrepresented by the Kamakala, which is the ‘root’ 
(matla) of all mantras, and which has its inferior correspondence (which 
can be regarded as its reflection in relation to the gross manifestation) in

366 This commandment corresponds to the ‘celestial mandate’ of the Far Eastern 
tradition; furthermore, the name of ajna chakra could be rendered in Arabic pre-
cisely as maqām al-ʿamr, indicating that there is a direct reflection of the ‘world’ 
called ‘ʿālam al-ʿamr,’ in the human being, just as from the ‘macrocosmic’ point 
of view, this reflection is situated in our state of existence at the central place of 
the ‘Terrestrial Paradise;’ one could even deduce from this precise consideration 
on the modality of the ‘angelic’ manifestations in relation to man, but this would 
lead us entirely away from our subject. 
367 The sight of the ‘third eye,’ by which the being is freed from the temporal 
condition (which has nothing in common with the ‘clairvoyance’ of Occultists 
and Theosophists), is intimately related to the ‘prophetic’ function; it is referred 
to by the Sanskrit word rishi, which literally means ‘seeing,’ and which has its 
exact equivalent in the Hebrew roeh, the ancient designation of the prophets, 
later replaced by the word nabī (which is to say ‘one who speaks by inspiration’). 
– Let us point out, without being able to insist otherwise, that what we indicate 
in this note and in the preceding one is related to the esoteric interpretation of 
the Sūrat al-Qadr, concerning the ‘descent’ of the Qurʾān. 
368 These two chakras are represented as ‘lotuses’ with six and sixteen petals 
respectively. 
369 One of the reasons why Shakti is symbolized by the triangle is the triplicity 
of its manifestation as Will (Ichchha), Action (Kriya), and Knowledge (Jnana).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

266 
The Veil of IsisOne of the reasons why Shakti is symbolized by the triangle is the triplicity 
of its manifestation as Will (Ichchha), Action (Kriya), and Knowledge (Jnana).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

266 
The Veil of Isis

the triangle Traipura of muladhara. We cannot think of going into the 
details of the very complex descriptions given of these different centers 
for meditation, which relate for the most part to the mantra-vidya, or of 
the enumeration of the various particular Shaktis who have their ‘seats’ 
between ajna and sahasrara. Finally, sahasrara is called Shivasthana, be-
cause it is the residence of Paramashiva, in union with the supreme Nir-
vana Shakti, the ‘Mother of the Three Worlds;’ it is the ‘home of bliss,’ 
where the ‘Self’ (atma) is realized. He who truly and fully knows sa-
hasrara is free from ‘transmigration’ (samsara), because he has broken 
by this very knowledge all the bonds that have held him attached, and he 
has since reached the state of jivanmukta. 
We will conclude with a remark, which we believe has not yet been 
made anywhere, on the concordance of the centers mentioned here with 
the Sephiroth of Kabbalah, which, in fact, must necessarily have their cor-
respondence in the human being. It might be objected that the Sephiroth 
are ten in number, while the six chakras and sahasrara form only a total 
of seven, but this objection falls flat if one observes that in the arrange-
ment of the ‘Sephirothic tree’ there are three pairs placed symmetrically 
on the ‘columns’ of the right and left, so that the Sephiroth set is distrib-
uted at seven different levels only; consider their projections on the cen-
tral axis or ‘middle column,’ which corresponds to sushumna (the two 
lateral ‘columns’ being linked with ida and pingala), so we are brought 
back to the septenary.370 
Beginning from the top, there is no difficulty in first regarding the 
assimilation of sahasrara, ‘localized’ to the crown of the head, to the su-
preme Sephirah, Keter, whose name precisely means the ‘Crown.’ Then 
comes the set of Hokhmah and Binah, which must correspond to ajna, 
and whose duality could even be represented by the two petals of this 
‘lotus;’ moreover, they are Da’at ‘resultant,’ which is to say, ‘Knowledge,’ 
and we have seen that the ‘localization’ of ajna also refers to the ‘eye of 
Knowledge.’371 The following couple, Hesed and Gevurah, can, according 
to a very general symbolism concerning the attributes of ‘Mercy’ andthat the ‘localization’ of ajna also refers to the ‘eye of 
Knowledge.’371 The following couple, Hesed and Gevurah, can, according 
to a very general symbolism concerning the attributes of ‘Mercy’ and

370 Note the similarity of the symbolism of the ‘Sephirothic tree’ with that of the 
caduceus, according to what we have indicated previously; furthermore, the dif-
ferent ‘channels’ connected the Sephiroth with each other are not without anal-
ogy with the nadis, this, of course, in regards to the particular application that 
can be made to the human being. 
371 The duality of Hokhmah and Binah can also be put in symbolic relation with 
the ‘microcosmic’ correspondence of the right and left eyes with the Sun and 
the Moon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---uman being. 
371 The duality of Hokhmah and Binah can also be put in symbolic relation with 
the ‘microcosmic’ correspondence of the right and left eyes with the Sun and 
the Moon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
267 
‘Justice,’ be placed in the man in relation to the two arms;372 these two 
Sephiroth will therefore be placed at both shoulders, and consequently at 
the level of the guttural region, corresponding thus to vishuddha.373 As 
for Tiferet, its central position obviously refers to the heart, which imme-
diately leads to its correspondence with anahata. The pair of Netzah and 
Hod will be placed at the hips, the attaching point of the lower limbs, like 
that of Hesed and Gevurah at the shoulders, the upper attachment points; 
the hips are at the level of the umbilical region, so it is manipura. Finally, 
with regards to the last two Sephiroth, it seems that there is reason to 
consider an inversion, because Yesod, according to the very meaning of 
its name, is the ‘foundation,’ which corresponds exactly to muladhara. 
Malkut should be assimilated to swadhishthana, which the meaning of 
the names seems to justify, for Malkut is the ‘Kingdom,’ and 
swadhishthana literally means the ‘proper abode’ of the Shakti. 
In spite of the length of this expose, we have only sketched a few 
aspects of a subject that is truly inexhaustible, hoping only to have been 
able to provide some useful clarifications to those who wish to study it 
further.this expose, we have only sketched a few 
aspects of a subject that is truly inexhaustible, hoping only to have been 
able to provide some useful clarifications to those who wish to study it 
further.

372 See what we have said in The King of the World, of the symbolism of both 
hands, in precise relation to the Shekinah (which we will mention in passing 
with relation to the Hindu Shakti) and the ‘Sephirothic tree.’ 
373 It is also at both shoulders that, according to Islamic tradition, the two angels 
responsible for recording the good and bad deeds of a man are placed respec-
tively, and which also represents the divine attributes of ‘Mercy’ and ‘Justice.’ – 
It should also be noted, in this connection, that the symbolic figure of the ‘bal-
ance’ mentioned in the Sifra di-Zeniuta could also be ‘situated’ in a similar way 
in the human being.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Education 
L’enseignement initiatique, December 1933.of the ‘bal-
ance’ mentioned in the Sifra di-Zeniuta could also be ‘situated’ in a similar way 
in the human being.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Education 
L’enseignement initiatique, December 1933.

As a complement to our previous studies on the question of initi-
ation, and more particularly with regards to the essential differ-
ence between the methods of initiatic education and those of pro-
fane education, we reproduce here, without any modifications, an 
article we published earlier in the journal Le Symbolisme (January 
1913 issue). Since most current readers of Voile d’Isis may have 
never heard of this article, we believe that its reproduction will 
not be untimely; at the same time, it will show that whatever may 
be imagined by those who judge too easily according to them-
selves, our way at looking at these things has never changed. 
It seems that, in a rather general way, one does not realize a very exact 
account of what is, or what should be, initiatic education, what essen-
tially characterizes it, by differentiating it deeply from profane education. 
In such matters, many view things in a superficial way, they stop at ex-
ternal appearances and forms, thus seeing nothing more, as a peculiarity 
worthy of remark, they find the usage of symbolism strange and at the 
least useless, they do not understand its raison d’être, we may even say 
the necessity for it. Apart from this, they suppose that the initiatic doc-
trine is basically only a philosophy like all others, perhaps a little differ-
ent by its methods, but in any case, nothing more because their mentality 
is thus made that they are unable to conceive of anything else. Those 
who will agree to recognize the education of a doctrine as having some 
value from one point of view or another, and for any reason which usu-
ally are not initiatic reasons, those even can never be more than a type 
of profane education, a complement to ordinary education, for the use of 
a relative elite. Now, it is perhaps even better to deny its value altogether, 
which amounts to ignoring it altogether, than to belittle it in this way 
and to present in its name and in its place the expression of particular 
views, which are more or less coordinated, on all sorts of things that, in 
reality, are not initiatic either in themselves or by the way they are 
treated. 
If this defective way of looking at initiatic education is due only to a 
lack of understanding of its true nature, there is another that is about aser in themselves or by the way they are 
treated. 
If this defective way of looking at initiatic education is due only to a 
lack of understanding of its true nature, there is another that is about as

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
269 
equivalent, though apparently quite opposite to this.

It consists in want-
ing to contradict it with profane education, while at the same time attrib-
uting to it a certain special science, which is more or less vaguely defined, 
at each moment putting it in contradiction and in conflict with the other 
sciences, and always declaring superior these without knowing much of 
why, since it is not less systematic in its exposition, nor less dogmatic in 
its conclusions.

Partisans of a teaching of this kind, so-called initiatic, 
affirm, it is true, that it is of a very different nature from ordinary educa-
tion, be it scientific, philosophical, or religious; from that they give no 
proof and, unfortunately, they do not stop there in facts of gratuitous or 
hypothetical assertions.

Moreover, grouping themselves into multiple 
schools and under different denominations, they contradict each other 
no less than they contradicted, often in a biased way, the representatives 
of the different branches of profane education, which does not prevent 
each of them from pretending to be taken at his word and considered 
more or less infallible.

But if initiatic teaching is neither an extension of profane education, 
as some would like, nor its antithesis, as others claim, if it is neither a 
philosophical system nor a specialized science, one wonders what it is, 
because it is not enough to have said what it is not, it is necessary, if not 
to give a strict definition which is perhaps impossible, at least try make 
it understood what its nature is.

To make its nature understood, at least 
insofar as can be done, it is to explain at the same time, and by the same 
token, why it is not possible to define it without distorting it, and also 
why it is so generally and in a certain way necessarily despised for its 
true character.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But if initiatic teaching is neither an extension of profane education, 
as some would like, nor its antithesis, as others claim, if it is neither a 
philosophical system nor a specialized science, one wonders what it is, 
because it is not enough to have said what it is not, it is necessary, if not 
to give a strict definition which is perhaps impossible, at least try make 
it understood what its nature is. To make its nature understood, at least 
insofar as can be done, it is to explain at the same time, and by the same 
token, why it is not possible to define it without distorting it, and also 
why it is so generally and in a certain way necessarily despised for its 
true character. Thus, the basis which forms this teaching is the constant 
use of symbolism in the transmission of this teaching, it could however 
be for anybody who thinks even a little, as is simply logical to do, a mode 
of expression quite different from ordinary language which must have 
been created to express, at least at its origins, ideas other than those ex-
pressed by the latter, and conceptions which cannot be translated inte-
grally by words, for which we would need a less limited language, which 
is more universal, because they are themselves measures of a more uni-
versal order. But if the initiatic conceptions are other than the profane conceptions, 
it is because they proceed above all from a different mentality than these, 
of which they differ less by their object than by the point of view under 
which they envisage this object. Now, according this essential distinction 
which exists between these two orders of conceptions, it is easy to admit 
that, on the one hand, all that can be considered from the profane point 
of view can be so, but then they can be so in a completely different way 
and with another understanding from the initiatic point of view, while,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

270 
The Veil of Isisfane point 
of view can be so, but then they can be so in a completely different way 
and with another understanding from the initiatic point of view, while,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

270 
The Veil of Isis

moreover, there are things which completely escape the profane domain 
and which are peculiar to the initiatic domain, since it is not subject to 
the same limitations. 
That symbolism, which is like the sensible form of all initiatic educa-
tion, if we consider that every symbol is susceptible to multiple interpre-
tations which are not in contradiction with each other, but on the con-
trary complement each other which are all equally true though proceed-
ing from different points of view, it is not allowed to be doubted for even 
a moment that it is indeed in reality a language more universal than hu-
man languages; if this is so, it is because the symbols is the synthetic and 
schematic representation of a whole ensemble of ideas and conceptions 
that everyone can grasp according to his own mental abilities and to the 
extent that they have prepared their intelligence. And so the symbol, for 
which it penetrates its own deep meaning, will be able to conceive of far 
more than is possible to express by words; this shows the necessity of 
symbolism: it is the only way to transmit the inexpressible which consti-
tutes the proper domain of initiation, or rather to deposit conceptions of 
this order to germinate in the intellect of the initiate, who will then have 
to transfer them from power to action, to develop and elaborate them by 
his own personal work, because nothing more can be done than to pre-
pare it by outlining for him by appropriate formulas, the plan that he will 
have to realize in himself to achieve the effective possession of initiation 
that he has received from outside symbolically. 
But if symbolic initiation, which is only the basis or support of true 
and effective initiation, is the only thing that can be given externally, at 
least it can be preserved and transmitted even by those who do not un-
derstand its meaning nor scope. It is enough for the symbols to be kept 
intact so that they are always capable of awakening, in him who is capa-
ble of it, all the conceptions of which they appear in the synthesis. And 
it is in this fat the true initiatic secret lies, whose nature is inviolable and 
which defends itself against the curiosity of laymen, and whose relative 
secret of certain external signs is only a symbolic figuration. There is no 
other mystery than the inexpressible, which is obviously thereby incom-
municable, each will be able to penetrate it according to the extent of his 
intellectual horizon; even if he has penetrated it in full, he will never be 
able to communicate to another what he understands himself, at most it 
will help to reach this understanding only by those who are currently 
able. 
Thus, the initiatic secret is something that lies well beyond all the 
rituals and all the sensory forms used for the transmission of external 
and symbolic initiation, which does not prevent these forms from having 
in the early stages of initiatic preparation, their necessary role and theirnsory forms used for the transmission of external 
and symbolic initiation, which does not prevent these forms from having 
in the early stages of initiatic preparation, their necessary role and their

--- PAGE BREAK ---the transmission of external 
and symbolic initiation, which does not prevent these forms from having 
in the early stages of initiatic preparation, their necessary role and their

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
271 
own value originating in what they do to translate the fundamental sym-
bols into gestures, and from this they are a way to give the initiatic the 
teaching that is presented to him which is the most adequate and gener-
ally applicable way of preparing him for assimilation, since all the man-
ifestations of human individuality are translated, in its present conditions 
of existence, into various mode of the vital activity. But, it would be 
wrong to go further and pretend to make life, as many would like, a kind 
of absolute principle; the expression of an idea in the vital mode is after 
all only a symbol like others, as well as, for example, its translation in the 
spatial mode which constitutes a geometric symbol or ideogram. If any 
process of initiation present in its different phases and correspondence, 
either with individual human life, or even with the whole of terrestrial 
life, it is that one can consider the vital evolution itself particular or gen-
eral, like the development of a plan similar to that which the initiate must 
realize in order to realize himself in the complete expansion of all the 
powers of his being. They are always and everywhere plans correspond-
ing to the same synthetic conception, so that they are identical in princi-
ple, although they are different and indefinitely varied in their realiza-
tion, they proceed from a single ideal Archetype, the universal plan 
drawn by a cosmic Force or Will that, without in anyway prejudging its 
nature, we can call the Great Architect of the Universe. 
Therefore every being, whether individual or collective, tends, con-
sciously or not, to realize in itself by the means appropriate to its partic-
ular nature the plan of the Great Architect of the Universe, and to com-
plete there, according to the function which belongs to him in the cosmic 
whole, the total realization of this same plan, which is, in sum, only the 
universalization of his own personal realization. It is at the precise point 
of its evolution where a being is actually aware of this finality that the 
true initiation beings for him; when he has become aware of himself, he 
must lead himself, according to his personal path, to this integral reali-
zation which is accomplished, not in the isolated development of certain 
special and more or less extraordinary faculties, but in the complete, har-
monic, and hierarchical development of all the virtual possibilities in-
volved in the very essence of this being. Since the end is necessarily the 
same for all that has the same principle, it is in the means employed to 
achieve it that lies exclusively what constitutes the proper value of any 
being, considered within the limits of the special function which is de-
termined for him by his individual nature, or by certain elements of it; 
moreover, this value of the being is relative and exists only in relation to 
its function, for there is no comparison of inferiority or superiority tondividual nature, or by certain elements of it; 
moreover, this value of the being is relative and exists only in relation to 
its function, for there is no comparison of inferiority or superiority to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

272 
The Veil of Isisestablish between different functions which correspond to so many dif-
ferent particular orders, although all are equally included in the Univer-
sal Order, of which they are, all in the same way, necessary elements.

Thus, initiatic instruction, envisaged in its universality, must include 
so many applications in an indefinite variety, of the same transcendent 
and abstract principle, all the particular ways of realization which are not 
only limited to each category of beings, but also to each individual being; 
comprehending all thus, it totalizes them and synthesizes them in the 
absolute unity of the Universal Way.

Therefore, if the principles of initi-
ation are immutable, their symbolic representation can and must vary so 
as to adapt to the multiple and relative conditions of existence, conditions 
whose diversity means that, mathematically, there cannot be two identi-
cal things throughout the universe, because if they were really identical 
in all, or in other words, if they were perfectly coincidental in the full 
extent of their understanding, they would obviously not be two separate 
things, but one and the same thing.

We can therefore say, in particular, that it is impossible for two dif-
ferent individuals to have two absolutely similar initiations, even from 
the external and ritual point of view, and, a fortiori, from the point of 
view of the internal work of the initiate.

The unity and immutability of 
the principle in no way demands the uniformity and immobility, which 
are in any case unrealizable for external forms, and this allows, in the 
practical application which must be made according to the expression 
and transmission of the initiatic teaching, reconciling the two notions, 
which are so often wrongly opposed, of tradition and of progress, but 
recognizing a purely relative character of the latter.272 
The Veil of Isis

We can therefore say, in particular, that it is impossible for two dif-
ferent individuals to have two absolutely similar initiations, even from 
the external and ritual point of view, and, a fortiori, from the point of 
view of the internal work of the initiate. The unity and immutability of 
the principle in no way demands the uniformity and immobility, which 
are in any case unrealizable for external forms, and this allows, in the 
practical application which must be made according to the expression 
and transmission of the initiatic teaching, reconciling the two notions, 
which are so often wrongly opposed, of tradition and of progress, but 
recognizing a purely relative character of the latter. It is only the external 
translation of the initiatic instruction and its assimilation by this or that 
individuality which are susceptible to modifications, and not the instruc-
tion envisaged in itself; indeed, insofar as such a translation is possible, 
it must necessarily take relativities into account, whereas what it ex-
presses is independent in the ideal universality of its essence, and it can 
obviously not be a question of progress from a point of view which in-
cludes all the possibilities in the simultaneity of a single synthesis. Initiatic education, external and transmissible in forms, is and can 
only be a preparation of the individual to receive the true initiatic in-
struction by the effect of his own personal work. We can thus indicate to 
him the path to follow, the plan to realize, and arrange it to acquire the 
mental and intellectual attitude necessary for the intelligence of the ini-
tiatic conceptions; we can still assist and guide him by controlling his 
work in a constant way, but that is all, because no one else, even a Master 
in the fullest sense of the word, can do this work for him. What the ini-
tiate must necessarily acquire on his own, because no one or anything

--- PAGE BREAK ---because no one else, even a Master 
in the fullest sense of the word, can do this work for him. What the ini-
tiate must necessarily acquire on his own, because no one or anything

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
273 
external to him can communicate it to him, is precisely what escapes him 
by his very nature of profane curiosity, which is to say the effective pos-
session of the initiatic secret itself. But for him to able to achieve this 
possession in all its extent and with all that implies, the teaching that 
serves as a sort of base and support for his personal work must have 
unlimited possibilities, and thus enable him to extend his conceptions 
indefinitely, instead of confining them within the more or less narrow 
limits of a systematic theory or of any dogmatic formula. 
Now, this being established, how far can this teaching go when it ex-
tends beyond the first phases of the initiatic preparation with the exter-
nal forms which are most especially attached to it? Under what condi-
tions can it exist as it should be to fulfill the role assigned to it and effec-
tively assist those who participate in it, provided only that they them-
selves are capable of reaping the benefits? How are these conditions re-
alized by the various organizations with an initiatic character? Finally, to 
what extent do the hierarchies of such organizations correspond in actual 
initiation? There are so many questions that it is hardly possible to deal 
with in so few words, and all of which would deserve to be amply devel-
oped, without it being possible, by doing so, to provide something other 
than a theme for reflection and meditation, and without having the vain 
pretention of exhausting a subject that is expanding and deepening more 
and more as one advances in one’s study, precisely because who studies 
it with the necessary dispositions of mind, it opens up truly unlimited 
conceptual horizons.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eepening more 
and more as one advances in one’s study, precisely because who studies 
it with the necessary dispositions of mind, it opens up truly unlimited 
conceptual horizons.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The ‘Religion’ of a Philosopher 
La « religion » d’un philosophe, January 1934.dies 
it with the necessary dispositions of mind, it opens up truly unlimited 
conceptual horizons.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The ‘Religion’ of a Philosopher 
La « religion » d’un philosophe, January 1934.

We are not used to paying attention to manifestations of profane 
‘thought,’ so we should not have read the recent book by Mr. Bergson, 
The Two Sources of Morality and Religion, and still less would we have 
spoken of it had we not been informed that it was on things which are 
normally not the responsibility of a philosopher. In fact, the author talks 
about ‘religion,’ ‘mysticism,’ indeed even of ‘magic;’ we must say at once 
that this is not one of those things which can be accepted as the idea they 
are, rather it is the custom of the philosophers to divert the words from 
their meanings to tune with their particular conceptions. 
First, with respect to religion,374 the origins of the thesis which M. 
Bergson backs are not mysterious and are very simple in their essence; 
it is quite astonishing that those who spoke about his book do not seem 
to have noticed this. We know that all the modern theories in this regard 
have in common the attempt to reduce religion to something purely hu-
man, which amounts to denying it, consciously or unconsciously, since 
it is to refuse to consider what forms its very essence, which is precisely 
the ‘non-human’ element. As a whole, these theories can be reduced to 
two types: the ‘psychological’ one, which pretends to explain religion by 
the nature of the human individual, and the other ‘sociological,’ which 
wishes to see it as an exclusively social thing, the product of a kind of 
‘collective unconsciousness’ that dominates individuals and imposes it-
self on them. The originality of Mr. Bergson is that he has sought to com-
bine these two kinds of explanations: instead of viewing them as more 
or less exclusive of each other, as their respective supports usually do, he 
accepts them both at the same time by relating them to different things, 
but nevertheless designated by the same word ‘religion;’ the ‘two 
sources’ he envisions are nothing other than this in reality. There are 
two types of religions for him, one ‘static’ and the other ‘dynamic,’ 
which, oddly enough, he also calls ‘closed religion’ and ‘open religion;’ 
the first is of a social nature, the second of a psychological nature; natu-
rally, it is it where his preferences led and that which he considers as thecalls ‘closed religion’ and ‘open religion;’ 
the first is of a social nature, the second of a psychological nature; natu-
rally, it is it where his preferences led and that which he considers as the

374 We leave aside what relates to morality, which does not interest us here; 
naturally, the explanation proposed in this respect is parallel to that of religion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---onsiders as the

374 We leave aside what relates to morality, which does not interest us here; 
naturally, the explanation proposed in this respect is parallel to that of religion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
275 
superior form of religion, we say this, because it is quite obvious that in 
a ‘philosophy of becoming’ such as his, it cannot be otherwise. In fact, 
such a philosophy admits no immutable principle, which is the very ne-
gation of metaphysics; putting all reality into change, he considers that, 
whether in doctrines or in external forms, that which does not change 
responds to nothing real, and even prevents man from grasping reality 
as he conceives it. But, it will be said, if one denies that there are immu-
table principles and ‘eternal truths,’375 we must logically refuse all values, 
not only metaphysics, but also in religion; this is indeed what happens, 
for religion in the true meaning of the word is what Mr. Bergson calls 
‘static religion,’ and in which he only wishes to see an imaginary ‘fabu-
lation;’ as for his ‘dynamic religion,’ it is not religion at all. 
This so-called ‘dynamic religion’ does not even have any characteris-
tic elements that constitute the very definition of religion: no dogmas, 
since this is immutable and, as Mr. Bergson says, ‘frozen;’ no rites, of 
course, for the same reason, and also because of their social character; 
both must be left to ‘static religion,’ and, as far as morality is concerned, 
Mr. Bergson started by setting it aside as something that does not fit into 
religion as he sees fit. Then there is nothing left, or at least there remains 
only a vague ‘religiosity,’ a sort of confused aspiration towards an ‘ideal’ 
of some kind, in fact it is quite close to that of the modernist and liberal 
Protestants which also recalls, in many ways, the ‘religious experience’ 
of William James. It is this ‘religiosity’ that Mr. Bergson takes for a higher 
religion, thus believing to ‘sublimate’ religion when he has emptied it of 
all of its content, because there is nothing in this which is compatible 
with his conceptions; besides, it is undoubtedly all that can be extracted 
from a psychological theory, for we have never seen that such a theory 
has proved itself capable of going beyond ‘religious sentiment,’ which, 
once again, is not religion. 
The ‘dynamic religion,’ in Mr. Bergson’s eyes, finds its highest ex-
pression in ‘mysticism,’ seen through its worst side, because he does not 
exalt it except for what benefits the ‘individual,’ which is to say vaguely, 
inconsistently, and somehow ‘anarchically;’376 what pleases him about 
the mystics, let us say it clearly, is their tendency towards rambling… As 
for what constitutes the very basis of mysticism, which is to say, whether 
we like it or not, its attachment to a ‘static religion,’ he obviously viewslearly, is their tendency towards rambling… As 
for what constitutes the very basis of mysticism, which is to say, whether 
we like it or not, its attachment to a ‘static religion,’ he obviously views

375 It should be noted that M. Bergson seems to avoid even using the word ‘truth,’ 
and that he almost always substitutes it with ‘reality.’ 
376 It is astonishing that Mr. Bergson does not cite, as one of the most accom-
plished specimens of his ‘dynamic religion,’ the ‘teachings’ of Krishnamurti; it 
would be difficult to find something more exact in what he means.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

276 
The Veil of Isisst accom-
plished specimens of his ‘dynamic religion,’ the ‘teachings’ of Krishnamurti; it 
would be difficult to find something more exact in what he means.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

276 
The Veil of Isis

it as negligible; we also feel that there is something that bothers him be-
cause his explanations on this point are rather embarrassing. What may 
seem curious from a ‘non-Christian’ is that, for him, ‘complete mysti-
cism’ is that of the Christian mystics, indeed, he forgets a little too easily 
that these are Christians before they are mystic; or, at least to justify 
them as Christians, he unduly poses mysticism at the very origins of 
Christianity. To establish a kind of continuity in this regard between it 
and Judaism, he succeeds in transforming the Jewish prophets into ‘mys-
tics,’ obviously, he has not slightest idea of the character of the mission 
of the prophets and the nature of their inspiration… Now, if Christian 
mysticism, no matter how distorted the conception of it, is for him the 
very type of mysticism, the reason for this is very easy to understand: it 
is because there is hardly any mysticism other than that one, and perhaps 
even mysticism itself is, deep down, something specifically Christian. But 
this too escapes Mr. Bergson, who tries to discover before Christianity, 
‘sketches of the future mysticism,’ whereas it is totally different; there 
are some pages on India which bear witness to an incredible incompre-
hension! There are also the Greek mysteries, and here the approximation 
is reduced to a very bad play on words; moreover, Mr. Bergson is forced 
to confess himself that “most mysteries have nothing mystical about 
them;” but then why does he speak of it under this term? As to what 
these mysteries were, it is the most ‘profane’ representation that they 
can be; ignorant of everything relating to initiation, how could he under-
stand that there was there, as well as in India, something which at first 
was in no way religious, and which went on incomparably beyond his 
‘mysticism,’ and even beyond authentic mysticism? But then how could 
a philosopher understand that he should, like all ordinary mortals, re-
frain from talking about what he does not know?377nd his 
‘mysticism,’ and even beyond authentic mysticism? But then how could 
a philosopher understand that he should, like all ordinary mortals, re-
frain from talking about what he does not know?377

377 Mr. Alfred Loisy wished to reply to Mr. Bergson and support against him that 
there is only one ‘source’ of morality and religion. As a specialist in the ‘history 
of religions,’ he prefers the theories of Frazer to those of Durkheim, and also the 
idea of a continuous ‘evolution’ to that of an ‘evolution’ by abrupt mutations; to 
our eyes, all this is exactly the same, but it is at least a point on which we must 
give him ground, which he certainly owes it to his eccelesiastic education: 
thanks to it, he knows the mystics better than Mr. Bergson, and he points out 
that they have never had the slightest suspicion of something resembling the 
‘vital impetus;’ obviously, Mr. Bergsons wished to make ‘Bergsonians’ before 
the term came into existence, which is hardly in keeping with the simple histor-
ical truth; Mr. Loisy is also astonished to see Joan of Arc ranked among the mys-
tics… - Let us note, because it is good to record, that his books opens with a very 
amusing admission: “The author of this pamphlet,” he declares, “has no partic-
ular inclination for questions of a purely speculative order.” This is at least a

--- PAGE BREAK ---opens with a very 
amusing admission: “The author of this pamphlet,” he declares, “has no partic-
ular inclination for questions of a purely speculative order.” This is at least a

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
277 
If we return to the ‘static religion,’ we see that Mr. Bergson accepts, 
on its so-called origins, all the nonsense of the ‘sociological school,’ in-
cluding the most questionable gossip: ‘magic,’ ‘totemism,’ ‘taboo,’ 
‘mana,’ ‘animal cult,’ ‘spirit cult,’ ‘primitive mentality,’ nothing is miss-
ing from all the usual ‘junk,’ if it is permissible to express oneself as 
such… Perhaps what belongs to him in his own right is the role he assigns 
in all this to a so-called ‘fabulous function,’ which seems to us much more 
truly ‘fabulous’ than what it serves to explain, but it is necessary to im-
agine some theory which makes it possible to deny en bloc all real foun-
dations which one agrees to treat as ‘superstitions;’ a ‘civilized’ philoso-
pher, what is more, a philosopher ‘of the twentieth century,’ obviously 
considers that any other attitude would be unworthy of him! 
We stop only on one point, that which concerns ‘magic;’ this is a great 
resource for some theorists, who probably do not know what it is very 
well, but who wish to draw out religion and science at the same time. 
This is not precisely the position of Mr. Bergson: seeking a ‘psychological 
origin’ for magic, he makes it into “the externalization of a desire whose 
heart is filled,” and he claims that “if we reconstruct, by an introspective 
effort, the natural reaction of man to his perception of things, we find 
that magic and religion are held together, and that there is nothing in 
common between magic and science.” It is true that there is some waver-
ing: if we take a certain point of view, “magic is obviously part of reli-
gion;” but, from another point of view, “religion is opposed to magic;” 
what is clearer is the assertion that “magic is the opposite of science,” 
and that ‘far from preparing the coming of science, as has been claimed, 
it was the great obstacle against which methodical knowledge had to 
struggle.” All this is exactly the opposite of the truth: as we have ex-
plained quite often, magic has absolutely nothing to do with religion, and 
it is not the origin of all sciences, but simply a particular science among 
others, and, more precisely, an experimental science, but Mr. Bergson is 
no doubt convinced that there can be no other sciences than those enu-
merated by modern ‘classifications’… Speaking of ‘magical operations’ 
with the assurance of something who has never seen one, he writes this 
amazing phrase: “If the primitive intelligence had begun here by conceiv-
ing of principles, it would soon have gone to experience, which would 
have proved its falsity.” We admire the intrepidity with which this phi-
losopher, shut up in his cabinet, denies ‘a priori’ all that does not fit 
within the framework of his theories! How can he believe that men were 
foolish enough to have repeated indefinitely, even without ‘principles,’ 
‘operations’ that would never have succeeded? What would he say if itework of his theories! How can he believe that men were 
foolish enough to have repeated indefinitely, even without ‘principles,’ 
‘operations’ that would never have succeeded? What would he say if it

rather laudable frankness; since it is he who says so, and quite spontaneously 
so, we readily believe him at his word!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

278 
The Veil of Isise succeeded? What would he say if it

rather laudable frankness; since it is he who says so, and quite spontaneously 
so, we readily believe him at his word!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

278 
The Veil of Isis

happened that, on the contrary, “experience demonstrated the falsity” of 
his own assertions? Obviously, he does not even conceive that such a 
thing is possible; such is the strength of preconceived ideas, in him and 
his ilk, that they do not even doubt for a moment that the world is strictly 
limited to the measure of their conceptions. 
Now it happens that this is truly remarkable: it is that magic is cruelly 
avenging itself of the negations of Mr. Bergson; reappearing in its most 
base and rudimentary form, under the disguise of ‘psychic science,’ it 
succeeds in being admitted by him without recognizing it, not only as 
real, but as playing a vital role for the future of his ‘dynamic religion!’ 
We do not exaggerate anything: he speaks of ‘survival’ just like a vulgar 
spiritist, and he believes in an ‘experimental deepening’ that makes it 
possible “to conclude the possibility and even the probability of a survival 
of the soul,” however without being capable of saying if it is ‘for a time 
or forever’… But this unfortunate restriction does not prevent him from 
proclaiming in a dithyramb: It does not take any more to convert into a 
living and active reality a belief in the afterlife that seems to run across 
most men, but which remains mostly verbal, abstract, and ineffective… 
In truth, if we were sure, absolutely sure of survival, we could not think 
of anything else.” Ancient magic was more ‘scientific’ and had no such 
pretentions; it was necessary for some of its most elementary phenom-
ena to give rise to such interpretations, to await the invention of spiritu-
alism, to which the deviation of the modern mind alone could give birth, 
and it is indeed the theory of spirituality, pure and simple, that Mr. Berg-
son, like William James before him, accepts with a ‘joy’ which ‘pales in 
all pleasures’… and who fixes us on the degree of discernment of which 
he is capable: in fact, ‘superstition,’ there was never anything better! 
That is where his book ends; we cannot, certainly, wish for a better proof 
of the nothingness that is all this philosophy!h 
he is capable: in fact, ‘superstition,’ there was never anything better! 
That is where his book ends; we cannot, certainly, wish for a better proof 
of the nothingness that is all this philosophy!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Holy Grail 
Le Saint Graal, February 1934.better! 
That is where his book ends; we cannot, certainly, wish for a better proof 
of the nothingness that is all this philosophy!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Holy Grail 
Le Saint Graal, February 1934.

Mr. Arthur Edward Waite recently published a work on the legends of 
the Holy Grail,378 imposing in its size and the amount of research it rep-
resents, and in which all those interested in this question can find a very 
complete and methodical account of the contents of the many texts re-
lating to it, as well as the various theories that have been proposed to 
explain the origin and meaning of these very complex and sometimes 
contradictory legends in some of their elements. It must be added that 
Mr. Waite did not intend to do any scholarly work, and it should also be 
praised, because we are entirely of his opinion regarding the value of any 
work that does not pass beyond this point of view, and whose interest 
can only be ‘documentary;’ he wished to identify the real and ‘inner’ 
meaning of the symbolism of the Holy Grail and the ‘quest.’ Unfortu-
nately, we must say that this side of his work is that which seems to be 
the least satisfactory; the conclusions it reaches are rather disappointing, 
especially if one thinks of all the work done to reach it, and this is the 
point on which we would like to make a few observations, which will 
quite naturally be related to questions which we have already dealt with 
on other occasions. 
We believe it is not insulting to Mr. Waite to say that his work is 
somewhat one-sighted; should we translate this into French as ‘partial?’ 
This may not be strictly accurate, and in any case we do not mean to say 
that it should be so; rather, there is something of the defect which is so 
common in those who, having ‘specialized’ in a certain order of studies, 
are inclined to reduce everything to it, or to neglect that which cannot 
be reduced. That the legend of the Grail is Christian is certainly not ques-
tionable, and Mr. Waite is right to say so; but does this necessarily pre-
vent it from being something else at the same time? Those who are con-
scious of the fundamental unity of all traditions will see no incompatibil-
ity, but Mr. Waite, for his part, wishes to see this as something specifi-
cally Christian, thus being closed in a traditional form, whose links with 
other forms, precisely because of its ‘inner’ aspect, seems to escape him. 
It is not that he denies the existence of elements from another source,eing closed in a traditional form, whose links with 
other forms, precisely because of its ‘inner’ aspect, seems to escape him. 
It is not that he denies the existence of elements from another source,

378 The Holy Grail, its legends and symbolism; Rider and Co., London, 1933.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

280 
The Veil of Isispe him. 
It is not that he denies the existence of elements from another source,

378 The Holy Grail, its legends and symbolism; Rider and Co., London, 1933.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

280 
The Veil of Isis

one probably prior to Christianity, because it would go against the obvi-
ous, but he gives it only a very slight importance, and he seems to regard 
them as ‘accidental,’ as having been added to the legend ‘from the out-
side,’ simple because of the milieu in which it was developed. These ele-
ments are regarded by him as belonging to the so-called folklore, not al-
ways by disdain as the word may suggest, but rather to satisfy a kind of 
‘fashion’ of our time, without always being aware of the intentions in-
volved in it; it may be useful to dwell on this point a little further. 
The very conception of folklore, as it is usually understood, rests on a 
radically false idea, the idea that there are ‘popular creations,’ spontane-
ous products of the mass of people; we immediately see the close rela-
tionship of this view with ‘democratic’ prejudices. As has been rightly 
said, “the profound appeal of all popular traditions lies in the fact that 
they do not have a popular origin;”379 we will add that, if it is, as is almost 
always the case, traditional elements in the true sense of the word, so 
distorted, diminished, or fragmented as they sometimes may be, and 
things having a real symbolic value, all this, far from being of a popular 
origin, is not even of a human origin. What can be popular alone is the 
fact of ‘survival,’ when these elements belong to vanished traditional 
forms; in this respect the term folklore takes on a meaning quite similar 
to that of ‘paganism,’ taking into account only the etymology of the lat-
ter, less with the ‘polemic’ and injurious intention. The people thus pre-
serve, without understanding it, the remains of ancient traditions, some-
times even going back to a past so remote that it would be impossible to 
determine it, and we are content to report, for this reason, the obscure 
domain of ‘prehistory;’ it fulfills in this the function of a kind of collective 
memory which is more or less ‘subconscious,’ whose content has obvi-
ously come from elsewhere.380 What may seem astonishing is that, when 
one goes to the essence of things, one finds that what is thus preserved 
contains, in a more or less veiled form, a considerable amount of esoteric 
data, which is to say, everything that is less popular in essence; this fact 
itself suggests an explanation that we will confine ourselves to indicating 
in a few words. When a traditional form is about to be extinguished, its 
last representatives may very willingly entrust, to the collective memory 
of which we have just spoken, what otherwise would be lost without 
return; it is the only way to save what can be saved to some degree, and, 
at the same time, the natural incomprehension of the mass is a sufficient 
guarantee that what possessed an esoteric character will not be strippedway to save what can be saved to some degree, and, 
at the same time, the natural incomprehension of the mass is a sufficient 
guarantee that what possessed an esoteric character will not be stripped

379 Luc Benoist, La Cuisine des Anges, une esthétique de la pensée, p. 74. 
380 This is an essentially ‘lunar’ function, and it should be noted that, according 
to astrology, the popular mass corresponds to the Moon, which at the same time 
indicates its purely passive nature, incapable of initiative or spantaneity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
281 
of it, but will only remain, as a kind of testimony of the past, for those, 
in other times, will be able to understand it.

That being said, we do not see why it is attributed to folklore, without 
further examination, all that belongs to traditions other than Christian-
ity, which alone is an exception; such seems to be the intention of Mr.

Waite, when he accepts this denomination for the ‘pre-Christian’ and 
particularly Celtic elements which are encountered in the legends of the 
Grail.

There is no privileged traditional form in this respect; the only dis-
tinction to be made is that of extinct forms and those which are now 
alive, and therefore the whole question would be whether the Celtic tra-
dition had really ceased to live when they form the legends in question.

This is at least questionable: on the one hand, this tradition may have 
lasted longer than what is commonly believed, with an organization 
which is more or less hidden, and, on the other hand, these legends them-
selves may be older than the ‘critics’ think, not that there were neces-
sarily texts which are lost today, which we do not believe any more than 
Mr.

Waite does, but by an oral transmission that may have lasted several 
centuries, which is far from being an exceptional fact.

We see here the 
mark of a ‘junction’ between two traditional forms, one old and the other 
new, the Celtic tradition and the Christian tradition, a junction by which 
what was preserved from the first was incorporated in the second, prob-
ably changing to a certain extent in its external form by adaptation and 
assimilation, but not by transposing itself to another plane, as Mr.

Waite 
would have it, for there are equivalences between all the regular tradi-
tions; there is much more than just a question of ‘sources,’ in the sense 
that scholars understand it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We see here the 
mark of a ‘junction’ between two traditional forms, one old and the other 
new, the Celtic tradition and the Christian tradition, a junction by which 
what was preserved from the first was incorporated in the second, prob-
ably changing to a certain extent in its external form by adaptation and 
assimilation, but not by transposing itself to another plane, as Mr. Waite 
would have it, for there are equivalences between all the regular tradi-
tions; there is much more than just a question of ‘sources,’ in the sense 
that scholars understand it. It may be difficult to specify exactly where 
and when this junction took place, but it has only a secondary and almost 
historical interest; it is also easy to conceive that these things are of those 
that leave no trace in written ‘documents.’ Perhaps the ‘Celtic Church’ 
or the ‘Culdean Church’ deserves, in this regard, more attention than Mr. Waite seems willing to grant it; its very name could be interpreted, and 
there is nothing improbable about the fact that there is something behind 
it which is of another order, no longer religious, but initiatic, because, 
like all that relates to the links existing between the different traditions, 
what is involved here is necessarily the initiatic or esoteric domain. Ex-
oterism, whether religious or otherwise, never goes beyond the limits of 
the traditional form to which it belongs; what goes beyond these limits 
as such cannot belong to a ‘church,’ but it can only be its external ‘sup-
port,’ and this is a point on which we will have the opportunity to return 
later. Another observation, more particularly concerning symbolism, is also 
essential: there are symbols that are common to the most diverse and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

282 
The Veil of Isisdistant forms of tradition, not as a result of ‘borrowing’ which, in many 
cases would be impossible, but because they actually belong to the Pri-
mordial Tradition of which these forms are all directly or indirectly de-
rived.

This case is precisely that of the vase or cup; why is it only folklore 
when it comes to ‘pre-Christian’ traditions, whereas in Christianity alone 
it would essentially be a ‘Eucharistic’ symbol?

It is not the assimilations 
envisaged by Burnouf or by others who are here to reject, but rather the 
‘naturalistic’ interpretations that they wished to extend to Christianity 
as to all the rest, and which are valid nowhere.

We should therefore do 
exactly the opposite of what Mr.

Waite does, who, stopping at external 
and superficial explanations, which he accepts with confidence as long 
as it is not about Christianity, seeing radically different and unrelated 
meanings where there are only more or less multiple aspects of the same 
symbol or its various applications; no doubt it would have been other-
wise if he had not been constrained by his preconceived idea of a kind of 
heterogeneity of Christian in relation to other traditions.

Similarly, Mr.

Waite quite rightly rejects, with regards to the legend of the Grail, theo-
ries which call upon so-called ‘gods of vegetation,’ but it is regrettable 
that it is much less clear with regards to the ancient Mysteries, which 
never had anything in common with this ‘naturalism’ which is an en-
tirely modern invention.

The ‘gods of vegetation’ and other similar sto-
ries have never existed except in the imagination of Frazer and his ilk, 
whose anti-traditional intentions are not doubted.

In truth, it also seems that Mr.282 
The Veil of Isis

The ‘gods of vegetation’ and other similar sto-
ries have never existed except in the imagination of Frazer and his ilk, 
whose anti-traditional intentions are not doubted. In truth, it also seems that Mr. Waite is more or less influenced by a 
certain ‘evolutionism;’ this tendency is betrayed in particular when he 
declares that what matters is much less the origin of the legend than the 
last state to which it has subsequently arrived, and he seems to believe 
that there must have been, from one stage to the next, a kind of progres-
sive improvement. In reality, if it is something that has a truly traditional 
character, everything must be on the contrary from the beginning, and 
later developments only make it more explicitly, without adding new el-
ements from without. Mr. Waite seems to admit a kind of ‘spiritualiza-
tion,’ by which a higher meaning could have been grafted onto some-
thing that did not have it in the first place; in fact, it is rather the opposite 
that generally occurs, and this is a little too reminiscent of the profane 
views of ‘historians of religion.’ We find, with regard to alchemy, a very 
striking example of this kind of reversal: Mr. Waite thinks that material 
alchemy preceded spiritual alchemy, and that it only appeared with 
Khunrath and Jacob Boehme; if he knew certain Arab treatises much ear-
lier than these, he would be obliged, even if he stuck with written docu-
ments, to modify this opinion, and besides, since he recognizes that the 
language used is the same in both cases, we could ask him how he can

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
283 
be sure that, in this or that text, it is only material operations.

The truth 
is that we have not always felt the need to expressly declare that it was 
something else, which must, on the contrary, be veiled precisely by the 
symbolism put into use; if it has happened later that some have declared 
it, it was especially in the presence of degeneration due to the fact that 
there were then people who, ignorant of the value of the symbols, took 
all literally and in an exclusively material sense: they were the ‘blowers,’ 
the precursors to modern chemistry.

To think that a new meaning can 
be given to a symbol which does not possess in itself, is almost to deny 
symbolism entirely, because it is to make it artificial, if not entirely arbi-
trary, and any case purely human.

In this order of ideas, Mr.

Waite goes 
so far as to say that everyone finds in a symbol that which he finds in 
himself, so that his signification would change with the mentality of each 
epoch; here we recognize the ‘psychological’ theories dear to many of 
our contemporaries, were we not right to speak of ‘evolutionism?’ We 
have said it often, and we cannot repeat it enough: every true symbol 
carries its multiple meanings in itself, and that from the beginning, be-
cause it is not constituted as such by virtue of a human convention, but 
by virtue of the ‘law of correspondence’ which connects all the worlds to 
each other; whereas, while some see these meanings, others do not see 
them or see only a part of them, they are none the less contained within, 
and the ‘intellectual horizon’ of each makes all the difference.

Symbolism 
is an exact science, not a reverie where individual fantasies can be given 
free rein.

Therefore, we do not believe in things of this order, ‘the invention of 
poets,’ which Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Symbolism 
is an exact science, not a reverie where individual fantasies can be given 
free rein. Therefore, we do not believe in things of this order, ‘the invention of 
poets,’ which Mr. Waite seems disposed towards; these inventions, far 
from concentrating on the essential, only conceal it, voluntarily or not, 
enveloping it in the deceptive appearances of any ‘fiction.’ Sometimes 
they conceal it all too well, because when they become too invasive, it 
ends up becoming almost impossible to discover the profound and orig-
inal meaning; is it not so that, among the Greeks, symbolism degenerated 
into ‘mythology?’ This danger is especially to be feared when the poet 
himself is not conscious of the true value of the symbols, for it is evident 
that this case may occur; the apologue of ‘the ass bearing relics’ applies 
here as in many other things, and the poet, then, will play a role analo-
gous to that of the profane people without knowingly conserving and 
transmitting initiatic data, as we said above. The question arises here in 
particular: were the authors of the Grail sagas in the latter case or, on the 
contrary, were they aware of the deeper meaning in one degree or an-
other of what they were expressing? It is certainly not easy to answer 
with certainty, because, again, appearances can be an illusion: in the 
presence of a mixture of insignificant and incoherent elements, one is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

284 
The Veil of Isisasy to answer 
with certainty, because, again, appearances can be an illusion: in the 
presence of a mixture of insignificant and incoherent elements, one is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

284 
The Veil of Isis

tempted to think that the author did not know what he was talking about, 
nevertheless, it is not necessarily so, for it has often happened that the 
obscurities and even the contradictions were precisely desired as such, 
and that the useless details are expressly intended to mislead the atten-
tion of the layman, in the same way as a symbol may be intentionally 
concealed in a more or less complicated ornamental pattern; especially 
in the Middle Ages, example of this kind are abound, even if it is just 
among Dante and the ‘Fedeli d’Amore.’ The fact that the higher meaning 
is less apparent in Chrétien de Troyes, for example, than in Robert de 
Borron, does not necessarily prove that the former was less aware of it 
than the latter; still less would it be necessary to conclude that this mean-
ing is absent from his writings, which would be an error comparable to 
that which consists in attributed to the former alchemists only what con-
cerns the material, for the sole reason that they have not thought to write 
in letters that their science was actually of a spiritual nature.381 Moreo-
ver, the question of the ‘initiation’ of the authors of the sagas may be less 
important than one might think at first sight, since it does not change 
the appearances under which the subject is present in any case; since it 
is an ‘externalization’ of esoteric data, but in no way a ‘polarization,’ it 
is easy to understand that it must be so. We will go even further: a lay-
man may even, for such an ‘externalization,’ have served as a ‘spokes-
person’ for an initiatic organization, which will have chosen him for this 
purpose simply for his qualities as a poet or writer, or for any other con-
tingent reason. Dante wrote in perfect knowledge of the facts; Chrétien 
de Troyes, Robert de Borron, and many others were probably far less 
aware of what they were saying, and perhaps not even some of them 
were; it does not really matter, for if there was an initiatic organization 
behind them, whatever it may be, the danger of a distortion due to their 
misunderstanding was thereby removed, this organization being able to 
guide them constantly without them even suspecting it, either through 
some of its members providing them with the elements to be imple-
mented, or by suggestions or influences of another kind, more subtle and 
less ‘tangible’ but no less real or effective. It will be easy to understand 
that this has nothing to do with the so-called poetic ‘inspiration,’ as the 
modern ones understand it, and which is in reality only pure and simple 
imagination, nor with ‘literature,’ in the profane sense of the word; we 
will immediately add that it is no more a matter of ‘mysticism,’ but this 
last point touches indirectly on other questions, which we will consider 
in the second part of this study.of the word; we 
will immediately add that it is no more a matter of ‘mysticism,’ but this 
last point touches indirectly on other questions, which we will consider 
in the second part of this study.

381 If Mr. Waite believes, as it seems, that some things are too ‘material’ to be 
consistent with the existence of a higher meaning in which they are encoun-
tered, we could ask him what he thinks of, for example, Rabelais and Boccaccio.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Holy Grail II 
Le Saint Graal II, March 1934.nce of a higher meaning in which they are encoun-
tered, we could ask him what he thinks of, for example, Rabelais and Boccaccio.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Holy Grail II 
Le Saint Graal II, March 1934.

It does not seem doubtful to us that the origins of the legend of the Grail 
must be related to the transmission of traditional elements of the initiatic 
order from Druidism to Christianity; this transmission having been made 
regularly, and no matter through which modes, these elements were 
from then on an integral part of Christian esoterism, we agree with Mr. 
Waite on this second point, but we must say that the first seems to have 
escaped him. The existence of Christian esoterism in the Middle Ages is 
an absolutely certain things; proofs of every kind are abound, and the 
denials of modern incomprehension, whether from partisans or adver-
saries of Christianity, can do nothing to change this fact. We have had 
enough opportunity to talk about this issue so that it need not be empha-
sized here. But even among those who admit the existence of this eso-
terism, there are many who make it into an inaccurate conception, and 
such appears to be the case of Mr. Waite, judging by his conclusions; 
there are confusions and misunderstandings that are important to dispel. 
First, observe that we say ‘Christian esoterism’ and not ‘esoteric 
Christianity;’ it is not a special form of Christianity, it is the ‘inner’ side 
of the Christian tradition, and it is easy to understand that there is more 
than just a simple nuance. Moreover, when it is necessary to thus distin-
guish in a traditional form two faces, one exoteric and the other esoteric, 
it must be understood that they do not relate to the same domain, so that 
there can be no conflict or opposition between them; in particular, when 
exoterism is of a specifically religious character, as is the case here, the 
corresponding esoterism, while taking it as a base and support, has in 
itself nothing to do with the religious domain and is in a totally different 
order. It immediately results that this esoterism can in no way be repre-
sented by ‘Churches’ or ‘sects’ which, by definition, are always religious 
and therefore exoteric; this is another point which we have already dealt 
with in other circumstances and is therefore enough for us to only briefly 
recall. Certain ‘sects’ may have arisen from a confusion between the two 
domains, and from an erroneous ‘externalization’ of esoteric data that is 
poorly understood and misapplied, but the true initiatic organizations, 
keeping strictly on their own ground, remain necessarily foreign to such 
deviations, and their ‘regularity’ even obliges them to recognize onlyand misapplied, but the true initiatic organizations, 
keeping strictly on their own ground, remain necessarily foreign to such 
deviations, and their ‘regularity’ even obliges them to recognize only

--- PAGE BREAK ---

286 
The Veil of Isiswhat presents a character of orthodoxy, even in the exoteric order.

We 
are therefore assured that those who wish to link ‘sects’ to esoterism or 
initiation are wrong and can only go astray; there is no need for further 
examination to rule out any such hypothesis, and if we find in some 
‘sects’ elements which appear to be of an esoteric nature, it must be con-
cluded, not that they had their origin therein, but, on the contrary, that 
they have been diverted from their true meaning.

That being so, certain apparent difficulties are immediately resolved, 
or, to be more precise, we notice that they are non-existent: thus, there 
is no need to ask what the situation may be in relation to Christian or-
thodoxy understood in the ordinary sense, to a line of transmission out-
side the ‘apostolic succession,’ such as the one of which is in question in 
some versions of the Grail legend; if it is an initiatic hierarchy, the reli-
gious hierarchy can in no way be affected by its existence, moreover, it 
does not even have to know of it ‘officially,’ if it can be said, since it itself 
has legitimate jurisdiction only in the exoteric domain.

Similarly, when 
it comes to a secret formula in relation to certain rites, there is, frankly, 
an odd naïvety to wonder whether the loss or omission of this formula is 
likely to prevent the celebration of the mass and its validity; mass, as it 
is, is a religious rite and this is an initiatic rite.That being so, certain apparent difficulties are immediately resolved, 
or, to be more precise, we notice that they are non-existent: thus, there 
is no need to ask what the situation may be in relation to Christian or-
thodoxy understood in the ordinary sense, to a line of transmission out-
side the ‘apostolic succession,’ such as the one of which is in question in 
some versions of the Grail legend; if it is an initiatic hierarchy, the reli-
gious hierarchy can in no way be affected by its existence, moreover, it 
does not even have to know of it ‘officially,’ if it can be said, since it itself 
has legitimate jurisdiction only in the exoteric domain.

Similarly, when 
it comes to a secret formula in relation to certain rites, there is, frankly, 
an odd naïvety to wonder whether the loss or omission of this formula is 
likely to prevent the celebration of the mass and its validity; mass, as it 
is, is a religious rite and this is an initiatic rite.

Each is worth its own 
order, and even if both have a ‘Eucharistic’ character in common, this 
does not change this essential distinction, any more than the fact that the 
same symbol can be interpreted at the same time from both the exoteric 
and esoteric points of views prevents them from being entirely distinct 
and from referring to totally different domains; whatever might some-
times be the external resemblances, which are explained by certain cor-
respondences, the scope and purpose of the initiatic rites are quite dif-
ferent from those of religious rites.286 
The Veil of Isis

Similarly, when 
it comes to a secret formula in relation to certain rites, there is, frankly, 
an odd naïvety to wonder whether the loss or omission of this formula is 
likely to prevent the celebration of the mass and its validity; mass, as it 
is, is a religious rite and this is an initiatic rite. Each is worth its own 
order, and even if both have a ‘Eucharistic’ character in common, this 
does not change this essential distinction, any more than the fact that the 
same symbol can be interpreted at the same time from both the exoteric 
and esoteric points of views prevents them from being entirely distinct 
and from referring to totally different domains; whatever might some-
times be the external resemblances, which are explained by certain cor-
respondences, the scope and purpose of the initiatic rites are quite dif-
ferent from those of religious rites. All the more, there is no need to in-
quire whether the mysterious formula in question could not be identified 
with a formula used in this or that Church possessing a more or less spe-
cial ritual; first, as long as it is about orthodox Churches, the variants of 
the ritual are quite secondary and can in no way relate to something es-
sential; secondly, these various rituals can never be other than religious, 
and as such they are perfectly equivalent, the consideration of one or the 
other does not bring us any closer to the initiatic point of view; useless 
research and discussion would be spared if we were fixed upon the prin-
ciples above all things! Now, the fact that the writings concerning the Grail legend are ema-
nated, directly or indirectly, from an initiatic organization does not mean 
that they constitute a ritual of initiation, as some people have rather 
oddly supposed; it is curious to note that this hypothesis has never been 
made, to our knowledge at least, for works which more clearly describe

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
287 
an initiatic process, such as the Divine Comedy or the Roman de la Rose, 
it is quite obvious that not all writings that are esoteric are rituals.

Mr.

Waite, who rightly rejects this assumption, points out the improbabili-
ties: in particular, the fact that the alleged recipient would have a ques-
tion to ask, instead of having to answer the question of the initiator as 
usually takes place, and we might add that the divergences which exist 
between the different versions are incompatible with the character of a 
ritual, which necessarily has a fixed and definite form.

But how does all 
this prevent the legend from being attached, in any other respect, to what 
Mr.

Waite calls Instituted Mysteries, which we more simply call initiatic 
organizations?

It is because they have an idea that is much too narrow 
and inaccurate in more than one way: on the one hand, he seems to con-
ceive of them as something almost exclusively ‘ceremonial,’ which, let us 
remark by the way, is a way of seeing that is quite typically Anglo-Saxon; 
on the other hand, following a common error, he regards them as more 
or less ‘societies,’ while if some of them have come to take such a form, 
it is only the effect of a kind of modern degeneration.

He has undoubtedly 
experienced, by direct experience, a good number of these pseudo-initi-
atic associations which are now common in the West, and, despite seem-
ing to have been rather disappointed, he has nonetheless remained influ-
ence by what he saw in one specific sense: we mean that, failing to clearly 
perceive the difference between authentic initiation and counter-initia-
tion, he wrongly attributes characters comparable to those of the coun-
terfeits he has been in contact with to true initiatic organizations, and 
this misunderstanding leads to other consequences, directly affect, as we 
shall see, the positive conclusions of his study.It is because they have an idea that is much too narrow 
and inaccurate in more than one way: on the one hand, he seems to con-
ceive of them as something almost exclusively ‘ceremonial,’ which, let us 
remark by the way, is a way of seeing that is quite typically Anglo-Saxon; 
on the other hand, following a common error, he regards them as more 
or less ‘societies,’ while if some of them have come to take such a form, 
it is only the effect of a kind of modern degeneration.

He has undoubtedly 
experienced, by direct experience, a good number of these pseudo-initi-
atic associations which are now common in the West, and, despite seem-
ing to have been rather disappointed, he has nonetheless remained influ-
ence by what he saw in one specific sense: we mean that, failing to clearly 
perceive the difference between authentic initiation and counter-initia-
tion, he wrongly attributes characters comparable to those of the coun-
terfeits he has been in contact with to true initiatic organizations, and 
this misunderstanding leads to other consequences, directly affect, as we 
shall see, the positive conclusions of his study.

In fact, it is clear that anything of an initiatic order can in no way fit 
into a framework as narrow as that of ‘societies’ constituted in the mod-
ern way, but precisely where Mr.

Waite does not find anything that re-
sembles his ‘societies’ near or far, he is lost, and he comes to admit the 
fantastic assumption of an initiatic that can exist outside any organiza-
tion and any regular transmission; we cannot do better here than to refer 
to the articles we have previously devoted to this question.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In fact, it is clear that anything of an initiatic order can in no way fit 
into a framework as narrow as that of ‘societies’ constituted in the mod-
ern way, but precisely where Mr. Waite does not find anything that re-
sembles his ‘societies’ near or far, he is lost, and he comes to admit the 
fantastic assumption of an initiatic that can exist outside any organiza-
tion and any regular transmission; we cannot do better here than to refer 
to the articles we have previously devoted to this question. Apart from 
the so-called ‘societies,’ he apparently sees no other possibility than that 
of a vague and indefinite thing which he calls the ‘Secret Church’ or the 
‘Inner Church,’ according to expressions borrowed from mystics such as 
Eckartshausen and Lopoukine, and in which even the very word 
‘Church’ indicates that one is, in fact, returned purely and simply to the 
religious point of view, perhaps by one of those more or less aberrant 
varieties in which mysticism tends to develop spontaneously as soon as 
it escapes the control of rigorous orthodoxy. Effectively, Mr. Waite is still 
one of those, unfortunately so numerous today, who, for various reasons,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

288 
The Veil of Isisconfuse mysticism and initiation; he comes to speak somehow indiffer-
ently to one or the other of these two things, incompatible with each 
other as they are, as if they were synonymous.

What he believes to be 
initiation ultimately resolves itself as a mere ‘mystic experience,’ and we 
wonder whether he really does not conceive of this ‘experience’ as some-
thing ‘psychological,’ which would bring us back to a level even lower 
than that of mysticism understood in its proper meaning, because the 
true mystic states are already entirely outside the realm of psychology, 
despite all the modern theories of the kind whose most famous repre-
sentative is William Jones.

As for the interior states whose realization is 
of the initiatic order, they are neither psychological states nor even mys-
tic states; they are something much more profound, and at the same time 
they are not of those things of which we cannot say where they come 
from or what they are, but rather they imply an exact knowledge and a 
precise technique.

Sentimentality and imagination no longer hold the 
slightest part here.

To transpose the truths of the religious order into the 
initiatic order is not to dissolve them in the clouds of any ‘ideal;’ it is, on 
the contrary, to penetrate the deepest and most ‘positive’ meaning at the 
same time, by removing all the clouds which arrest and limit the intel-
lectual view of ordinary humanity.

To tell the truth, in a conception such 
as that of Mr.

Waite, it is not transposition that is involved, but at most, 
if you will, a kind of prolongment or extension in the ‘horizontal’ sense, 
since all that is mysticism is included in the religious domain and does 
not go beyond it; in order to go beyond it, something other than aggre-
gation to a ‘Church’ labelled as ‘Inner’ is needed above all, as it seems, 
because it has only an ‘ideal’ existence, which, translated in clearer 
terms, amounts to saying that it is in fact only a dream organization.288 
The Veil of Isis

To tell the truth, in a conception such 
as that of Mr. Waite, it is not transposition that is involved, but at most, 
if you will, a kind of prolongment or extension in the ‘horizontal’ sense, 
since all that is mysticism is included in the religious domain and does 
not go beyond it; in order to go beyond it, something other than aggre-
gation to a ‘Church’ labelled as ‘Inner’ is needed above all, as it seems, 
because it has only an ‘ideal’ existence, which, translated in clearer 
terms, amounts to saying that it is in fact only a dream organization. There cannot really be the ‘secret of the Holy Grail,’ nor any other 
initiatic secret; if we want to know where this secret lies, we must refer 
to the very ‘positive’ constitution of the spiritual centers, as we have in-
dicated quite explicitly in our study on The King of the World. In this 
respect, we will confine ourselves to pointing out that Mr. Waite some-
times touches on things whose scope seems to elude him: this is how he 
sometimes speaks of ‘substituted’ things, which may be symbolic words 
or objects, but this may refer either to the various secondary center as 
images or reflections of the Supreme Center, or to the successive stages 
of ‘obscuration’ which occurs gradually, in accordance with the cyclic 
laws, in the manifestation of these same centers in relation to the exterior 
world. Besides, the first of these two cases returns in a certain way to the 
second, since the very constitution of the secondary centers, correspond-
ing to the particular traditional forms, whatever they may be, already 
marks an initial degree of obscurity vis-à-vis the Primordial Tradition; in

--- PAGE BREAK ---e secondary centers, correspond-
ing to the particular traditional forms, whatever they may be, already 
marks an initial degree of obscurity vis-à-vis the Primordial Tradition; in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
289 
fact, the Supreme Center is no longer in direct contact with the exterior, 
and the link is maintained only through the secondary centers. On the 
other hand, if one of these disappears, one can say that it is in away re-
sorbed in the Supreme Center, of which it was only an emanation; more-
over, here again there are degrees to be observed: it may happen that 
such a center becomes only more hidden and more closed, and this fact 
may be represented by the same symbolism as its complete disappear-
ance, any distance from the exterior being at the same time, and to an 
equivalent extent, a return to the Principle. We wish to refer here to the 
symbolism of the final disappearance of the Grail: whether it has been 
taken to Heaven, according to certain versions, or has been transported 
to the ‘Kingdom of Prester John,’ according to others, it means precisely 
the same thing, which Mr. Waite hardly seems to suspect.382 It is always 
the same withdrawal from the exterior to the interior, because of the 
state of the world at certain times, or, to speak more precisely, of that 
portion of the world that is related to the traditional form in question; 
this withdrawal applies here only to the esoteric side of the tradition, the 
exoteric side being, in the case of Christianity, remaining without appar-
ent change, but it is precisely on the esoteric side that the effective and 
conscious links with the Supreme Center are established and maintained. 
The fact that something subsists, but the traditional form remains vivi-
fied necessitates that it remains invisibly in some way; if it were other-
wise, it would amount to saying that the ‘spirit’ has entirely withdrawn 
from it and there remains only a dead body. It is said that the Grail was 
no longer seen as before, but it is said that no one saw it anymore; cer-
tainly, in principle at least, it is always present for those who are ‘quali-
fied,’ but, in fact, these have become more and more rare, to the point of 
constituting only a minute exception, and since the time when it is said 
that the Rose-Cross retreated to Asia, whether literally or symbolically, 
what possibilities to achieve effective initiation can still be found before 
them in the Western world?ime when it is said 
that the Rose-Cross retreated to Asia, whether literally or symbolically, 
what possibilities to achieve effective initiation can still be found before 
them in the Western world?

382 From the fact that a letter attributed to Prester John is obvious apocryphal, 
Mr. Waite claims to conclude that it is nonexistent, which is a very odd argu-
ment; the question of the relationship of the legend of the Grail with the Order 
of the Temple is treated by him in a way that is hardly less perfunctory; it seems 
that he has, unconsciously, no doubt, a certain hurry to dismiss these as too 
significant and irreconcilable with his ‘mysticism,’ and, in general, the German 
versions of the legend seems to us to deserve more consideration than he grants 
them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiation and Crafts 
L’initiation et les métiers, April 1934.and, in general, the German 
versions of the legend seems to us to deserve more consideration than he grants 
them.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiation and Crafts 
L’initiation et les métiers, April 1934.

We have often said that the ‘profane’ conception of the science and the 
arts, as is now prevalent in the West, is a very modern thing and implies 
a degeneration from a previous state in which both had a very different 
character. The same thing can be said also of crafts, and the distinction 
between arts and crafts, or between ‘artist’ and ‘artisan,’ is also specifi-
cally modern, as if it were born of this profane deviation and is only made 
meaningful through this fact. For the ancients, the artifex is the man who 
exercises an art or craft; in fact, it is neither the artist nor the artisan in 
the sense that these words have today, it is something more than both, 
because, originally at least, the activity is attached to principles of a much 
more profound order. 
In every traditional civilization every activity of man, whatever it may 
be, is always considered as deriving essentially from principles, in this 
way it is ‘transformed,’ one might say, and instead of being reduced to 
what it is as a mere outward manifestation (which is the profane point 
of view), it is integrated into the tradition and constitutes, for the one 
who accomplishes it, a means of effectively participating in the tradition. 
This is even the case from the simple exoteric point of view: for example, 
if we consider a civilization such as the Islamic civilization, or the Chris-
tian civilization of the Middle Ages, nothing is easier than to realize the 
‘religious’ character in the most ordinary acts of existence. This is be-
cause religion is not something that occupies a separate place without 
any relation to everything else, as it is to modern Westerners (for those 
at least who still consent to admit religion); on the contrary, it permeates 
the whole existence of the human being, or, to put it better, everything 
that constitutes this existence, and in particular the social life is found as 
encompassed in its domain, so that in such conditions there can be noth-
ing ‘profane’ except for that which, for one reason or the other, are out-
side the tradition, and whose case represents only a simple anomaly. 
Elsewhere, where there is nothing to which the name ‘religion’ properly 
applies, there is none the less a traditional and ‘sacred’ legislation which, 
while having different characters, fulfills the same exact role; these con-
siderations may therefore apply to any traditional civilization without 
exception. But there is still something more: if we move from exoterismnt characters, fulfills the same exact role; these con-
siderations may therefore apply to any traditional civilization without 
exception. But there is still something more: if we move from exoterism

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
291 
to esoterism (we use these words here for convenience, although they 
are not equally appropriate in all cases), we find, very generally, the ex-
istence of an initiation related to crafts that takes them as a base; it is 
therefore that these crafts are still capable of a superior and more pro-
found meaning, and we would like to indicate how they can actually pro-
vide a path to the initiatic domain.

What best allows us to understand it is the notion of what the Hindu 
doctrine calls swadharma, that is, the fulfillment by each being of an ac-
tivity conforming to its own nature, and it is also by this notion, or by its 
absence, that the defect of the profane conception is most clearly marked.

Indeed, in this conception a man may adopt any profession, and he can 
even change it at will, as if this profession were something purely outside 
him, without any real connection with what he really is, with what 
makes him himself, and with what does not make himself something else.

In the traditional conception, on the contrary, everyone must normally 
fulfill the function for which he is destined by his very nature, and he 
cannot fulfill another without there being serious disorder, which will 
have repercussions on the whole social organization of which he is a part; 
moreover, if such a disorder becomes generalized, it will come to have 
effects on the cosmic milieu itself, all things being linked together ac-
cording to rigorous correspondences.Indeed, in this conception a man may adopt any profession, and he can 
even change it at will, as if this profession were something purely outside 
him, without any real connection with what he really is, with what 
makes him himself, and with what does not make himself something else.

In the traditional conception, on the contrary, everyone must normally 
fulfill the function for which he is destined by his very nature, and he 
cannot fulfill another without there being serious disorder, which will 
have repercussions on the whole social organization of which he is a part; 
moreover, if such a disorder becomes generalized, it will come to have 
effects on the cosmic milieu itself, all things being linked together ac-
cording to rigorous correspondences.

Without further insisting on this 
last point, which might easily be applied to the conditions of the present 
age, we will point out that the opposition of the two conceptions may, at 
least in a certain relation, be reduced to that of the ‘qualitative’ point of 
view and a ‘quantitative’ point of view: in the traditional conception, it 
is the essential qualities of beings that determine their activity; in the 
profane conception, individuals are only considered as interchangeable 
‘units,’ as if they were, in themselves, devoid of any quality of their own.

This latter conception, which is clearly close to the modern ideas of 
‘equality’ and ‘uniformity’ (the latter being literally the reverse of true 
unity, because it implies the pure and ‘inorganic’ multiplicity of a kind 
of social ‘atomism’) can logically only lead to the exercise of a purely 
‘mechanical’ activity, in which there is no longer anything strictly hu-
man, and that is indeed what we can see nowadays.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Without further insisting on this 
last point, which might easily be applied to the conditions of the present 
age, we will point out that the opposition of the two conceptions may, at 
least in a certain relation, be reduced to that of the ‘qualitative’ point of 
view and a ‘quantitative’ point of view: in the traditional conception, it 
is the essential qualities of beings that determine their activity; in the 
profane conception, individuals are only considered as interchangeable 
‘units,’ as if they were, in themselves, devoid of any quality of their own. This latter conception, which is clearly close to the modern ideas of 
‘equality’ and ‘uniformity’ (the latter being literally the reverse of true 
unity, because it implies the pure and ‘inorganic’ multiplicity of a kind 
of social ‘atomism’) can logically only lead to the exercise of a purely 
‘mechanical’ activity, in which there is no longer anything strictly hu-
man, and that is indeed what we can see nowadays. It must be under-
stood then that the ‘mechanical’ crafts of the moderns, being only a prod-
uct of profane deviation, cannot in any way offer the possibilities of 
which we are speaking here; to tell the truth, they cannot even be con-
sidered as crafts, if we wish to restrict this word to its traditional mean-
ing, which is the only one that interests us at present. If the craft is something of the man himself, as a manifestation or ex-
pansion of his own nature, it is easy to understand that he could, as we 
said earlier, serve as a basis for an initiation and it is even best suited for

--- PAGE BREAK ---

292 
The Veil of Isisthis purpose in most cases.

Indeed, if the initiation is essentially to exceed 
the possibilities of the human individual, it is none the less true that it 
can take as a starting point only this individual as he is; hence the diver-
sity of the initiatic ways, which is to say, in short, the means imple-
mented as ‘supports,’ in conformity with the difference of the individual 
natures, this difference intervening all the less after the beings advances 
further in his path.

The means thus employed can only be effective if 
they correspond to the very nature of the beings to which they apply, 
and since it is necessary to proceed from the most accessible to the least 
accessible, from the exterior to the interior, it is normal to take them into 
the activity by which this nature manifests itself externally.

But it goes 
without saying that this activity can play such a role only in so far as it 
really reflects the interior nature; there is thus a real question of ‘quali-
fication,’ in the initiatic sense of the term, and, under normal conditions, 
this ‘qualification’ should be required for very exercise of the craft.

At 
the same time, this affects the fundamental difference between initiatic 
and profane education: what is simply ‘learned’ from the outside is with-
out any value here; what is at stake is ‘awakening’ the latent possibilities 
the being has within itself (and this is, fundamentally, the true meaning 
of Plato’s ‘reminiscence’).

We can still understand, by these last considerations, how initiation, 
taking the craft as ‘support,’ will have at the same time, and somehow 
conversely, a repercussion on the exercise of this craft.292 
The Veil of Isis

At 
the same time, this affects the fundamental difference between initiatic 
and profane education: what is simply ‘learned’ from the outside is with-
out any value here; what is at stake is ‘awakening’ the latent possibilities 
the being has within itself (and this is, fundamentally, the true meaning 
of Plato’s ‘reminiscence’). We can still understand, by these last considerations, how initiation, 
taking the craft as ‘support,’ will have at the same time, and somehow 
conversely, a repercussion on the exercise of this craft. The being, having 
fully realized the possibilities of which his professional activity is only 
an external expression and thus possessing the effective knowledge of 
what is the very principle of this activity, will consciously accomplish 
what was firstly an entirely ‘instinctive’ consequence of his nature; so, if 
the initiatic knowledge is born of the profession for him, this, in turn, 
will become the field of application of this knowledge, from which he can 
no longer be separated. There will then be a perfect correspondence be-
tween the interior and the exterior, and the work produced may be, not 
only the expression to some degree and in a more or less superficial way, 
but the truly adequate expression of the one who conceived and executed 
it, which will constitute the ‘chef-d’œuvre’ in the true sense of the word. This, we see, is far from the so-called unconscious, or subconscious if 
you will, ‘inspiration’ in which the modern ones wish to see the mark of 
the true artist, while looking at it as superior to the artisan, following the 
more than questionable distinction which they have become accustomed 
to. Artist or artisan, he who acts under such an ‘inspiration’ is only a 
layman in any case; it undoubtedly shows that he carries with him cer-
tain possibilities, but as long as he has not really become aware of them,

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
293 
even if he reaches what is known as ‘genius,’ that will not change any-
thing, and without being able to control these possibilities, his successes 
will be only accidental, which is commonly recognized by saying that 
‘inspiration’ is sometimes lacking.

All that can be said, in order to assim-
ilate the case which real knowledge intervenes in, is that the work which, 
consciously or unconsciously, truly flows from the nature of the person 
executing it, will never give the impression of a more or less painful ef-
fort, which always entails some inperfection, because it is an abnormal 
things; on the contrary, it will draw its very perfection from its conform-
ity with nature, which will imply in an immediate and necessary way, its 
exact adaptation to the end for which it is destined.

If we now wish to more strictly define the domain of what we can call 
the initiation of crafts, we will say that they belong to the order of the 
‘lesser mysteries,’ referring to the development of the possibilities which 
properly belong to the state of the human being, which is not the ultimate 
goal of initiation, but at least obligatorily constitutes the first phase.

In 
fact, it is necessary that this development must first be accomplished in 
its entirety, to then allow the being to go beyond the human state, but, 
beyond this, it is obvious that the individual differences, on which these 
initiations of crafts are based, disappear entirely and can no longer play 
any role.If we now wish to more strictly define the domain of what we can call 
the initiation of crafts, we will say that they belong to the order of the 
‘lesser mysteries,’ referring to the development of the possibilities which 
properly belong to the state of the human being, which is not the ultimate 
goal of initiation, but at least obligatorily constitutes the first phase.

In 
fact, it is necessary that this development must first be accomplished in 
its entirety, to then allow the being to go beyond the human state, but, 
beyond this, it is obvious that the individual differences, on which these 
initiations of crafts are based, disappear entirely and can no longer play 
any role.

As we have explained on other occasions, the ‘lesser mysteries’ 
lead to the restoration of what traditional doctrines refer to as the ‘pri-
mordial state,’ but, as soon as the being has reached this state, which still 
belongs to the domain of human individuality (and which is the point of 
communication of it with the higher states), the differentiations which 
give rise to the various ‘specialized’ functions have disappeared, alt-
hough all these functions also have their common source which is indeed 
a question of returning to the full possession that is involved in the ex-
ercise of any function.

If we contemplate the history of mankind as taught by traditional doc-
trines, in accordance with cyclic laws, we must say that, originally, man 
having full possession of his state of existence, naturally had the possi-
bilities corresponding to all the functions prior to any distinction.

The 
division of these functions occurred at a later stage, representing a state 
already inferior to the ‘primordial state,’ but in which each human being, 
while having only certain definite possibilities, spontaneously had the 
effective consciousness of these possibilities.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If we contemplate the history of mankind as taught by traditional doc-
trines, in accordance with cyclic laws, we must say that, originally, man 
having full possession of his state of existence, naturally had the possi-
bilities corresponding to all the functions prior to any distinction. The 
division of these functions occurred at a later stage, representing a state 
already inferior to the ‘primordial state,’ but in which each human being, 
while having only certain definite possibilities, spontaneously had the 
effective consciousness of these possibilities. It was only in a period of 
greater obscuration that this consciousness became lost, and from then 
on initiation became necessary to allow the man to find, with this con-
sciousness, the previous state which was inherent; this is indeed the first 
of its goals, the one it proposes most immediately. To be possible, this 
implies a remontant transmission, by an uninterrupted ‘chain,’ to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

294 
The Veil of Isised the first 
of its goals, the one it proposes most immediately. To be possible, this 
implies a remontant transmission, by an uninterrupted ‘chain,’ to the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

294 
The Veil of Isis

state which is a question of restoration, and thus, from near to far, to the 
‘primordial state’ itself; still, initiation does not stop there and the ‘lesser 
mysteries’ being only the preparation for the ‘greater mysteries,’ which 
is to say, taking possession of the higher states of being we must go back 
even beyond the origins of humanity. Indeed, there is no true initiation, 
even at the most inferior level, even at the most inferior and elementary 
level, without the intervention of a ‘non-human’ element, which is, ac-
cording to what we have exposed previously in other articles, the ‘spir-
itual influence’ communicated regularly by the initiatic rite. If this is so, 
there is obviously no need to look ‘historically’ at the origin of initiation, 
a question which appears from then on as meaningless, nor at the origins 
of the crafts, arts, and sciences, envisaged in their traditional and ‘legiti-
mate’ conception, because all, through multiple, but secondary, differen-
tiations and adaptations derive from the ‘primordial state,’ which con-
tains them all in principle, and hence they are connected to other orders 
of existence, beyond humanity itself, which is necessary so that they can 
effectively contribute to the realization of the plan of the Great Architect 
of the Universe each in their own ranks and according to their own 
measures.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

‘Verbum, Lux, and Vita’ 
« Verbum, Lux et Vita », May 1934.ation of the plan of the Great Architect 
of the Universe each in their own ranks and according to their own 
measures.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

‘Verbum, Lux, and Vita’ 
« Verbum, Lux et Vita », May 1934.

During our recent study on Kundalini-Yoga,383 we have been lead to point 
out the close connection which exists between sound and light from the 
cosmogonic point of view; we recalled in speaking of this association, 
and even the identification established, at the beginning of the Gospel of 
Saint John, between the terms Verbum, Lux, and Vita. We propose to de-
velop this information on this point, without however claiming to treat 
completely the subject which it touches, directly or indirectly, with a 
multitude of other more or less complex questions, as one can easily see 
from a study, however brief it may be, of what relates to it in the different 
traditional doctrines. 
We know that the Hindu doctrine affirms the primordiality of sound 
among the sensory qualities, as corresponding to Ether among the ele-
ments, but, at the same time, this affirmation, thus enunciated, immedi-
ately refers to the corporeal world, it is likely to be transposition into 
other domains, for it translates the very process of universal manifesta-
tion with regards to this corporeal world which is only a simple case. If 
we consider this in its entirety, this same affirmation becomes the pro-
duction of all things, in any state whatsoever, by the Divine Verb or the 
Divine Word, which is thus at the commencement or the principle of 
every manifestation. This is also expressly stated at the beginning of the 
Hebrew Genesis, and we see that the first uttered word, as the starting 
point of the manifestation, is the Fiat Lux, by which the chaos of possi-
bilities is illuminated and organized; this precisely establishes the direct 
relation which exists, in the principal order, between what can be desig-
nated analogically as sound and light, which is to say in sum, what sound 
and light are as respective expressions in our world. 
Here, it is necessary to make an important remark: the word ʿamar, 
which is used in the Biblical text, and which is usually translated as ‘to 
say,’ has for its principle meaning in Hebrew, as in Arabic, that of ‘to 
command’ or ‘to order;’ the Divine Word is the ‘order’ (ʿamr) by which 
the creation is effected, which is to say, the production of the universal 
manifestation. Also according to the Islamic tradition, the first creation’ the Divine Word is the ‘order’ (ʿamr) by which 
the creation is effected, which is to say, the production of the universal 
manifestation. Also according to the Islamic tradition, the first creation

383 See the November 1933 issue of Voile d’Isis.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

296 
The Veil of Isisthe production of the universal 
manifestation. Also according to the Islamic tradition, the first creation

383 See the November 1933 issue of Voile d’Isis.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

296 
The Veil of Isis

is that of Light (An-Nūr), which is also called min amrillāhī, resulting 
directly from the divine commandment, and this creation is situated, so 
to speak, in the ‘world,’ which is to say, the state or degree of existence, 
which for this reason is also called ʿālam al-ʿamr, and which is properly 
speaking the ‘spiritual world.’ Indeed, the intelligible Light is the essence 
(dhāt) of the ‘Spirit’ (Ar-Rūḥ), and this, when considered in the universal 
sense, identifies with the Light itself; this is why the terms An-Nūr al-
Muḥammadī and Ar-Rūḥ al-Muḥammadīyyah are equivalent, both denot-
ing the principal and total form of the ‘Universal Man,’384 who is ʿawwal 
khalqillāhī, ‘the first of the divine creation.’ This is the true ‘Heart of the 
World,’ whose expansion produces the manifestation of all beings, while 
its contradiction finally brings them back to their Principle, and so he is 
both ‘the First and the Last’ (Al-ʿAwwal wa Al-ʿAkhir) in relation to the 
creation, as Allāh Himself is ‘the First and the Last’ in the absolute sense. 
‘Heart of hearts and Spirit of spirits’ (Qalb al-qulūbī wa Rūḥ al-ʾarwāḥ), 
it is in its midst that the particular ‘spirits,’ the angels (al-malaʿīkah) and 
the ‘separate spirits’ (al-ʾarwāḥ al-mujarradah), which are thus formed 
of the Primordial Light as their only essence, without a mixture of the 
elements representing the determining conditions of the lower degrees 
of existence.385 
If we now continue to the more particular consideration of our 
‘world,’ which is to say the degree of existence to which the human state 
belongs, we must find there, as ‘center,’ a principal corresponding to this 
‘Universal Heart’ and which is somehow only the specification in rela-
tion to the state in question. It is in this principle that the Hindu doctrine 
designates as Hiranyagarbha: it is an aspect of Brahma, which is to say, 
the Word that produces the manifestation, and at the same time it is also 
‘Light,’ as indicated by the designation Taijasa given to the subtle state 
which constitutes its own ‘world,’ and of which it contains in itself all 
possibilities.386 It is here that we find the third of terms we mentioned at 
the beginning: this Cosmic Light, for the beings manifested in this do-
main, and in conformity with their particular conditions of existence, ap-
pear as ‘Life;’ Et Vita erat Lux hominum, the Gospel of Saint John says 
exactly in this sense. Hiranyagarbha is therefore, in this regard, the ‘vitalith their particular conditions of existence, ap-
pear as ‘Life;’ Et Vita erat Lux hominum, the Gospel of Saint John says 
exactly in this sense. Hiranyagarbha is therefore, in this regard, the ‘vital

384 See The Symbolism of the Cross, ch. 6. 
385 It is easy to see that what we are dealing with here can be identified with the 
field of the supra-individual manifestation. 
386 See Man and His Becoming according to the Vedanta, ch. 14. – In the very name 
Hiranyagarbha, the luminous nature is clearly indicated, for the light is symbol-
ized by gold (Hiranya), which is itself ‘mineral light,’ and which corresponds, 
analogously, among metals, to the sun among the planets, and we know that the 
sun is also one of the figures of the ‘Heart of the World.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---‘mineral light,’ and which corresponds, 
analogously, among metals, to the sun among the planets, and we know that the 
sun is also one of the figures of the ‘Heart of the World.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
297 
principle’ of this whole world, and that is why it is called jiva-ghana, the 
word ghana indicates that we find here the ‘global’ principal form of 
which we speak above, so that the ‘Life’ appears as an image or a reflec-
tion of the ‘Spirit’ at a certain level of manifestation;387 this same form is 
still that of the ‘Egg of the World’ (Brahmanda), of which Hiranyagarbha 
is the vivifying ‘germ.’ 
In a certain state, corresponding to this first subtle mode of the human 
order which constitutes the world of Hiranyagarbha, the being feels itself 
like a wave of the ‘Primordial Ocean,’ without it being possible to say 
whether this wave is a sound vibration or a light wave; in reality, it is 
both at once indissolubly united in principle, beyond any differentiation 
which occurs only at a later stage in the development of manifestation. 
We speak here analogically, of course, because it is obvious that in the 
subtle state there can be no question of sound and light in the ordinary 
sense, which is to say, as sensory qualities, but only of what they proceed 
respectively, furthermore, the vibration or the undulation, in its literal 
sense, is only a movement which, as such, necessarily implies the condi-
tions of space and time which are peculiar to the domain of the corporeal 
existence; the analogy is none the accurate and it is the only possible 
mode of expression here. The state in question is therefore directly re-
lated to the very principle of life;388 it is found as an image in the essential 
manifestations of organic life itself, both in the pulsations of the heart 
and in the alternative movements of respiration, and we will indicate, 
without being able to insist upon it at this point, that this is the true 
foundation of the many applications of the ‘science of rhythm.’ This nat-
urally includes the mantra-vidya, which corresponds here to the ‘sonic’ 
aspect, and, on the other hand, the ‘luminous’ aspect appears more par-
ticularly in the nadis of the ‘subtle form’ (sukshma-sharira), we can see 
without difficulty the relation of all this to the dual nature of Kundalini, 
who, at the same time, lies in the human being as a ‘life force.’389 Thus 
we find the three terms Verbum, Lux, and Vita, are inseparable from each 
other at the very principle of the human state, and on this point, as on, lies in the human being as a ‘life force.’389 Thus 
we find the three terms Verbum, Lux, and Vita, are inseparable from each 
other at the very principle of the human state, and on this point, as on

387 This remark may help to define the relations between the ‘spirit’ (ar-rūḥ) and 
the ‘soul’ (an-nafs), which is properly the ‘vital principle’ of each particular be-
ing. 
388 In the Islamic tradition, this refers more specifically to the aspect or attribute 
expressed by the divine name Al-Ḥayy, which is usually translated as ‘the Ever-
Living,’ but which could be rendered more accurately as ‘the Vivifier.’ 
389 We will recall here again the close relationship that exists in symbolism be-
tween the serpent, which is represented by Kundalini, and the ‘Egg of the 
World,’ to which we alluded a moment ago regarding Hiranyagarbha.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

298 
The Veil of Isis

all others, we find the perfect agreement of the different traditional doc-
trines, which are only the various expressions of the one Truth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Death 
De la mort initiatique, June 1934.e find the perfect agreement of the different traditional doc-
trines, which are only the various expressions of the one Truth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Death 
De la mort initiatique, June 1934.

The question regarding what is called ‘initiatic death,’ like almost all 
those of this order, seems very little understood by those of our contem-
poraries who claim to be dealing in these things; thus, when speaking on 
this we often encounter an expression such as ‘fictitious death,’ which 
testifies to the most complete incomprehension. Those who thus express 
themselves evidently see only the exteriority of the rite and have no idea 
of the effects it must produce on those who are truly ‘qualified;’ other-
wise, they would realize that this ‘death,’ far from being ‘fictitious,’ is on 
the contrary, even more real than death understood in the ordinary sense 
of the word, because it is obvious that the layman who dies does not 
become initiated by that, and the distinction between the profane order 
and the initiatic order is, in fact, the only one that goes beyond the con-
tingencies inherent in the particular states of being and which, conse-
quently, have a profound and permanent value from a universal point of 
view. We will be content with recalling in this regard, all traditions insist 
on the essential difference which exists in the posthumous states of the 
human being according to whether it is the profane or the initiate; if the 
consequences of death, taken in its usual sense, are thus conditioned by 
this distinction, it is therefore that the change that gives access to the 
initiatic order corresponds to a higher degree of reality. 
It is understood that the word ‘death’ must be taken here in its most 
general sense, according to which we can say that any change of state, 
whatever it may be, is both a death and a birth, according to whether it 
is considered from one side or the other: death in relation to the anteced-
ent state, birth to the consequent state. Initiation is generally described 
as a ‘second birth,’ which it is indeed, but this ‘second birth’ necessarily 
implies death to the profane world and follows immediately in a certain 
way, since these are only two sides of the same change of state. As for 
the symbolism of the rite, it will be based on the analogy that exists be-
tween all the changes of state; due to this analogy, death and birth in the 
ordinary sense symbolize initiatic death and birth, the images borrowed 
from them being transposed by the rite into another order of reality. In 
this connection, it should be remarked that any change of state must bebolize initiatic death and birth, the images borrowed 
from them being transposed by the rite into another order of reality. In 
this connection, it should be remarked that any change of state must be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

300 
The Veil of Isiss borrowed 
from them being transposed by the rite into another order of reality. In 
this connection, it should be remarked that any change of state must be

--- PAGE BREAK ---

300 
The Veil of Isis

regarded as being accomplished in the darkness, which gives the expla-
nation of the symbolism of the color black in relation to this question:390 
the candidate for initiation must pass through complete darkness before 
entering the ‘True Light.’ It is in this phase of darkness that what is re-
ferred to as the ‘descent into the underworld’ takes place, which we have 
discussed extensively elsewhere:391 it is, one may say, a sort of ‘recapit-
ulation’ of the antecedent states, by which the possibilities of the profane 
domain will be definitively exhausted, so that the being can then freely 
develop the possibilities of the higher order that he carries within him, 
and whose realization properly belongs to the initiatic domain. 
On the other hand, since similar considerations are applicable to any 
change of state, and the subsequent and successive degrees of initiation 
naturally correspond also to changes of state, we can say that there will 
still be for each accession a death and birth, although the ‘disconnect,’ if 
it is allowed to be expressed as such, is less clear and of less fundamental 
importance than for the first initiation, which is to say, for the passage 
from the profane order to the initiatic order. Moreover, it goes without 
saying that the changes undergone by the being during its development 
are truly in an indefinite multitude; the initiatic degrees conferred ritu-
ally, in any traditional form whatsoever, can therefore only correspond 
to a sort of general classification of the main stages to be covered, and 
each of them can summarize an entire ensemble of secondary and inter-
mediate stages. But it is in this process a more particularly important 
point, where the symbolism of death must appear once again in a most 
explicit way, and this still requires some explanation. 
The ‘second birth,’ understood as corresponding to the first initiation, 
is what one may properly call a ‘psychic regeneration,’ and it is indeed 
in the psychic order, which is to say, in the order which the subtle modes 
of the human being are situated, that the first phases of the initiatic de-
velopment must take place; these do not constitute an end in themselves, 
and they are only preparatory for the realization of possibilities of a 
higher order, we mean of the spiritual order in the true meaning of this 
word. The point of the initiatic process to which we have just alluded is 
therefore that which will mark the transition from the psychic order to 
the spiritual order, and this passage may be regarded more especially as 
constituting a ‘second death’ and a ‘third birth.’392 It should be added that 
this ‘third birth’ will be instead represented as a ‘resurrection’ than as an 
ordinary birth, because it is no longer a ‘beginning’ in the same sense asd a ‘third birth.’392 It should be added that 
this ‘third birth’ will be instead represented as a ‘resurrection’ than as an 
ordinary birth, because it is no longer a ‘beginning’ in the same sense as

390 This explanation is also appropriate for the phases of the Hermetic ‘Great 
Work,’ which strictly correspond to those of initiation. 
391 See The Esoterism of Dante. 
392 In Masonic symbolism, this corresponds to initiation into the rank of Master.

--- PAGE BREAK ---‘Great 
Work,’ which strictly correspond to those of initiation. 
391 See The Esoterism of Dante. 
392 In Masonic symbolism, this corresponds to initiation into the rank of Master.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
301 
in the first initiation; the possibilities already developed and acquired 
once and for all, will have to be found after this passage, but ‘trans-
formed’ in a way analogous to that of the ‘glorious body’ or the ‘body of 
resurrection’ which represent the ‘transformation’ of human possibili-
ties, beyond the limiting conditions that define the mode of existence of 
individuality itself. 
The question, thus reduced to its essentials, is overall rather simple; 
what complicates it is, as almost always happens, the confusions that one 
commits by mixing considerations that are actually related to something 
else. It is particularly the case with regards to the ‘second death,’ to 
which many attach a rather unfortunate significance, because they do 
not know how to make certain essential distinctions between the various 
cases in which this expression may be used. The ‘second death,’ accord-
ing to what has just been said, is nothing but the ‘psychic death;’ this fact 
can be considered as likely to occur, more or less long after death for the 
ordinary man outside of any initiatic process, but then this ‘second death’ 
will not give access to the spiritual domain, and the being, coming out of 
the human state, will simply pass to another individual state of manifes-
tation. This is a formidable possibility for the layman, who has every ad-
vantage in being maintained in what we have called the ‘extensions’ of 
the human state, which is, in all traditions, the main raison d’être for fu-
nerary rites. But it is quite different for the initiate, since the latter only 
realizes the possibilities of the human state in order to overcome it, and 
they must necessarily exist out of this state, without actually needed to 
wait for the dissolution of the corporeal appearance to pass to the supe-
rior states. 
To not omit other possibilities, let us add that there is another adverse 
aspect of the ‘second death,’ which refers to ‘counter-initiation;’ indeed, 
the latter imitates true initiation in its phases, but its results are, in a way, 
at the opposite of it, and can in no way lead to the spiritual domain. When 
the being who follows this path arrives at the ‘psychic death,’ he finds 
himself in a situation not exactly similar to that of the layman, but even 
worse in some respects, because of the developments he has given to the 
possibilities of the subtle order; we will not insist on this anymore, for 
this is a case which can only be of interest from a very special point of 
view, and which, in any case, has absolutely nothing to do with true ini-
tiation. The fact of the ‘black magicians,’ as is commonly said, regard 
only themselves, and it would be useless to add fuel to the fantastic rav-
ings which this subject gives rise all too often already. It is proper to deal 
with them only to denounce their misdeeds when circumstances require 
it, and to oppose them as far as possible; unfortunately, at a time liket gives rise all too often already. It is proper to deal 
with them only to denounce their misdeeds when circumstances require 
it, and to oppose them as far as possible; unfortunately, at a time like

--- PAGE BREAK ---

302 
The Veil of Isis

ours, these misdeeds are oddly more extensive than those who have not 
had the opportunity to realize it directly.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Alleged Empiricism of the Ancients 
Du prétendu « empirisme » des anciens, July 1934.are oddly more extensive than those who have not 
had the opportunity to realize it directly.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Alleged Empiricism of the Ancients 
Du prétendu « empirisme » des anciens, July 1934.

We have already explained the fundamental difference existing between 
the nature of the sciences among the ancients and the moderns on many 
occasions, a difference which is that of the traditional sciences and the 
profane sciences; this is a question on which so many errors are so wide-
spread that we cannot return to them with too much insistence. This is 
how we often see without any doubt that the science of the ancients was 
purely ‘empiric,’ which basically means that it was not even a science 
properly speaking, but only a kind of practical and utilitarian knowledge. 
On the contrary, it is easy to see that preoccupations of this order have 
never held so much room as among modern men, and without even going 
back further than so-called ‘classic’ antiquity, all that pertains to experi-
mentation was regarded by the ancients as being able to constitute only 
a knowledge of a very inferior degree. We do not see how this can be 
reconciled with the previous statement; by an odd inconsistency, even 
those who formulate it almost never fail to reproach the ancients for their 
disdain of experience! 
The source of the error in question, as a multitude of other errors, is 
the ‘evolutionist’ or ‘progressive’ conception: thereunder they wish that 
all knowledge begins in a rudimentary state, from which it would have 
developed and elevated little by little. They postulate a kind of crude 
primitive simplicity, which naturally cannot be the object of any obser-
vation, and they claim that everything is made from below, as if it were 
not contradictory to admit that the superior can emerge from the infe-
rior. Such a conception is not merely an error but is properly a ‘counter-
truth’; by this we mean that it is exactly the opposite of the truth, by a 
strange reversal which is very characteristic of the modern spirit. On the 
contrary, the truth is that there has been since the beginning a sort of 
degradation or continual ‘descent,’ passing from spirituality to material-
ity, which is to say, from the superior to the inferior. Manifesting itself 
in all domains of human activity, and from which arose in relatively re-
cent times, the profane sciences, separated from every transcendent prin-
ciple, and justified solely by the practical applications to which they give 
rise, because this is, in sum, all that interests modern man, who cares 
little for pure knowledge, and who, speaking of the ancients as we haveolely by the practical applications to which they give 
rise, because this is, in sum, all that interests modern man, who cares 
little for pure knowledge, and who, speaking of the ancients as we have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

304 
The Veil of Isish they give 
rise, because this is, in sum, all that interests modern man, who cares 
little for pure knowledge, and who, speaking of the ancients as we have

--- PAGE BREAK ---

304 
The Veil of Isis

just said, attributed to them their own tendencies,393 because he cannot 
even conceive that they could be any different, any more than he cannot 
conceive that other sciences can exist in object and methods, other than 
those he himself exclusively cultivates. 
This same error also implies that ‘empiricism’ understood in the sense 
that designates a philosophical theory, which is to say the very modern 
idea that all knowledge derives entirely from experience, and more pre-
cisely from the sensory experience; in fact, this is just another form of 
the affirmation that everything comes from below. It is clear that, apart 
from this preconceived idea, there is no reason to suppose that the first 
state of all knowledge must have been an ‘empiric’ state; this connection 
between the two meanings of the same word is certainly not fortuitous, 
and we could say that it is the philosophic ‘empiricism’ of the moderns 
that lead them to attribute to the ancients an ‘empiricism’ of fact. But we 
must admit that we have never been able to even understand the possi-
bility of such a conception, so much does it seem to go against the obvi-
ous: that there is knowledge that does not come from the senses, it is 
there, pure and simple, a question of fact, but the moderns, who claim to 
rely only on facts, do not know or readily deny this when they disagree 
with their theories. In sum, the existence of this ‘empiricist’ conception 
simply proves, in those who have emitted it and in those who accept it, 
the complete disappearance of certain faculties of the supra-sensory or-
der, starting, naturally, with pure intellectual intuition.394 
Science as understood by the moderns, which is to say, the profane 
sciences, does not suppose anything in a general way other than the ra-
tional development of sensory data; it is therefore they who are truly 
‘empiric’ in their starting point, and one could say that the moderns un-
duly confuse the starting point of their sciences with the origin of all 
science. Yet even in their sciences there are sometimes, like vestiges di-
minished or altered by ancient knowledge, whose real nature escapes 
them, and we think especially of the mathematic sciences, whose essen-
tial notions cannot be drawn from sensory experience; the efforts of cer-
tain philosophers to explain ‘empirically’ the origin of these notions are 
sometimes overwhelmingly comical! If some are tempted to protestannot be drawn from sensory experience; the efforts of cer-
tain philosophers to explain ‘empirically’ the origin of these notions are 
sometimes overwhelmingly comical! If some are tempted to protest

393 It is by an illusion of the same kind that the modern ones, because they are 
driven mainly by ‘economic’ motives, claim to explain all the historical events 
by relating them to causes of this order. 
394 The demise of these faculties as to their actual exercise, naturally they subsist 
in spite of everything in a latent state in every human being, but this kind of 
atrophy can reach such a degree that their manifestation becomes completely 
impossible, and this is what we see in the great majority of our contemporaries.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing, but this kind of 
atrophy can reach such a degree that their manifestation becomes completely 
impossible, and this is what we see in the great majority of our contemporaries.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
305 
when we speak of diminishment or alteration, we will ask them to com-
pare in this regard, for example, the traditional science of numbers to 
profane arithmetic; they will probably quite easily understand what we 
mean by that. 
Moreover, most of the profane sciences really owe their origin only 
to debris or, one may say, the residues of traditional sciences not under-
stood: we have cited elsewhere as particularly characteristic of this, the 
example of chemistry, it is not a question of true alchemy, but of its de-
naturation by the ‘blowers,’ which is to say by laymen who, unaware of 
the true meaning of the hermetic symbols, took them in a grossly literal 
sense. We have also mentioned the case of astronomy, which represents 
only the material part of ancient astrology, isolated from all that consti-
tuted the ‘spirit’ of this science, and which is irretrievably lost for the 
moderns, who repeat stupidly that astronomy was discovered, in a very 
‘empiric’ way, by ‘Chaldean shepherds,’ without suspecting that the 
name of the Chaldeans was actually the designation of a sacerdotal caste! 
We could multiply examples of this kind and establish a comparison be-
tween sacred cosmogonies and the theory of the ‘nebula’ and other sim-
ilar hypotheses, or, in another order of ideas, show the degeneration of 
medicine from its ancient dignity as the ‘sacerdotal art,’ and so on. The 
conclusion would always be the same: the profane illegitimately seized 
fragments of knowledge of which they could not grasp the scope or sig-
nificance of, and they formed so-called independent sciences, which are 
just worth what they were worth themselves; modern science, which has 
originated from it, is therefore only the science of the ignorant.395 
The traditional sciences, as we have said so often, are essentially char-
acterized by their attachment to the transcendent principles, of which 
they strictly depend on as contingent applications, and this is the very 
opposite of the ‘empiricism’; the principles necessarily escape the pro-
fane, and that is why they, even if they are modern scholars, can only 
ever be ‘empirical.’ As a result of the degradation to which we alluded 
previously, men are no longer all equally qualified for any knowledge, 
which is to say, since the beginning of the Kali-Yuga, there must be those 
who are profane; in order for the truncated and distorted science to be 
taken seriously and to attribute to it what it is not, it was necessary for 
true knowledge to disappear, which the initiatic organizations were in 
charge of preserving and transmitting it, and this is precisely what has 
happened in the Western world in recent centuries.or 
true knowledge to disappear, which the initiatic organizations were in 
charge of preserving and transmitting it, and this is precisely what has 
happened in the Western world in recent centuries.

395 By a curious irony of things, the ‘scientism’ of our times is above all to pro-
claim itself ‘secular,’ without realizing that it quite simply there the explicit ad-
mission of this ignorance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

306 
The Veil of Isisscientism’ of our times is above all to pro-
claim itself ‘secular,’ without realizing that it quite simply there the explicit ad-
mission of this ignorance.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

306 
The Veil of Isis

We will add again that, in the way that the moderns consider the 
knowledge of the ancients, we see clearly this negation of any ‘suprahu-
man’ element which forms the basis of the anti-traditional spirit, and 
which is, after all, a direct consequence of profane ignorance. Not only is 
everything reduced to purely human proportions, but because of this re-
versal of all things brought about by the ‘evolutionist’ conception, one 
goes as far as to put the ‘infrahuman’ as the origin. The most grave thing 
is that, in the eyes of our contemporaries, these things seem to be self-
evident: they have come to express them as if they could not even be 
contested and the least founded hypotheses are presented as ‘facts,’ be-
cause one does not even have the idea that it could be otherwise; we say 
this is the most grave thing, because that is what may make us fear that, 
having reached such a point, the deviation of the modern spirit is not 
entirely irremediable. 
These considerations may further help to understand why it is abso-
lutely futile to try to reach any agreement or rapprochement between 
traditional knowledge and profane knowledge, and why the former does 
not have to ask the latter for ‘confirmation’ of which they do not even 
demand of themselves. If we insist on it, it is because we know how wide-
spread this view is today among those who have some idea of traditional 
doctrines, but an ‘external’ idea, if we may say so, is insufficient to allow 
them to penetrate the profound nature of the traditional doctrines, as 
well as to prevent them from being deluded by the deceptive prestige of 
modern science and its practical applications. Thus placing on the same 
plane things which are by no means comparable, they waste not only 
their own time and effort, but they are still in danger of going astray and 
misleading others in all kinds of false conceptions; the manifold varieties 
of ‘occultism’ exist to show that this danger is all too real.nd effort, but they are still in danger of going astray and 
misleading others in all kinds of false conceptions; the manifold varieties 
of ‘occultism’ exist to show that this danger is all too real.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ṣūfism 
Le Soufisme, August-September 1934.eading others in all kinds of false conceptions; the manifold varieties 
of ‘occultism’ exist to show that this danger is all too real.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Ṣūfism 
Le Soufisme, August-September 1934.

Under the title Islamic Sufism, Sirdar Ikbal Ali Shah has recently pub-
lished a volume396 which is not, as one may think, a more or less complete 
and methodical treatise on the subject, but rather a collection of studies, 
some of which relate to general questions, while others deal with more 
particular points, especially with regards to the most prevalent ṭuruq cur-
rently in India, such as the Naqshbandīyyah and the Chishtīyyah. Alt-
hough these latter are the most interesting in this book, it is not our in-
tention to dwell on them here, and we think it preferable to rather exam-
ine what touches more directly on the principles, which will, at the same 
time, be an occasion for us to recall and clarify indications that we have 
already given in various other circumstances.397 
Firstly, the title itself calls for an observation: why Islamic Sufism, and 
is this not a kind of pleonasm? Assuredly, in Arabic one must say taṣaw-
wuf islāmī, because the term taṣawwuf generally designates any doctrine 
of the esoteric or initiatic order, to whatever traditional form it is related; 
the word ‘Sufism,’ in Western languages, is not really a translation of 
taṣawwuf, it is simply a kind of conventional term forged specially to 
designate Islamic esoterism. It is true that the author explains his inten-
tion: he wanted, by adding the adjective ‘Islamic,’ to avoid any confusion 
with other things are sometimes also called ‘Sufism’ in ignorance; must 
we consider the abuse of words at this point, especially in a disordered 
period like one in which we live? It is certainly necessary to warn against 
theories and against organizations which unduly hang on to titles which 
do not belong to them, but, this precaution taken, nothing prevents the 
use of words taken in their normal and legitimate meaning; besides, if it 
were otherwise, it is without a doubt there would be few words that 
could still be used.aution taken, nothing prevents the 
use of words taken in their normal and legitimate meaning; besides, if it 
were otherwise, it is without a doubt there would be few words that 
could still be used.

396 Rider and Co., editors, London. 
397 In order to not return to it, we will immediately criticize a detail, which has 
its importance: the transcription of the Arabic words in this book is very defec-
tive, especially in the quotations, they are almost always separated in a faulty 
way which makes them very difficult to understand; it is to be hoped that this 
defect will be carefully corrected in a later edition.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

308 
The Veil of IsisOn the other hand, when the author declares that “there is no form of 
Sufism other than Islamic,” it seems to us that there is an equivocation: 
if he means to properly speak of ‘Sufism,’ this should go without saying, 
but if he means taṣawwuf, in the Arabic sense of the word, one must 
understand the initiatic forms existing in all traditional doctrines, and 
not only in Islamic doctrine.

Even with such generality, this affirmation 
is true in one sense: any regular initiatic form, indeed, essentially implies, 
first and foremost, the consciousness of the Principle Unity, and, sec-
ondly, the recognition of the fundamental identity of all traditions, de-
rived from a single source, and consequently, from the inspiration of all 
sacred books; at its essence, this is the strict equivalence of the two arti-
cles of the shahādah.

Therefore, it may be said that mutaṣawwuf, what-
ever form he is attached to, is truly Muslim, at least implicitly.

It suffices 
to hear the word Islām in all the universality it contains; no one can say 
that this is an illegitimate extension of its meaning, for then it would 
become incomprehensible that the Qurʾān itself applies this word to tra-
ditional forms earlier than what is more specifically called Islamic: in 
sum, it is, in its premier meaning, one of the names of the orthodox Tra-
dition in all its forms, all of which proceed directly from prophetic inspi-
ration, and the differences being due only to the necessary adaptation to 
the circumstances of time and place.

Moreover, this adaptation only re-
ally affects the outer side, what we can call the sharīʿah (or what consti-
tutes its equivalent); the inner side, or ḥaqīqah, is independent of histor-
ical contingencies and cannot be subject to such changes, it is through 
these means that, under the multiplicity of such forms, the essential unity 
subsists.It suffices 
to hear the word Islām in all the universality it contains; no one can say 
that this is an illegitimate extension of its meaning, for then it would 
become incomprehensible that the Qurʾān itself applies this word to tra-
ditional forms earlier than what is more specifically called Islamic: in 
sum, it is, in its premier meaning, one of the names of the orthodox Tra-
dition in all its forms, all of which proceed directly from prophetic inspi-
ration, and the differences being due only to the necessary adaptation to 
the circumstances of time and place.

Moreover, this adaptation only re-
ally affects the outer side, what we can call the sharīʿah (or what consti-
tutes its equivalent); the inner side, or ḥaqīqah, is independent of histor-
ical contingencies and cannot be subject to such changes, it is through 
these means that, under the multiplicity of such forms, the essential unity 
subsists.

Unfortunately, in the work in question, we do not find a suffi-
ciently clear notion of the relation between sharīʿah and ḥaqīqah any-
where, or, if you like, exoterism and esoterism; when we see in some 
chapters doctrines and practices belonging to the most exoteric Islamism 
presented as if they properly belonged to ‘Sufism,’ we cannot help but 
fear that in the author’s mind, there is some confusion between the two 
domains which must always remain perfectly distinct, as we have often 
explained.

The exoterism of a certain traditional form is, for its adher-
ents, the indispensable support of esoterism, and the negation of such a 
link between one and the other only results in some more or less heter-
odox schools; but the existence of this relation does not prevent the two 
domains from being radically different: religion and legislation on the 
one hand, and initiation on the other, do not proceed by the same means 
and do not aim at the same end.308 
The Veil of Isis

Unfortunately, in the work in question, we do not find a suffi-
ciently clear notion of the relation between sharīʿah and ḥaqīqah any-
where, or, if you like, exoterism and esoterism; when we see in some 
chapters doctrines and practices belonging to the most exoteric Islamism 
presented as if they properly belonged to ‘Sufism,’ we cannot help but 
fear that in the author’s mind, there is some confusion between the two 
domains which must always remain perfectly distinct, as we have often 
explained. The exoterism of a certain traditional form is, for its adher-
ents, the indispensable support of esoterism, and the negation of such a 
link between one and the other only results in some more or less heter-
odox schools; but the existence of this relation does not prevent the two 
domains from being radically different: religion and legislation on the 
one hand, and initiation on the other, do not proceed by the same means 
and do not aim at the same end. As for the origin of ‘Sufism,’ in the usual sense of this word, we fully 
agree with the author that it is properly Islamic and proceeds directly 
from the very teaching of the Prophet, to whom the authentic silsilah

--- PAGE BREAK ---e usual sense of this word, we fully 
agree with the author that it is properly Islamic and proceeds directly 
from the very teaching of the Prophet, to whom the authentic silsilah

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
309 
ultimately leads back to. This means that anyone who really adheres to 
the tradition cannot accept the views of profane historians who claim to 
relate this origin to a foreign influence, Neo-Platonist, Persian, or Indian; 
this is another point that we have dealt with on several occasions, so that 
we do not have to insist on it now.398 Even though some ṭuruq have ‘bor-
rowed,’ it would be better to say ‘adapted,’ some details of their particu-
lar methods (although the similarities may be explained by the posses-
sion of the same knowledge, especially in regards to the ‘science’ of 
rhythm’ in its different branches), this is of only a secondary importance. 
Sufism is above all Arabic, and its form of expression, in all that is truly 
essential, is closely related to the constitution of the Arabic language, 
just as the Jewish Qabbalah is to the constitution of the Hebrew lan-
guage; it is Arabic like the Qurʾān itself, in whom its direct principles are 
held, just as the Qabbalah has its own in the Torah. But in order to dis-
cover these principles, the Qurʾān must be understood and interpreted 
according to the ḥaqāʾiq, and not simply by the linguistic, logical, and 
theological processes of the ʿulamāʾ az-ẓāhir (literally ‘learned from the 
exterior,’ or doctors of the sharīʿah, whose competence extends only to 
the exoteric domain). 
In this regard, it matters little whether the word Ṣūfī itself and its de-
rivatives (taṣawwuf, mutaṣawwuf) existed in the language from its origin 
or appeared only later, which is still a great subject of discussion among 
historians; it may well have existed before the word, either under another 
designation or even without having felt the need to give it a name.399 As 
far as the origin of this word is concerned, the question is perhaps insol-
uble, at least from the point of view where we place ourselves most ha-
bitually: we would readily say that it has too many supposed etymolo-
gies, none of which are either more or less plausible than the others, to 
really have one; the author enumerates a certain number, and there are 
still others which are more or less known. For our part, we see there a 
purely symbolic denomination, a kind of ‘figure,’ if you wish, which, as 
such, does not need to have a strictly linguistic derivation; in other tra-
ditions, one would find comparable cases (of course, to the extent where 
the constitution of the languages they use), without seeking further, the 
term ‘Rose-Cross’ is a rather characteristic example, and this is what cer-
tain initiations call ‘covered words.’ As for the so-called etymologies,languages they use), without seeking further, the 
term ‘Rose-Cross’ is a rather characteristic example, and this is what cer-
tain initiations call ‘covered words.’ As for the so-called etymologies,

398 In this connection, the author rightfully remarks that some of the most emi-
nent Sufis, such as Muḥyiddīn ibn ʿArabī, ʻUmar ibn Al-Fāriḍ, and without a 
doubt Dhūl-Nūn al-Miṣrī, never had any contact with Persia or India. 
399 In any case, whatever some may have said, there can be no equivalence be-
tween zuhd or ‘asceticism’ and taṣawwuf, the first can never be anything more 
than a simple means, and which is not always used for initiatic purposes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

310 
The Veil of Isisbe-
tween zuhd or ‘asceticism’ and taṣawwuf, the first can never be anything more 
than a simple means, and which is not always used for initiatic purposes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

310 
The Veil of Isis

they are in fact only linguistic similarities, which correspond to relations 
between certain ideas which thus come together more or less incidentally 
around the word in question; those who have knowledge of what we 
have said elsewhere about the very existence of a certain general pho-
netic symbolism cannot be surprised. But here, given the character of the 
Arabic language (a character which is in fact common to the Hebrew 
language), the first and fundamental meaning must be based on numbers; 
indeed, what is particularly remarkable is that the word Ṣūfī has the same 
number as Al-Ḥikmah al-Ilahīyyah, which is to say ‘Divine Wisdom.’400 
The true Ṣūfī is therefore the one who possesses this Wisdom, or, in other 
words, he is al-ʿārif billāh, which is to say ‘he who knows God,’ for He 
can only be known by Himself; whoever has not reached this supreme 
degree cannot be said to really be Ṣūfī, but only mutaṣawwuf.401 
These last considerations give the best possible definition of at-taṣaw-
wuf, in so far as it is permissible to speak here of a definition (for there 
can only be one properly when it is limited by its very nature, which is 
not the case with at-taṣawwuf); to finish, we should repeat all that we 
have said previously about initiation and its conditions, and we can do 
no better than to refer our readers to it. The formulas found in the most 
well-known treatises, some of which are quoted in the work to which we 
refer, cannot really be regarded as definitions, even with the reservation 
we have just expressed, because they do not directly reach the essential; 
they are only ‘approximations,’ so to speak, intended above all to provide 
a starting point for reflection and meditation, either by indicated the 
means and by hinting at the goal in a more or less veiled way, either by 
describing the external signs of the interior states attained to such and 
such degree of the initiatic realization. There are also a large number of 
enumerations or classifications of these degrees and states, but all of 
them must be taken as having only, in sum, a relative value, because 
there may be an indefinite multitude; we necessarily consider only the 
principal stages, which are ‘typical’ in a way, and which can also differ 
according to the points of view in which we place ourselves. Addition-
ally, it should not be forgotten that there is, especially for the initial 
phases, a diversity which results from the individual natures, so thatpoints of view in which we place ourselves. Addition-
ally, it should not be forgotten that there is, especially for the initial 
phases, a diversity which results from the individual natures, so that

400 The total number given by the addition of the numerical values of the letter 
is, for both, 186. 
401 “The extent of abuse commonly given to the word Sufi is totally comparable 
to the case of the term Yogi, which is also properly designated to the one who 
has to the “Union”, but that is customarily used equally to those who are still at 
a preliminary stage.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---e case of the term Yogi, which is also properly designated to the one who 
has to the “Union”, but that is customarily used equally to those who are still at 
a preliminary stage.”

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
311 
there can be no two cases which are strictly similar;402 and this is why it 
is said that ‘the ways to God are as numerous as the souls of men’ (at-
ṭuruqu ilallāhi ka-nufūsī banī ʾĀdam).403 These differences are effaced 
only with ‘individuality’ (al-annīyyah, from ʾanā, ‘me’), which is to say, 
when the higher states are attained, and when the attributes (ṣifāt) or al-
ʿabd or of the creature (which are strictly limitations) disappear (al-fanāʾ 
or ‘extinction’) to leave only those of Allāh (al-baqaʾ or ‘permanence’), 
being identified with those in his ‘personality,’ or ‘essence’ (adh-dhāt). 
In order to develop this more fully, the fundamental distinction between 
the ‘soul’ (an-nafs) and the ‘spirit’ (ar-rūḥ) should be particularly empha-
sized, which, oddly, the author of the book in question seems to ignore 
almost entirely, which brings a lot of vagueness to some of his exposes; 
without this distinction, it is impossible to truly understand the consti-
tution of the human being, and, consequently, the different orders of pos-
sibilities that he carries within himself. 
In relation to this final thing, we must also note that the author seems 
to delude himself about what can be expected from ‘psychology’; it is 
true that he considers it differently from the present-day Western psy-
chologists, and as likely to extend much further than they can suppose, 
in which he is completely right. Despite this, psychology, according to 
the etymology of its name, will never be anything other than ʾilm an-
nafs, and, by definition, all that is of the domain of ar-rūḥ will escape it. 
This illusion at its essence proceeds from an all too common tendency, 
which we unfortunately find other marks of in this book: the tendency, 
against which we have risen often, to wish to establish a sort of connec-
tion or concordance between traditional doctrines and modern concep-
tions. We do not see what use the quoting of philosophers who, even 
though they employ some apparently similar expressions, do not in real-
ity speak of the same things; the testimony of the ‘profane’ cannot be 
worth anything in the initiatic domain, and the true ‘Knowledge’ has 
nothing to gain from these erroneous or superficial assimilations.404 Nev-
ertheless, taking into account the few observations we have made, it willthe initiatic domain, and the true ‘Knowledge’ has 
nothing to gain from these erroneous or superficial assimilations.404 Nev-
ertheless, taking into account the few observations we have made, it will

402 In exoteric Islamism itself, the impossibility of the existence of two beings of 
two things alike in all respects is frequently invoked as a proof of the omnipo-
tence of God; indeed, this is the expression in theological terms of the infinity 
of the Universal Possibility. 
403 These particular paths are totalized in the “adamic” universality, just as hu-
man souls were, in virtuality, all present in Adam from the beginning of this 
world. 
404 What is curious is that the author seems to place ‘psychology’ above ‘meta-
physics’; he does not seem to suspect that all the philosophers designate by this 
latter name has nothing in common with true metaphysics, in the etymological 
sense of the word, and that this is none other than at-taṣawwuf itself.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

312 
The Veil of Isis

certainly be of interest and of benefit to read this book, especially the 
chapters devoted to the more special questions of which we cannot think 
of giving even the slightest preview. Moreover, it must be understood 
that we must not demand of books, whatever they may be, any more than 
they can give; even those of the greatest Masters will never make some-
body a mutaṣawwuf simply by reading them. They cannot provide either 
natural ‘qualifications’ nor an attachment to a regular silsilah, and if they 
can certainly bring about a development of certain possibilities in the 
person who is prepared for it, so to speak, only as an ‘occasion,’ because 
the true cause is always elsewhere in the ‘world of the spirit;’ we must 
not forget that, in the end, everything depends entirely on the Principle, 
before which all things are as if they were not: 
Lā ʾilāha ʾillāllāh waḥdahu lā sharīkah lahu, lahu al-mulku wa lahu al-
ḥamdu, wa huwa ʿalā kulli shayʾin qadīr!g depends entirely on the Principle, 
before which all things are as if they were not: 
Lā ʾilāha ʾillāllāh waḥdahu lā sharīkah lahu, lahu al-mulku wa lahu al-
ḥamdu, wa huwa ʿalā kulli shayʾin qadīr!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Organizations 
and Secret Societies

Organisations initiatiques et sociétés secrètes, 
October 1934., lahu al-mulku wa lahu al-
ḥamdu, wa huwa ʿalā kulli shayʾin qadīr!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Organizations 
and Secret Societies

Organisations initiatiques et sociétés secrètes, 
October 1934.

We have often insisted on a point which we consider absolutely essential 
when speaking of initiatic organizations: such organizations totally differ 
in their very nature from all that we call ‘societies’ or ‘associations,’ who 
are defined by their external character which may be entirely lacking in 
initiatic organizations, and even if external characters are introduced to 
them they are always accidental and must be regarded only as the effect 
of a kind of degeneration or, if you will, a ‘contamination,’ in the sense 
that it is the adoption of profane or exoteric forms, without any real re-
lation to the real purpose of these organizations. Therefore, it is quite 
wrong to identify ‘initiatic organizations’ and ‘secret societies’ together 
as is commonly done; as we have been asked from various sides to fur-
ther specify the distinctions that should be made in this regard, we will 
return to it more explicitly, at the risk of repeating ourselves to dispel as 
much confusion as possible. 
Firstly, it is quite obvious that the two expressions can in no way co-
incide in their application, for there are many kinds of secret societies, 
many of which certainly have nothing initiatic about them; it can be 
formed by the act of an individual leader without any traditional attach-
ment, and for any purpose whatsoever, we will have to return to this 
later. On the other hand, and this is undoubtedly the primary cause of 
the error we have just recalled, if it happens that an initiatic organization 
accidentally takes the form of a society, it will necessarily be secret, in at 
least one of the meanings that we will ascribe to this word in such a case. 
In fact, it must be said that in common usage there are several meanings, 
which are quite different from each other and do not seem interrelated, 
attached to the expression ‘secret societies,’ hence the differences of 
opinion as to whether this designation is appropriate for a particular 
case. Some wish to restrict it to associations that conceal their existence, 
or at least the name of their members; others extent it to those which are 
simply ‘closed,’ or which keep the secret only in certain special forms,t it to associations that conceal their existence, 
or at least the name of their members; others extent it to those which are 
simply ‘closed,’ or which keep the secret only in certain special forms,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

314 
The Veil of Isisritualistic or not, which are adopted by them in certain means of recog-
nition reserved for their members, or other such things of this kind.

Nat-
urally, the former will protest when the latter qualifies an association as 
secret when it is not within their own definition.

We say ‘protest’ be-
cause, as is all too often, discussions of this kind are not entirely selfless: 
when the more or less openly declared opponents of any association say 
it secretly, rightly or wrongly, they manifest a polemic and more or less 
insulting intention, as if the secret could only have ‘unspeakable’ mo-
tives.

It can even sometimes be discerned as a kind of barely disguised 
threat, in the sense that there is an intended allusion to the ‘illegality’ of 
such an association, for it is scarcely necessary to say that it is always on 
the ‘social’ ground, if not more precisely ‘political,’ in which such discus-
sions are preferable.

In these circumstances it is quite understandable 
that the members or supporters of the association in question endeavor 
to establish that the epithet ‘secret’ cannot truly be suitable for it, and for 
this reason they do not wish to accept the most limited definition, that 
which most obviously, cannot be applicable to it.

It may be said generally 
that most discussions have no other cause than a want of understanding 
as to the meaning of the terms used; when any interests are at stake, as 
it happens here, behind this vergence in the use of word, it is very likely 
that the discussion may continue indefinitely without the adversaries 
ever coming to an agreement.In these circumstances it is quite understandable 
that the members or supporters of the association in question endeavor 
to establish that the epithet ‘secret’ cannot truly be suitable for it, and for 
this reason they do not wish to accept the most limited definition, that 
which most obviously, cannot be applicable to it.

It may be said generally 
that most discussions have no other cause than a want of understanding 
as to the meaning of the terms used; when any interests are at stake, as 
it happens here, behind this vergence in the use of word, it is very likely 
that the discussion may continue indefinitely without the adversaries 
ever coming to an agreement.

In any case, the contingencies which in-
tervene therein are certainly very far from the initiatic domain, the only 
one which concerns us; if we thought it necessary to say a few words, it 
is only to ‘clear the ground’ in a way, and also because that would be 
enough to show that, in all the quarrels pertaining to the secret societies 
or those which are so-called, it is not initiatic organizations which are 
involved, or at least it is not the character of these in questions, which 
would otherwise be impossible for other reasons more profound than the 
rest of our exposé will make better understood.

Placing ourselves entirely outside of these discussions, and from a 
point of view that can only be that of a completely disinterested 
knowledge, we can say this: an organization, whether or not it has the 
particular external forms that make it possible to define it as a society 
can be described as secret, in the broadest sense of the word and without 
attaching any adverse intention to, when that organization possesses a 
secret of whatever nature, and that it is so by necessity or by virtue of a 
more or less artificial and express convention.314 
The Veil of Isis

In any case, the contingencies which in-
tervene therein are certainly very far from the initiatic domain, the only 
one which concerns us; if we thought it necessary to say a few words, it 
is only to ‘clear the ground’ in a way, and also because that would be 
enough to show that, in all the quarrels pertaining to the secret societies 
or those which are so-called, it is not initiatic organizations which are 
involved, or at least it is not the character of these in questions, which 
would otherwise be impossible for other reasons more profound than the 
rest of our exposé will make better understood. Placing ourselves entirely outside of these discussions, and from a 
point of view that can only be that of a completely disinterested 
knowledge, we can say this: an organization, whether or not it has the 
particular external forms that make it possible to define it as a society 
can be described as secret, in the broadest sense of the word and without 
attaching any adverse intention to, when that organization possesses a 
secret of whatever nature, and that it is so by necessity or by virtue of a 
more or less artificial and express convention. We believe this definition 
is broad enough to accommodate all possible cases, from that of the ini-
tiatic organization which is the furthest away from any external mani-
festation, to that of the mere societies of any purpose, political or other-
wise, which have, as we said above, nothing initiatic about them. It is

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
315 
therefore within the domain that each embraces, and basing ourselves as 
much as possible on its very terms, that we must make the necessary 
distinctions in a dual way, on the one hand between organizations which 
are societies and those which are not, and on the other hand between 
those which have an initiatic character and those which do not, because 
of the ‘contamination’ mentioned at the beginning these two distinctions 
do not precisely coincide; they would only coincide if the historical con-
tingencies had not, in certain cases, led to the intrusion of profane forms 
into organizations which, by their origin and essential purpose, are in-
contestably initiatic in nature.

On the first of the two points we have just mentioned, it is not neces-
sary to insist for long, because, besides the fact that which we have al-
ready spoken of it on various occasions, everyone knows well enough 
what a ‘society’ is, which is to say an organization that has statutes, reg-
ulations, meetings at fixed time and place, a register of its members, ar-
chives, records of its meetings, and other written documents, which are 
surrounded by an entire exterior encumbering apparatus.

We repeat that 
all this is perfectly useless for an initiatic organization, which, in terms 
of exterior forms, needs nothing but a certain set of rites and symbols, 
which, like the teachings which accompany and explain them, must reg-
ularly be transmitted by oral tradition.

We recall in this connection that, 
even if it sometimes happens that these things are put in writing, it can 
never be anything but a simple ‘aide-memoire,’ and this would not dis-
pense with oral and direct transmission in any way, which is the only 
transmission that is valid, since only it allows for the communication of 
a ‘spiritual influence,’ which is the fundamental reason for any initiatic 
organization.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We repeat that 
all this is perfectly useless for an initiatic organization, which, in terms 
of exterior forms, needs nothing but a certain set of rites and symbols, 
which, like the teachings which accompany and explain them, must reg-
ularly be transmitted by oral tradition. We recall in this connection that, 
even if it sometimes happens that these things are put in writing, it can 
never be anything but a simple ‘aide-memoire,’ and this would not dis-
pense with oral and direct transmission in any way, which is the only 
transmission that is valid, since only it allows for the communication of 
a ‘spiritual influence,’ which is the fundamental reason for any initiatic 
organization. A layman who knows all the rites by having read the de-
scriptions in books would not be initiated into it: it is for this same reason 
that, according to the Hindu doctrine, a mantra learned in some way 
without being regularly communicated by a guru is devoid of all efficac-
ity, because the ‘spiritual influence’ required to ‘awaken’ or ‘vivify’ him 
is totally lacking in such a case. An immediate consequence of what we have just said is that an initi-
atic organization, so long as it does not take on the accidental form a 
society with all its external manifestation, is in some way ‘elusive’ to the 
profane world; it is easy to understand that it leaves no trace accessible 
to the investigations of ordinary historians, whose method has the es-
sential character of referring only to written documents, which are non-
existent here. On the contrary, any society, however secret it may be, 
presents itself ‘outside’ which is necessarily within the reach of the lay-
man’s research, and by which it is always possible that they come to 
know it to a certain extent even if they are unable to penetrate their more

--- PAGE BREAK ---

316 
The Veil of Isisprofound nature.

It goes without saying that this last restriction concerns 
initiatic organizations having taken such a form, or, we may say, degen-
erated into societies because of the circumstances and environment in 
which they are located; we will add that this phenomenon has never oc-
curred as clearly as in the modern Western world, where it affects all that 
still exists of organizations that can claim an authentic initiatic character, 
even if, as we see all too often, this character in its current state comes 
to be unrecognized or misunderstood by most of its members themselves.

We do not wish to look here for the causes of this misunderstanding, 
which are diverse and manifold; we will only point out that this form of 
society may well be such because, the exterior inevitably taking on a dis-
proportionate importance in relation to its real value, the accidental ends 
up completely covering the essential, and the apparent similarities with 
profane societies can also give rise to many misconceptions about the 
true nature of these organizations.

We will give only one example of these misunderstandings, which 
touches more closely to the very essence of our subject, and which we 
have already indicated in a previous study: when it comes to a profane 
society, we can exit it just as we entered it, and then we find ourselves 
where we were before, purely and simple; a resignation or a radiation is 
enough for any link to be broken, this link obviously being of an entirely 
exterior nature and not implying any profound modification of the begin.

On the contrary, once one has been admitted to an initiatic organization, 
whatever it may be, one can never, by any means, cease to be attached 
to it, since, as we have explained on other occasions, initiation is con-
ferred once and for all and possesses a character that is truly ineffaceable: 
it’s ‘interior’ order is a fact against which no administrative formality 
can do anything.316 
The Veil of Isis

We will give only one example of these misunderstandings, which 
touches more closely to the very essence of our subject, and which we 
have already indicated in a previous study: when it comes to a profane 
society, we can exit it just as we entered it, and then we find ourselves 
where we were before, purely and simple; a resignation or a radiation is 
enough for any link to be broken, this link obviously being of an entirely 
exterior nature and not implying any profound modification of the begin. On the contrary, once one has been admitted to an initiatic organization, 
whatever it may be, one can never, by any means, cease to be attached 
to it, since, as we have explained on other occasions, initiation is con-
ferred once and for all and possesses a character that is truly ineffaceable: 
it’s ‘interior’ order is a fact against which no administrative formality 
can do anything. But wherever there is a society, there are also adminis-
trative formalities, there may be resignations and cancellations, by which 
they cease to be a part of the society in question; one immediately sees 
the equivocation that will result from it if it represents nothing but the 
‘exteriority’ of an initiatic organization. It would then be necessary, in all 
rigor, to make, in this regard, a distinction between societies and initiatic 
organizations as such; since the former is, as we have said, only a mere 
accidental and ‘superimposed’ form, the second of which, in itself and in 
all that constitutes its essence, remains entirely independent, the appli-
cation of this distinction is actually much less different that it may seem 
at first glance. Another consequence to which we are logically led to by these con-
siderations is this: a society, even a secret society, can always be subject 
to attacks from outside, because in its constitution there are elements 
which situate, so to speak, at the same level as these outside powers; it

--- PAGE BREAK ---t society, can always be subject 
to attacks from outside, because in its constitution there are elements 
which situate, so to speak, at the same level as these outside powers; it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
317 
will thus be able to be dissolved by the action of a political power. On the 
contrary, the initiatic organization, by its very nature, escapes such con-
tingencies, and no external force can suppress it; in this sense as well, it 
is truly ‘elusive.’ In fact, since the quality of its members can never be 
lost or removed from them, it preserves an effective existence as long as 
only one of them remains alive, and only the death of the last will lead 
to its disappearance; this very eventuality supposes that its authorized 
representatives will, for reasons of which they are the only judges, re-
nounce to ensure the continuation of the transmission of which they are 
the depositories, and so the only possible cause of its suppression is nec-
essarily within itself. 
Finally, any initiatic organization is still ‘elusive’ from the point of 
view of its secret, the latter being such by nature and not by convention, 
and therefore cannot be penetrated by the profane in any case, a hypoth-
esis which would imply in itself a contradiction, because the true initiatic 
secret is nothing but the ‘incommunicable,’ and initiation alone can give 
access to its knowledge. But this relates rather to the second of the first 
distinctions which we have indicated above, those which have an initiatic 
character and those which do not; we will have to return to it more fully 
in the second part of this study.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Organizations 
and Secret Societies II 
Organisations initiatiques et sociétés secrètes II, 
November 1934.to return to it more fully 
in the second part of this study.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Organizations 
and Secret Societies II 
Organisations initiatiques et sociétés secrètes II, 
November 1934.

The distinction between the initiatic organizations and all other more or 
less secret organizations should be very easy to differentiate between the 
very purposes of each other, but, indeed, the question is more complex 
than it may seem at first glance. However, there is one case that cannot 
be doubted: when one finds oneself in the presence of a group constituted 
for any purpose and whose origin is entirely known, which is known to 
have been created from scratch by individualities whose names may be 
mentioned, therefore it has no traditional attachment, we can be assured 
that this grouping, whatever its pretentions, has absolutely nothing to do 
with the initiatic. The existence of ritual forms in some of these group-
ings does not change anything, for such forms, borrowed or imitated 
from initiatic organizations, are then a simple parody devoid of any real 
value. Moreover, this does not apply only to organizations whose pur-
poses are solely political or more generally ‘social,’ in whatever sense 
can be attributed to that word, but also to all these modern formations 
which we have called ‘pseudo-initiatic,’ including those which invoke a 
trendy ‘ideal’ attachment to any tradition; we have already sufficiently 
explained this last point in previous articles, so that it is not necessary 
that we insist upon it further. 
However, there may be doubt as soon as we are dealing with an or-
ganization whose origin is enigmatic and cannot be related to defined 
individualities; indeed, even if the organization’s known manifestations 
obviously have no initiatic character, it may nonetheless represent a de-
viation or degeneration of something that was originally such. This de-
viation, which can occur under the influence of social preoccupations 
especially, supposes that the incomprehension of the first and essential 
goal has become general among the members of this organization; more-
over, it can be more or less complete, and what still remains of initiatic 
organizations in the Occident, in its current state, represents an interme-
diary stage to some extent in this regard. The extreme case will be whenless complete, and what still remains of initiatic 
organizations in the Occident, in its current state, represents an interme-
diary stage to some extent in this regard. The extreme case will be when

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
319 
ritual and symbolic forms are preserved, however, no one will be con-
scious of their true initiatic character, so that one will interpret them 
only according to any contingent application: whether this is legitimate 
or not, that is not the question, degeneration properly consisting in the 
fact that nothing is contemplated beyond this application and the more 
or less external domain to which it especially relates.

It is quite clear that 
in such a case, those who only see things ‘from the outside’ will be unable 
to discern what it is in reality and what distinguishes between such or-
ganizations and those we talked about in the first place, all the more so 
when they do not have the purpose for which they were artificially cre-
ated, consciously at least, both can thus be in more or less direct contact 
and even sometimes end up intermingling in an inextricable way.

To give a better understanding of what we have just said, we shall 
cite the example of two organizations which, externally, may appear to 
be quite comparable with each other, however they differ distinctly in 
their origins, so that they respectively return to each of the categories 
we have just distinguished: the Illuminati of Bavaria and the Carbonari.

With regard to the former, the founders are known and we know how 
they have developed the ‘system’ of their own initiative, separate from 
any attachment to anything preexisting; it is also known by what suc-
cessive states are passed through in the ranks and rituals, some of which 
were never practiced and existed only on paper.

For everything was put 
in writing from the beginning and, as the ideas of the founders developed 
and became clearer, their very plan was thwarted by this fact, which, 
naturally, related exclusively to the social domain and did not exceed it 
in any respect.--- PAGE BREAK ---

With regard to the former, the founders are known and we know how 
they have developed the ‘system’ of their own initiative, separate from 
any attachment to anything preexisting; it is also known by what suc-
cessive states are passed through in the ranks and rituals, some of which 
were never practiced and existed only on paper. For everything was put 
in writing from the beginning and, as the ideas of the founders developed 
and became clearer, their very plan was thwarted by this fact, which, 
naturally, related exclusively to the social domain and did not exceed it 
in any respect. There can be no doubt that this is only the artificial work 
of a few individuals, and that the forms they adopted could only consti-
tute a simulacrum or a parody of initiation, the traditional attachment 
being entirely lacking as the truly initiatic goal was never their concern. On the contrary, if we consider Carbonarism, we can see, on the one 
hand, that it is impossible to assign to it a ‘historic’ origin of this kind, 
and, on the other hand, that its rituals clearly present a character of an 
‘initiation of crafts,’ as such being related to Masonry and the Com-
pagnonnage, but, while they have always kept a certain awareness of 
their initiatic character, though diminished by the intrusion of concerns 
of the contingent order and the increasing share that has been attributed 
to them, it seems (though one can never be absolutely affirmative in this 
regard, a small number of members can always be an exception to the 
general misunderstanding without making it known) that Carbonarism 
has finally pushed the degeneration to the extreme, to the point of being 
nothing more in reality than a simple association of political conspirators

--- PAGE BREAK ---

320 
The Veil of Isisof which we know of their actions in the nineteenth century.

The Carbo-
nari then mingled with other associations of recent foundation and 
which had nothing initiatic about them, while, on the other hand, many 
of them belonged to Masonry at the same time, which can be explained 
both by the original affinity of the two organizations and by a certain 
relative degeneration of Masonry itself, going in the same direction as 
Carbonarism.

As for the Illuminati, their relations with Masonry had a 
very different character: those who entered it did so only with the firm 
intention of acquiring a preponderating influence and using it as an in-
strument for realization of their particular designs; speaking in passing, 
we can see how many who claim to make the Illuminati themselves a 
‘Masonic’ organization.

Let us add still that the ambiguity of this appel-
lation ‘Illuminati’ must in no way be an illusion: it was taken only in a 
strictly ‘rationalist’ sense, and we must not forget that, in the eighteenth 
century, the ‘enlightenment’ had in Germany a significance roughly 
equivalent to that of philosophy’ in France; that is to say, we could not 
conceive of anything more profane or even more formally contrary to 
any initiatic spirit.

Let us upon a parenthesis about this last remark: if it happens that 
‘philosophic’ and more or less ‘rationalist’ ideas infiltrate into an initiatic 
organization, we must see here only the effect of an individual (or col-
lective) error of its members, due to their inability to understand its true 
nature, and therefore to guarantee itself of any profane ‘contamination’; 
naturally, this error in no way affects the very principle of the organiza-
tion, but it is one of the symptoms of this degeneracy of fact which we 
have spoken of, whether it has reached a more or less advanced degree.Let us add still that the ambiguity of this appel-
lation ‘Illuminati’ must in no way be an illusion: it was taken only in a 
strictly ‘rationalist’ sense, and we must not forget that, in the eighteenth 
century, the ‘enlightenment’ had in Germany a significance roughly 
equivalent to that of philosophy’ in France; that is to say, we could not 
conceive of anything more profane or even more formally contrary to 
any initiatic spirit.

Let us upon a parenthesis about this last remark: if it happens that 
‘philosophic’ and more or less ‘rationalist’ ideas infiltrate into an initiatic 
organization, we must see here only the effect of an individual (or col-
lective) error of its members, due to their inability to understand its true 
nature, and therefore to guarantee itself of any profane ‘contamination’; 
naturally, this error in no way affects the very principle of the organiza-
tion, but it is one of the symptoms of this degeneracy of fact which we 
have spoken of, whether it has reached a more or less advanced degree.

We will say the same regarding ‘sentimentalism’ and ‘moralism’ in all 
their forms, things which are no less profane by their very nature; more-
over, the rest is, in general, more or less closely linked to a predominance 
of social occupations; it is especially so when these come to take a spe-
cifically ‘political’ form, in the narrowest sense of the word, that the de-
generation risks becoming almost irremediable.320 
The Veil of Isis

Let us upon a parenthesis about this last remark: if it happens that 
‘philosophic’ and more or less ‘rationalist’ ideas infiltrate into an initiatic 
organization, we must see here only the effect of an individual (or col-
lective) error of its members, due to their inability to understand its true 
nature, and therefore to guarantee itself of any profane ‘contamination’; 
naturally, this error in no way affects the very principle of the organiza-
tion, but it is one of the symptoms of this degeneracy of fact which we 
have spoken of, whether it has reached a more or less advanced degree. We will say the same regarding ‘sentimentalism’ and ‘moralism’ in all 
their forms, things which are no less profane by their very nature; more-
over, the rest is, in general, more or less closely linked to a predominance 
of social occupations; it is especially so when these come to take a spe-
cifically ‘political’ form, in the narrowest sense of the word, that the de-
generation risks becoming almost irremediable. One of the strangest phe-
nomena of this kind is the penetration of ‘democratic’ ideas into Western 
initiatic organizations (and, naturally, we think especially here of Ma-
sonry, or at least some of its parts), without their members seeming able 
to perceive that there is a contradiction pure and simple, and even in a 
dual way: indeed, by definition, any initiatic organization is in formal 
opposition to the ‘democratic’ and ‘egalitarian’ conception first, in rela-
tion to the profane world, to which it constitutes, in the most precise 
sense of this term, a separate and closed ‘elite,’ and then within itself, by 
the hierarchy of grades and of functions which it necessarily established 
between its own members. Moreover, this phenomenon is only one of

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
321 
the manifestations of the deviation of the modern Western mind, which 
extends and penetrates everywhere, even where it should meet irreduci-
ble resistance; this does not apply only to the initiatic point of view, but 
just as much from the religious point of view, which is to say, all that has 
a truly traditional character.

Thus, besides the organizations which have remained purely initiatic, 
there are those which, for one reason or another, have degenerated or 
deviated more or less completely, but which nevertheless remain initiatic 
always in their profound essence, however misunderstood it may be in 
their present state.

Then there are those that are only counterfeits or car-
icatures, which is to say the ‘pseudo-initiatic’ organizations, and finally 
there are other organizations of a more or less secret nature, but which 
have no pretentions of this kind, and which proposes only aims which 
obviously have no relation to the initiatic domain.

But it must be under-
stood that, whatever appearances, the ‘pseudo-initiatic’ organizations 
are in fact just as profane as the latter, and that is why we have gathered 
them from the beginning to form only a single group, as opposed to ini-
tiatic organizations, either pure or ‘contaminated’ with profane influ-
ences.

But to all this, we must add another category, that of the organi-
zations that come under what we have called ‘counter-initiation’; having 
sufficiently explained what is meant by this, we will limit ourselves to 
only mentioning them, otherwise our enumeration would present a seri-
ous deficiency, especially since the organizations in this category are cer-
tainly of far greater importance than would commonly tempted to as-
sume.But it must be under-
stood that, whatever appearances, the ‘pseudo-initiatic’ organizations 
are in fact just as profane as the latter, and that is why we have gathered 
them from the beginning to form only a single group, as opposed to ini-
tiatic organizations, either pure or ‘contaminated’ with profane influ-
ences.

But to all this, we must add another category, that of the organi-
zations that come under what we have called ‘counter-initiation’; having 
sufficiently explained what is meant by this, we will limit ourselves to 
only mentioning them, otherwise our enumeration would present a seri-
ous deficiency, especially since the organizations in this category are cer-
tainly of far greater importance than would commonly tempted to as-
sume.

We will only point out a new complication that results from their 
existence: in some cases they may have a more or less direct influence 
on profane organizations, especially the ‘pseudo-initiatic’; hence another 
difficulty in exactly determining the real character of this or that organ-
ization; of course, we are not concerned here with the examination of 
particular cases, and it suffices for us to have indicated quite clearly the 
classifications which is to be established in a general manner.

However, that is not all: there are organizations which, while having 
in themselves only a goal of the contingent order, have a real traditional 
connection, because they proceed from initiatic organizations of which 
they are an emanation of some sort, and by which they are ‘invisibly’ 
directed, even though their apparent leaders are entirely unknown to it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We will only point out a new complication that results from their 
existence: in some cases they may have a more or less direct influence 
on profane organizations, especially the ‘pseudo-initiatic’; hence another 
difficulty in exactly determining the real character of this or that organ-
ization; of course, we are not concerned here with the examination of 
particular cases, and it suffices for us to have indicated quite clearly the 
classifications which is to be established in a general manner. However, that is not all: there are organizations which, while having 
in themselves only a goal of the contingent order, have a real traditional 
connection, because they proceed from initiatic organizations of which 
they are an emanation of some sort, and by which they are ‘invisibly’ 
directed, even though their apparent leaders are entirely unknown to it. This case, as we have already indicated elsewhere, is particularly to be 
found in the Far Eastern secret organizations: constituted only for a spe-
cial purpose, these are generally only in existence temporarily, and they 
disappear without leaving a trace as soon as their mission is accom-
plished; they represent the last echelon in reality, and the outermost, of 
a hierarchy rising step by step to the most pure and inaccessible initiatic

--- PAGE BREAK ---

322 
The Veil of Isisccom-
plished; they represent the last echelon in reality, and the outermost, of 
a hierarchy rising step by step to the most pure and inaccessible initiatic

--- PAGE BREAK ---

322 
The Veil of Isis

organizations in the eyes of the profane organization. It is therefore no 
longer a matter of a degeneration of initiatic organizations, but of for-
mations expressly desired by them, without themselves descending to 
this contingent level and mingling with the action exercised therein, and 
this for purposes which, naturally, are very different from all that a su-
perficial observer can see or suppose. We will recall what we have al-
ready said on this subject, that the outermost of these organizations may 
sometimes be in opposition and even in struggle with each other, and 
nevertheless have a common direction or inspiration, this direction being 
beyond the domain where their opposition asserts itself and for which it 
is valid; perhaps this would also find its application elsewhere than in 
the Far East, although such a hierarchy of superimposed organizations is 
probably nowhere as clear and complete as in the Taoist tradition. Here 
we have organizations of a ‘mixed’ character, of which we cannot say 
that they are properly initiatic, nor are they merely profane, since their 
attachment to higher organizations confers on them an involvement, 
even if it is indirect and unconscious, to a tradition whose essence is 
purely initiatic; something of this essence is always found in their rites 
and symbols for those who know how to penetrate their most profound 
meaning. 
All the categories of organizations which we have envisaged have 
only the fact of holding a secret in common, whatever the nature of it 
may be; it goes without saying that, from one to the other, it can be ex-
tremely different: between the true initiatic secret and a political design 
that is kept hidden, or the concealment of the existence of an association 
of names of its members for reasons of simple caution, there is obviously 
no possible comparison. Still, we are not speaking of these fanciful 
groupings, as there are so many in our day, especially in the Anglo-Saxon 
countries, which in ‘mimicking’ the initiatic organizations, adopt forms 
that cover absolutely nothing, which are genuinely devoid of any scope 
or significance, over which they claim to keep a secret which is not jus-
tified by any serious reason. This last case is of interest only in that it 
shows quite clearly the mistake that is commonly made in the mind of 
the profane public, regarding the nature of the initiatic secret; it is imag-
ined that it is simply about the rites, as well as the words and signs used 
as a means of recognition, which would make it a secret as external and 
artificial as any other secret, a secret which in sum would only be such 
by convention. Now, if such a secret exists in most initiatic organizations, 
it is nevertheless only a very secondary and accidental element, and, to 
tell the truth, it has only one symbolic value per its relation to the true 
initiatic secret, which itself is so by the very nature of things, and whichery secondary and accidental element, and, to 
tell the truth, it has only one symbolic value per its relation to the true 
initiatic secret, which itself is so by the very nature of things, and which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
323 
consequently can never be betrayed in any way, being of a purely inter-
nal order and, as we have already said, residing properly in the ‘incom-
municable.’ On this point, we think that some clear points will not be 
useless; it will therefore be the subject of a future article, which will com-
plete the present exposé in this regard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Secrecy 
Du secret initiatique, December 1934.e 
useless; it will therefore be the subject of a future article, which will com-
plete the present exposé in this regard.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Initiatic Secrecy 
Du secret initiatique, December 1934.

As a follow-up to our previous articles, we must further clarify the true 
nature of initiatic secrecy, which is distinguished from all other types of 
external secrets that we encounter in the various organizations which, 
for this reason, are described as secret in the most general sense. Indeed, 
we have said that this qualification only means for us that such organi-
zations possess a secret of whatever nature; we have already explained 
that, according to the purpose proposed by these organizations, this se-
cret can relate naturally to the most diverse of things and take the most 
varied forms. In any case, any secret other than the properly initiatic se-
cret always has a conventional character; by this we mean that it is only 
by virtue of an express agreement, and not by the very nature of things. 
On the contrary, the initiatic secret is such because it cannot be other-
wise, being of a purely internal order and consisting exclusively of the 
‘inexpressible,’ which, consequently, is necessarily also the ‘incommuni-
cable’; therefore it is absolutely independent of any convention, and thus, 
if the initiatic organizations are secret, this character is not artificial and 
does not result from any arbitrary decision on the part of anybody. This 
point is therefore particularly important to distinguish, on the one hand, 
the initiatic organizations from all other secret organizations of any kind, 
and on the other hand, from the initiatic organizations themselves, which 
constitutes the essential all that may accidentally be added to them; we 
must now focus on developing some of the consequences of this. 
The first of these consequences, which we have already indicated be-
fore, is that, while any secret of the external order can always be be-
trayed, the initiatic secret along can never be betrayed in any way, since, 
in itself and by definition, it is inaccessible and elusive for the profane 
and cannot be penetrated by them, its knowledge can only be the conse-
quence of the initiatic itself. Indeed, this secret is of a nature such that 
words cannot express it; this is why, as we have explained on another 
occasion, initiatic teaching can only make use of rites and symbols, 
which it suggests instead of the ordinary sense of this word. Properly 
speaking, what is transmitted by initiation is not the secret itself, since it 
is communicable, but the ‘spiritual influence’ which takes the rites as 
‘vehicle,’ and which makes possible the interior work through which, byitted by initiation is not the secret itself, since it 
is communicable, but the ‘spiritual influence’ which takes the rites as 
‘vehicle,’ and which makes possible the interior work through which, by

--- PAGE BREAK ---is not the secret itself, since it 
is communicable, but the ‘spiritual influence’ which takes the rites as 
‘vehicle,’ and which makes possible the interior work through which, by

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
325 
taking the symbols as a base and support, each will reach this secret and 
penetrate it completely, more or less profoundly, according to the extent 
of his own possibilities of understanding and realization. 
Whatever one may think of other secret organizations, one cannot, in 
any case, blame initiatic organizations for having this character, since 
their secret is not something they voluntarily hide for any reason, legit-
imate or otherwise, and always are less subject to discussion and appre-
ciation as anything that belongs to the profane domain,405 but something 
that is not in anyone’s power, even if he wished to reveal and communi-
cate the secret with others. As for the fact that these organizations are 
‘closed,’ which is to say that they do not admit everyone indistinctly, it 
is simply explained by the need to possess certain ‘qualifications,’ with-
out which no real benefit can be derived from an attachment to such an 
organization. Moreover, when it becomes too ‘open’ and insufficiently 
strict in this regard, it runs the risk of degenerating as a result of the 
incomprehension of those whom it admits so recklessly, and who, espe-
cially when they become the majority do not fail to introduce all kinds 
of profane views and divert their activity towards goals which have noth-
ing in common with the initiatic domain, as we see all too often in our 
times, there are still such organizations of this kind in the Occident. 
Thus, and this is a second consequence of what we have stated at the 
beginning, the initiatic secret in itself and the ‘closed’ character of the 
organizations which hold the secret (or, to speak more precisely, who 
hold the means by which it is possible for those who are ‘qualified’ to 
have access to it) are two quite indistinct things and should not be con-
fused in any way. With regards to the first, it is to completely disregard 
the essence and scope of invoking reasons of ‘prudence’ as is sometimes 
done; as for the second, on the contrary, owes its character to the general 
nature of man and not to that of the initiatic organization, one can speak 
to a certain extent of ‘prudence’ in the sense that the organizations de-
fends itself, not again ‘indiscretions’ which are impossible in its essential 
nature, but against the danger of degeneration of which we have just 
spoken. This is still not the primary reason, the latter being none other 
than the perfect uselessness of admitting individuals for whom initiation 
would never be anything except for a ‘dead letter,’ which is to say an 
empty formality without any real effect. As for the ‘prudence’ vis-à-vis 
the exterior world, as it is most often understood, this can only be an 
altogether incidental consideration, although it is certainly legitimate int any real effect. As for the ‘prudence’ vis-à-vis 
the exterior world, as it is most often understood, this can only be an 
altogether incidental consideration, although it is certainly legitimate in

405 This is why it says in the Bible that “God has delivered the world (which is 
to say the profane domain, both in terms of knowledge and action) to the dis-
putes of men,” necessarily escapes all that presents a ‘supramundane’ character, 
which is to say of the ‘sacred’ or traditional order.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

326 
The Veil of Isisd action) to the dis-
putes of men,” necessarily escapes all that presents a ‘supramundane’ character, 
which is to say of the ‘sacred’ or traditional order.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

326 
The Veil of Isis

the presence of a more or less completely hostile milieu, the profane in-
comprehension seldom stopping at a kind of indifference and changing 
all too easily into a hatred whose manifestations constitute a danger 
which is certainly not illusory; however, this cannot reach the initiatic 
organization itself, which is, as we have said, is truly ‘elusive.’ Therefore, 
the precautions in this regard will be all the more necessary since this 
organization will already be more ‘externalized,’ and therefore less 
purely initiatic; moreover, it is only in this case that it can be in direct 
contact with the profane world, which otherwise could simply ignore it. 
We shall not speak here of a danger of another order, which may result 
from the existence of what we have called ‘counter-initiation,’ and to 
which the mere measures of ‘prudence’ cannot obviate; these are valid 
only against the profane world, whose reactions, we repeat, are to be 
feared only if the organization has taken an external form such as that of 
a ‘society’ or has been dragged more or less completely into an action 
exercised outside of the initiatic domain, all things of which can only be 
regarded as having a merely accidental and contingent character.406 
Thus we arrive at another consequence of the nature of initiatic se-
crecy: it may happen that, in addition to this secret which it alone is es-
sential to it, an initiatic organization also possesses secondary, and with-
out losing its own character, other secrets which are not of the same or-
der, but are of a more or less external and contingent order; these are 
purely accessory secrets which, being necessarily the only ones apparent 
to the observer from the outside, will be liable to give rise to the confu-
sion we pointed out at the end of our previous article. These secrets may 
come from the ‘contamination’ of which we have spoken, in other words 
the addition of goals which are not initiatic, and which can be attributed 
a more or less importance, since, in this sort of degeneracy all degrees 
are possible; it is not always so, and it may happen that such secrets re-
late to contingent, but legitimate, applications of the initiatic doctrine 
itself, which are considered to be ‘reserved’ for reasons that may be very 
diverse, and which would have to be determined in each case. The secrets 
to which we are referring here are those concerning the sciences and the 
traditional arts especially; what can be said in the most general way in 
this regard is that, since these sciences and arts cannot be truly under-
stood apart from the initiation in which they have their principle, their 
‘vulgarization’ could only have disadvantages, because it would inevita-
bly lead to a distortion or even a denaturation, of the kind that gave riseitiation in which they have their principle, their 
‘vulgarization’ could only have disadvantages, because it would inevita-
bly lead to a distortion or even a denaturation, of the kind that gave rise

406 What we have just said applies to the profane world reduced to itself, if we 
can express it as such; it should be added that it may also, in certain cases, serve 
as an unconscious instrument for an action exercised by representatives of the 
‘counter-initiation.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---ress it as such; it should be added that it may also, in certain cases, serve 
as an unconscious instrument for an action exercised by representatives of the 
‘counter-initiation.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
327 
to the sciences and profane arts, as we have explained in other circum-
stances. 
In this same category of accessory and non-essential secrets, we must 
also classify another kind of secret which exists very generally in initiatic 
organizations, and which is the one which most commonly causes, 
among the profane, this mistake on which we have previously called at-
tention to: this secret is the one that bears, either on all the rites and 
symbols used in such an organization, or, more specifically and in a more 
strict way than is common, on certain words and signs used as a ‘means 
of recognition,’ to allow its members to distinguish themselves from the 
profane. It goes without saying that any secret of this nature has only 
conventional and relative value, and, because it concerns external forms, 
it can always be discovered or betrayed, which will quite naturally be 
more of a risk than a more rigorously ‘closed’ organization; so we must 
insist on this, not only can this secret be in no way confused with the 
true initiatic secret, except by those who do not have the slightest idea 
of the nature of it, but that even there is nothing essential, so that its 
presence or absence cannot be invoked to define an organization as pos-
sessing an initiatic character or to define it otherwise. In fact, the same, 
or something similar, also exists in most other secret organizations 
which are not initiatic, although the reasons are different: it can be either 
to imitate the initiatic organizations in their outermost appearances, as 
is the case with the associations we have described as ‘pseudo-initiatic’ 
and those certain fanciful groups that do not deserve even this name, or 
simply to guarantee as much indiscretion as possible, in the most vulgar 
sense of the word, as happens for political associations especially which 
is easily understandable. On the other hand, the existence of a secret of 
this sort is not necessary for the initiatic organizations; even in these 
they have even less importance because they are of a purer and higher 
character, because they are then all the freer from all external forms and 
all that is inessential. So it happens that, which may seem paradoxical at 
first glance, but which is nonetheless very logical at the heart of it: the 
use of ‘means of recognition’ by an organization is a consequence of its 
‘closed’ character, but in those which are precisely the most ‘closed’ of 
all these means are reduced to the point of disappearing altogether, be-
cause there is no longer any need of them since their utility, being di-
rectly linked to a certain degree of ‘externality’ of the organizations that 
uses it, reaches its peak when the organization has a ‘semi-profane’ as-
pect, where the form of ‘society’ is the most typical example, because it 
is then that its opportunities of contact with the exterior world are the 
most extensive and multiple, and this, consequently, is most importantof ‘society’ is the most typical example, because it 
is then that its opportunities of contact with the exterior world are the 
most extensive and multiple, and this, consequently, is most important

--- PAGE BREAK ---

328 
The Veil of Isisbecause it 
is then that its opportunities of contact with the exterior world are the 
most extensive and multiple, and this, consequently, is most important

--- PAGE BREAK ---

328 
The Veil of Isis

for it to distinguish itself from the world by means which are themselves 
of the external order. 
The existence of such an external and secondary secret in the most 
widespread initiatic organizations is justified by other reasons: some at-
tribute to it above all a ‘pedagogic’ role, if it is permissible to express 
oneself thus; in other words, the ‘discipline of secrecy’ would constitute 
a kind of ‘training’ or exercise as part of the methods peculiar to these 
organizations, and one could see in this, as it were, an attenuated and 
restricted form of the ‘discipline of silence’ that was used in some ancient 
schools, especially among the Pythagoreans.407 This point of view is cer-
tainly correct, provided that it is not exclusive. It is to be remarked that 
in this regard the value of the secret is completely independent of the 
things which it bears; secrets of the most insignificant things will have, 
as ‘discipline,’ the same efficacity as a secret that is important unto itself. 
This should be a sufficient answer to the profane who, in this regard, 
accuse the initiatic organizations of ‘puerility,’ failing to understand that 
the words or signs on which the secret is imposed have a symbolic value 
of their own; if they are incapable of going as far as considerations of this 
last order, that which we have just indicated is at least within their reach, 
and certainly does not require a great effort of understanding. 
But it is, in reality, a deeper reason, based precisely on the symbolic 
character we have just mentioned, and which makes what we call ‘means 
of recognition’ not only that, but also, at the same timer, something more: 
these are really symbols like all others, whose meaning must be medi-
tated and deepened in the same way, and which thus forms an integral 
part of the initiatic teaching. The same is true of all the forms used by 
initiatic organizations, and, more generally, of all those which have a tra-
ditional character (including religious forms): they are always, funda-
mentally, something other than what they seem to be on the outside, and 
that is what distinguishes them essentially from profane forms, where 
the external appearance is everything and does not cover any reality of 
another order. From this point of view, the secret in question is itself a 
symbol, that of the true initiatic secret, which is obviously much morence is everything and does not cover any reality of 
another order. From this point of view, the secret in question is itself a 
symbol, that of the true initiatic secret, which is obviously much more

407 Disciplina secreti or disciplina arcani, as it was called in the Christian church 
of the first centuries. It should be noted that the word disciplina in Latin most 
often has the meaning of ‘education,’ which is also the etymological meaning, 
and even, by derivation, that of ‘science’ and ‘doctrine,’ while what is called 
‘discipline’ in French has only the value of a preparatory means in view of 
knowledge as is the case here, but which can also be of quite another order, as 
an example that which is simply ‘moral’; it is even of this last manner that one 
hears it most commonly in the profane domain

--- PAGE BREAK ---re, but which can also be of quite another order, as 
an example that which is simply ‘moral’; it is even of this last manner that one 
hears it most commonly in the profane domain

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
329 
than a mere ‘pedagogic’ means;408 but, of course, here as anywhere else, 
the symbol should not be confused with what is symbolized, and it is this 
confusion that profane ignorance emerges, because it does not know to 
see what is behind the appearance, and it does not even conceive that 
there can be anything other than what falls under the senses, which is 
practically equivalent to the pure and simple negation of all symbolism. 
Finally, we will indicate a final consideration that could still give rise 
to other developments: the secret of the external order, in the initiatic 
organizations where it exists, is properly part of the ritual, since what is 
the object is communication under the corresponding obligation of si-
lence, even in the course of initiation at each degree or at the completion; 
it thus constitutes, not only a symbol as we have just said, but also a true 
rite, with all the proper virtue which is essentially inherent to it as such. 
Moreover, to tell the truth, the rite and the symbol are, in call cases, 
closely linked by their very nature, for every rite necessarily implies a 
symbolic meaning in all its constitutive elements, and, conversely, every 
symbol produced for the one who meditates with the necessary aptitudes 
and dispositions, effects which are strictly comparable to those of rites 
proper, subject, of course, to the starting point of this work of meditation 
and as a precondition, the regular initiatic transmission, outside of 
which, the rites would be only a vain simulacrum, as it happens in the 
parodies of the ‘pseudo-initiation.’work of meditation 
and as a precondition, the regular initiatic transmission, outside of 
which, the rites would be only a vain simulacrum, as it happens in the 
parodies of the ‘pseudo-initiation.’

408 One could, if one wanted to go into some detail in this regard, notice that the 
‘sacred words’ that must never be pronounced are a particularly clear symbol of 
the ‘ineffable’ or the ‘inexpressible’; moreover, we know that something similar 
is sometimes found in exoterism, for example the Tetragrammaton in the Judaic 
tradition. In the same vein, one could also show that certain signs are related to 
the ‘localization’ in the human being of the subtle ‘centers’ whose ‘awakening’ 
constitutes, according to certain methods such as those of which we have spo-
ken here in our study on Kundalini-Yoga, a means of acquiring initiatic 
knowledge.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Profane Names and Initiatic Names 
Noms profanes et noms initiatiques, January 1935.have spo-
ken here in our study on Kundalini-Yoga, a means of acquiring initiatic 
knowledge.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Profane Names and Initiatic Names 
Noms profanes et noms initiatiques, January 1935.

Speaking in our previous articles of the various kinds of secrets of a more 
or less external order which may exist in certain organizations, initiatic 
or not, we have mentioned among others the secret concerning the 
names of their members; it may well seem that this is to rank among the 
simple precautionary measures intended to be protected against dangers 
which can come from any enemy, without there being any reason to look 
for a more profound reason. In fact, this is certainly the case in many 
instances, and at least in those where we are dealing with a purely pro-
fane secrete organization; but yet, when it comes to initiatic organiza-
tions, there may be something else, and this secret, like everything else, 
is truly symbolic. It is all the more interesting to dwell some on this point, 
that the curiosity of names is one of the most common manifestations of 
modern ‘individualism,’ and when it claims to apply to things of the ini-
tiatic domain it bears witness to a serious misunderstanding of the real-
ities of this order and an unfortunate tendency to want to reduce them 
to the level of profane contingencies. The ‘historicism’ of our contempo-
raries is satisfied only if a name is placed on everything, which is to say 
it attributes them to specific human individualities, according to the most 
restricted conception that can be made of it, that which takes place in 
profane life and which takes into account only the corporeal mode. How-
ever, the fact that the origin of initiatic organizations can never be related 
to such individualities should already give food for thought in this re-
gard; when it comes to those of the most profound order, their members 
themselves cannot be identified, not because they hide themselves, 
which, whatever carefulness is devoted towards it, cannot always be ef-
fective, but because, strictly speaking, they are not ‘personages’ in the 
sense that historians would like, so that whoever believes they can name 
them will inevitably be in error. Before entering into further explanations 
on this point, we shall say that something analogous is found propor-
tionally at all stages of the initiatic scale, even at the most elementary 
levels, so that, if an initiatic organization is really what it ought to be, the 
designation of any of its members by a profane name, even if it is exactly 
‘materially,’ will always be tainted with falsity, just as the confusion that 
would exist between an actor and a character whose role he plays andts members by a profane name, even if it is exactly 
‘materially,’ will always be tainted with falsity, just as the confusion that 
would exist between an actor and a character whose role he plays and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ane name, even if it is exactly 
‘materially,’ will always be tainted with falsity, just as the confusion that 
would exist between an actor and a character whose role he plays and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
331 
whose name one would persist in applying to him in all circumstances of 
his existence. 
We have already had occasion to speak of initiation conceived as a 
‘second birth’; it is by an immediate logical consequence of this concep-
tion that in many organizations the initiate receives a new name, differ-
ent from his profane name. This is not a mere formality, for this name 
must correspond to a mode equally different from its being, the one 
whose realization is made possible by the action of the ‘spiritual influ-
ence’ transmitted by initiation; it may also be remarked that, even from 
the exoteric point of view, the same practice exists with a similar reason 
in certain religious orders. We then have two distinct modes for the same 
being, one manifesting itself in the profane world, and the other within 
the initiatic organization; normally, each of them must have its own 
name, that of one not suitable to the other, since they are in two truly 
different orders. We can go further: to every degree of actual initiation 
corresponds yet another mode of being; he should therefore receive a 
new name for each of these degrees, and even if this name is not given 
to him in fact, there is nonetheless, one may say, as a characteristic ex-
pression of this mode, because a name is nothing else than that in reality. 
Now, since these modes are hierarchical in being, so are the names that 
represent them respectively: a name will therefore be all the truer since 
it will correspond to a mode of a more profound order, since, by this, it 
will express something that will be closer to the true essence of the being. 
Contrary to common opinion, it is therefore the profane name which, 
being attached to the most external mode and the most superficial man-
ifestation, is the least true of all; it is especially so in a civilization which 
has lost all traditional character, and where such a name expresses al-
most nothing of the nature of the being. As for what may be called the 
true name of the human being, the most true of all, a name which is also 
a ‘number,’ in the Pythagorean and Kabbalist meaning of this word, is 
the one that corresponds to the central mode of its individuality, which 
is to say, its restoration in the ‘primordial state,’ because it is that which 
constitutes the integral expression of its ‘individual essence.’ 
It follows from these considerations that an initiatic name does not 
have to be known in the profane world, since it represents a mode of the 
being which cannot be manifested in the profane world, so that its 
knowledge would somehow fall into the void, finding nothing to which 
it could really apply. Inversely, the profane name represents a mode that 
the being must discard when he returns to the initiatic domain, which is 
then for him only a mere role that he plays on the exterior; therefore, 
this name cannot be valid in this domain, in relation to which what itscard when he returns to the initiatic domain, which is 
then for him only a mere role that he plays on the exterior; therefore, 
this name cannot be valid in this domain, in relation to which what it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

332 
The Veil of Isisin, which is 
then for him only a mere role that he plays on the exterior; therefore, 
this name cannot be valid in this domain, in relation to which what it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

332 
The Veil of Isis

expresses is in a way non-existent, as belonging to a lower degree of re-
ality. Moreover, it goes without saying that these profound reasons for 
the distinction and, so to speak, the separation of the initiatic name and 
the profane name, as designating actually different ‘entities,’ may not be 
entirely conscious everywhere where the name change takes place; it 
may happen that, as a result of a degeneration of certain initiatic organ-
izations, we come to try to explain it by motives which are entirely ex-
ternal, for example by presenting it as a simple measure of prudence, 
which is worth the interpretations of rituals and symbolism in a moral 
or political sense, and in no way precludes that there was anything else 
at the origin. On the contrary, if it concerns only profane organization, 
these same external motives are really valid, and there can be nothing 
more, unless, in some cases, these also concern rites as we have already 
said, the desire to imitate the uses of initiatic organizations, but, natu-
rally, without this being able to respond to the slightest reality; this again 
shows that similar appearances can, in fact, cover the most different 
things. 
Now, all that we have said so far about this multiplicity of names, 
representing so many modes of being, relates only to extensions of hu-
man individuality included in its integral realization, which is to say, in-
itiatically, to the domain of ‘lesser mysteries.’ When the being passes into 
the ‘greater mysteries,’ which is to say the realization of supra-individual 
states, he passes also beyond name and form, since, as is taught in the 
Hindu doctrine, these are the respective expressions of the essence and 
substance of individuality. Truly, such a being has no name since this is 
a limitation from which he is henceforth free; he may, if necessary, take 
any name to manifest himself in the individual domain, but this name 
will not affect him in any way and will be just as ‘accidental’ as a simple 
garment that can be discarded or changed at will. This is the explanation 
of what we have said at the beginning: when it comes to organizations 
of this order, their members have no names, and moreover they them-
selves do not have even have a name; in this conditions, what is there to 
give rise profane curiosity? If even they manage to discover some names, 
they will have only one of conventional value; this can already happen, 
very often, for organizations of a lower order than that, in which ‘collec-
tive signatures’ will be used, representing either these organizations 
themselves as a whole, or functions envisaged regardless of the individ-
ualities that fill them. We repeat, all this results from the very nature of 
things of an initiatic order in which individual considerations count for 
nothing and which is not intended to confuse research, although this a 
consequence; but how can the profane suppose anything other than in-
tentions they themselves have?al considerations count for 
nothing and which is not intended to confuse research, although this a 
consequence; but how can the profane suppose anything other than in-
tentions they themselves have?

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
333 
Hence in many cases the difficulty or even the impossibility of iden-
tifying the authors of works having a certain initiatic character: they are 
entirely anonymous, or, what amounts to an equivalent, they have as a 
signature only a symbolic mark or a conventional name; moreover, there 
is no reason for their authors to have played any apparent role in the 
profane world.

On the contrary, when such works bear the name of an 
individual who is otherwise known to have lived, they may not be much 
more advance, because that is not why we will know exactly who or what 
we are dealing with: this individual may very well have been a spokes-
person, even a mask; in such a case, his purported work may imply 
knowledge he never really had, he may be only an initiate of a lower 
degree, or even a mere layman who has been chosen for any contingent 
reason, as we have explained in connection with the sagas of the Holy 
Grail, and then it is obviously not the author who matters, but the organ-
ization that inspired him.

Moreover, even in the profane order, we can be astonished at the im-
portance attributed nowadays to the individuality of an author and to 
everything that touches it: does the value of the work depend in any way 
on these things?

On the other hand, it is easy to see that the concern to 
attach one’s name to any work is less so in a civilization that is more 
closely related to the traditional principles, of which, indeed, ‘individu-
alism’ in all its forms is in a sense a negation.

We can easily understand 
that all this is fulfilled and we do not wish to insist upon it more, but it 
was not without benefit to emphasize it again, on this occasion, the role 
of the anti-traditional spirit, characteristic of the modern epoch, as the 
principal cause of the misunderstanding of initiatic things and the ten-
dency to reduce them to profane points of view.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On the other hand, it is easy to see that the concern to 
attach one’s name to any work is less so in a civilization that is more 
closely related to the traditional principles, of which, indeed, ‘individu-
alism’ in all its forms is in a sense a negation. We can easily understand 
that all this is fulfilled and we do not wish to insist upon it more, but it 
was not without benefit to emphasize it again, on this occasion, the role 
of the anti-traditional spirit, characteristic of the modern epoch, as the 
principal cause of the misunderstanding of initiatic things and the ten-
dency to reduce them to profane points of view. It is this spirit which, 
under names such as those of ‘humanism’ and ‘rationalism,’ it has en-
deavored for a few centuries to reduce everything to the proportions of 
vulgar human individuality restricted to the knowledge of the profane, 
and to deny everything that goes beyond this narrowly limited domain, 
which is everything that comes under initiation in any degree. It is 
scarcely necessary to remark that these considerations which we have 
just expounded upon here are essentially based on the metaphysical doc-
trine of the multiple states of being, of which they are a direct applica-
tion. How could this doctrine be understood by those who claim to make 
of the individual man, and even exclusively his corporeal mode, a com-
plete and closed whole, a self-sufficient being, instead of seeing what it 
is in reality, the contingent and transient manifestation of a being in a 
very particular domain among the indefinite multitude of those whose 
whole constitutes the Universal Existence, and to which correspond, for 
this same being, so many different modes and states, from which it will

--- PAGE BREAK ---

334 
The Veil of Isis

be possible for him to become consciously precisely by following the 
path opened to him by initiation?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Rite and the Symbol 
Le rite et le symbole, February 1935.eil of Isis

be possible for him to become consciously precisely by following the 
path opened to him by initiation?

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Rite and the Symbol 
Le rite et le symbole, February 1935.

We drew attention to the close connection between the rite and the sym-
bol at the end of one of our previous articles: all the constituent elements 
of the rite necessarily have, we stated, a symbolic meaning and, on the 
other hand, the symbol itself in its most usual sense is essentially in-
tended to produce effects that are rigorously comparable to those of rites 
as a support of meditation. Let us add that, when it comes to truly tradi-
tional rites and symbols (and those which do not possess this character 
do not deserve to be named, being only counterfeits or parodies in fact), 
their origin is similarly ‘non-human.’ Thus the impossibility of assigning 
a definitive author or inventor is not due to ignorance, as the profane 
historians may suppose (when they do not arrive at this, in their despair 
they see this as a product of a kind of ‘collective unconscious’ which, 
even if it existed, would be incapable in any case of giving rise to trans-
cendent things such as those in question),409 but it is a necessary conse-
quence of this very origin which can only be contested by those who 
totally ignore the true nature of tradition and all that is an integral part 
of it, as is obviously the case for both rites and symbols. 
If we wish to examine the fundamental identity of the rite and the 
symbol in more detail, we can say firstly that the symbol, understood as 
the ‘graphic’ figuration as is most common, is in a way the fixation of a 
ritual gesture.410 It often happens that the very path of the symbol must 
be carried out regularly under conditions which confer on it the charac-
teristic of a rite proper; we have a very clear example from this, in an 
inferior domain such as that of magic (which is a traditional science 
nonetheless), with the production of talismanic figures, and, in the order 
which concerns us immediately, the outline of the yantras in the Hindu 
tradition is also a striking example.411al science 
nonetheless), with the production of talismanic figures, and, in the order 
which concerns us immediately, the outline of the yantras in the Hindu 
tradition is also a striking example.411

409 On this subject see what we have said about the alleged folklore in our study 
on The Holy Grail (February 1934 issue). 
410 These considerations are directly related to what we have called the ‘theory 
of the gesture,’ which we have alluded to on a number of occasions, but without 
having been able to develop it yet. 
411 In ancient Masonry, we can assimilate the outline of the ‘Tracing Board of 
the Lodge,’ which effectively constituted a real yantra. Rites in connection with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

336 
The Veil of IsisIn ancient Masonry, we can assimilate the outline of the ‘Tracing Board of 
the Lodge,’ which effectively constituted a real yantra. Rites in connection with

--- PAGE BREAK ---

336 
The Veil of Isis

But that is not all, because the notion of the symbol to which we have 
just referred is much too narrow, to tell the truth. There are not only 
figurative or visual symbols, there are also sound symbols; we have al-
ready indicated on another occasion this distinction of two fundamental 
categories, which in the Hindu doctrine is that of the yantra and man-
tra.412 We have even said then that their respective predominance char-
acterized two types of rites, which originally relate to the traditions of 
sedentary peoples in the case of visual symbols, and to that of nomadic 
peoples in the case of sound symbols; naturally, it is understood that sep-
aration between the two cannot be established in an absolute manner 
(and this is why we speak only of predominance), all combinations being 
possible here because of the multiple adaptations that have occurred over 
the ages and through which the various traditional forms have been con-
stituted that are known to us today. These considerations quite clearly 
show the connection which quite generally exists between rituals and 
symbols; we can add that this link is more immediately apparent in the 
case of mantrāsaḥ: indeed, while the visual symbol, once it has been out-
lined, possibly remains in the permanent state (and this is why we spoke 
of the fixed gesture), the sound symbol, on the contrary, is manifested 
only in the very accomplishment of the rite. This difference is attenuated 
when a correspondence is established between sound symbols and visual 
symbols; this is what happens when writing, which represents a true fix-
ation of the sound (not of the sound itself as such, of course, but of a 
permanent possibility of reproducing it); it is scarcely necessary to recall 
that all writing is an essentially symbolic figuration, at its origin at least. 
Moreover, this is not the case with the word itself, to which this symbolic 
character is no less inherent in its very nature: it is obvious that the word, 
whatever it may be, cannot be anything other than a symbol of the idea 
that it is intended to express. Thus, every language, oral or written, is 
truly a set of symbols, and this is precisely why language cannot be a 
creation more artificial or less artificial, nor a mere product of individual 
faculties, despite all the ‘naturalist’ theories that are imagined to explain 
it.413precisely why language cannot be a 
creation more artificial or less artificial, nor a mere product of individual 
faculties, despite all the ‘naturalist’ theories that are imagined to explain 
it.413

the construction of monuments to traditional destination could still be cited here 
as an example, these monuments necessarily having a symbolic character within 
themselves. 
412 See our article on Cain and Abel (January 1932 issue). 
413 We will refer here to what we said earlier about the primitive language (The 
Science of Letters, February 1931 issue); it goes without saying that the distinc-
tion between ‘sacred languages’ and ‘profane languages’ only intervene second-
arily. For language as well as for sciences and arts, the ‘profane’ character is

--- PAGE BREAK ---ng that the distinc-
tion between ‘sacred languages’ and ‘profane languages’ only intervene second-
arily. For language as well as for sciences and arts, the ‘profane’ character is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
337 
For the visual symbols themselves, it is also a case quite comparable 
to that of the sound symbols in relation to what we have just indicated: 
this case is that of the symbols which are not drawn permanently, but 
only are employed as signs in the initiatic rites (especially the ‘signs of 
recognition’ that we have spoken of in our previous articles) and even 
religious ones (the ‘sign of the cross’ is a typical example and known to 
all); here, the symbol is really one with the ritual gesture itself.414 More-
over, it would be quite useless to make of these signs a third category of 
symbols, distinct from those we have spoken so far. Certain ‘psycholo-
gists’ would probably consider them thus and designate them as ‘motor’ 
symbols or by some other expression of this kind, but, being obviously 
made to be perceived by sight, they thus enter into the category of visual 
symbols; they are in this category because of their ‘instantaneity,’ so to 
speak, those which present the greatest similarity with the complemen-
tary category, that of sound symbols. Moreover, the ‘graphic’ symbol it-
self is, we repeat, a gesture or a fixed motion (the very movement or the 
complex set of motions that must be made to outline it, that the same 
‘psychologists’ would no doubt call a ‘motor scheme’). As far as sound 
symbols are concerned, we can also say that the movements of the vocal 
organs, necessary for their production (whether it is the emission of or-
dinary speech or of musical sounds), is in fact a gesture in the same way 
as all other kinds of corporeal movements, of which it is impossible to 
isolate it entirely.415 Thus, this notion of the gesture, taken in its widest 
sense (which is more in conformity with what the word really implies 
than the more restricted meaning which is imposed on it by common 
usage), brings all these cases that differ into unity, so that it may be saids more in conformity with what the word really implies 
than the more restricted meaning which is imposed on it by common 
usage), brings all these cases that differ into unity, so that it may be said

never anything but the result of a true degeneration (this could only have hap-
pened earlier and more easily in the case of languages because of their common 
and general use). 
414 A case that is intermediate in some way is that of the symbolic figures which, 
traced at the beginning of a rite or in its preparation, are erased immediately 
after its completion; this is so for many yantrāsaḥ, and it was the same for the 
‘Tracing Board of the Lodge’ in Masonry. This practice is not only a precaution 
taken against profane curiosity, an explanation which is always much too ‘sim-
plistic’: it must be seen above all as a consequence of the link that intimately 
unites the symbol to the rite, so that it would not have a reason to subsist visibly 
outside of it.  
415 Let us point out with regard to the relations of language with the gesture 
understood in its most ordinary and restricted sense, the works of R. P. Marcel 
Jousse, who, although having a base necessarily very different from ours, are no 
less worthy in our view, in that they touch on the question of certain traditional 
modes of expression which are generally related to the constitution and the use 
of sacred languages, and almost entirely forgotten in profane languages, which 
are reduced to the most restricted form of language.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

338 
The Veil of Isisonstitution and the use 
of sacred languages, and almost entirely forgotten in profane languages, which 
are reduced to the most restricted form of language.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

338 
The Veil of Isis

that it is there that they have their common principle in essence; in the 
metaphysical order, this fact has a profound meaning, which we cannot 
think of developing at present. 
It must be easy to understand now that every rite is constituted liter-
ally by a set of symbols; indeed, these do not only include the objects 
used or the figures represented, as one might be tempted to think when 
one sticks to the most superficial notion, but also the gestures made and 
the words uttered (since these are in reality, according to what we have 
just said, only a particular case of these), in a word, all the elements of 
the rite without exception; these elements are thus symbols by their very 
nature, and not by virtue of a superimposed significance which would 
come to them from external circumstances and which would not be in-
herent to them. One could still say that rites are symbols ‘put into action,’ 
that any ritual gesture is a symbol ‘acted’;416 it is only another way of 
emphasizing the same thing, only emphasizing the character of the ritual 
of being, like any action, something which is necessarily accomplished 
in time,417 while the symbol as such can be considered from an ‘atem-
poral’ point of view. In this sense, one could speak of a certain pre-emi-
nence of the symbol in relation to the rite, but rite and symbol are in their 
essence only two aspects of the same reality; this is none other than the 
‘correspondence’ which connects all the degrees of the Universal Exist-
ence, so that through it our human state can be put in communication 
with the higher states of being.s is none other than the 
‘correspondence’ which connects all the degrees of the Universal Exist-
ence, so that through it our human state can be put in communication 
with the higher states of being.

416 From this point of view, we can particularly note the role played in the rites 
by the gestures which the Hindu tradition calls mudrāḥ, and which constitutes 
a true language of movements and attitudes; the ‘touching’ used as a ‘means of 
recognition’ in initiatic organizations, both in the Occident and the Orient, are 
nothing more than a special case of mudrāḥ. 
417 In Sanskrit the word Karma, which first means ‘action’ in general, is used in 
a ‘technical’ way to refer to ‘ritual action’ in particular; what it then directly 
expresses is the same character of the rite that we indicate here.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Confusion 
of 
the 
Psychic 
and 
the 
Spiritual 
De la confusion du psychique et du spirituel, March 1935.

We have already pointed out on many occasions the unfortunate ten-
dency of some people in the West to confuse the two domains of the 
psychic and the spiritual; we are forced to observe so many manifesta-
tions of this tendency in various forms that we must return to this subject 
once again, unfortunate as it is to deal with it.

Indeed, we see all too often 
the consequences that may result: spreading this confusion is, whether 
we like it or not, to commit beings to be irretrievably lost in the chaos of 
the ‘intermediary world,’ and, in this way, to play the game of the ‘sa-
tanic’ forces that govern what we have called ‘counter-initiation.’ 
It is important here to be precise in order to avoid any misunderstand-
ing: no development of the possibilities of a being, even in a lower order, 
can be regarded as essentially ‘malefic’ in itself; everything depends on 
the use that is made of it, and, first and foremost, it is necessary to con-
sider whether this development is taken for an end in itself, or on the 
contrary, for a simple means to achieve a goal of a superior order.

Indeed, 
as we have often pointed out, anything can serve as an opportunity and 
‘support’ depending on the circumstances of each particular case for 
those who embark on the path that will lead them to spiritual ‘realiza-
tion’; this is especially true at the beginning, because of the diversity of 
the individual natures whose influence is then at its peak, but it is still so 
in later stages, to a certain extent, as long as the limits of the individuality 
are not exceeded.Indeed, we see all too often 
the consequences that may result: spreading this confusion is, whether 
we like it or not, to commit beings to be irretrievably lost in the chaos of 
the ‘intermediary world,’ and, in this way, to play the game of the ‘sa-
tanic’ forces that govern what we have called ‘counter-initiation.’ 
It is important here to be precise in order to avoid any misunderstand-
ing: no development of the possibilities of a being, even in a lower order, 
can be regarded as essentially ‘malefic’ in itself; everything depends on 
the use that is made of it, and, first and foremost, it is necessary to con-
sider whether this development is taken for an end in itself, or on the 
contrary, for a simple means to achieve a goal of a superior order.

Indeed, 
as we have often pointed out, anything can serve as an opportunity and 
‘support’ depending on the circumstances of each particular case for 
those who embark on the path that will lead them to spiritual ‘realiza-
tion’; this is especially true at the beginning, because of the diversity of 
the individual natures whose influence is then at its peak, but it is still so 
in later stages, to a certain extent, as long as the limits of the individuality 
are not exceeded.

On the other hand, anything can be as much of an ob-
stacle as it can be a ‘support,’ if the being stops there and is allowed to 
be deluded and misled by certain appearances of ‘realization’ which does 
not have any value on its own and are only accidental and contingent 
results, even if they may be regarded as results from any point of view; 
this danger of illusion and aberration always exists precisely as long as 
we are still in the order of individual possibilities.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Indeed, 
as we have often pointed out, anything can serve as an opportunity and 
‘support’ depending on the circumstances of each particular case for 
those who embark on the path that will lead them to spiritual ‘realiza-
tion’; this is especially true at the beginning, because of the diversity of 
the individual natures whose influence is then at its peak, but it is still so 
in later stages, to a certain extent, as long as the limits of the individuality 
are not exceeded. On the other hand, anything can be as much of an ob-
stacle as it can be a ‘support,’ if the being stops there and is allowed to 
be deluded and misled by certain appearances of ‘realization’ which does 
not have any value on its own and are only accidental and contingent 
results, even if they may be regarded as results from any point of view; 
this danger of illusion and aberration always exists precisely as long as 
we are still in the order of individual possibilities. The most gross example, if we can say, of such a mistake is that which 
refers to possibilities of a purely corporeal and physiologic order, in this 
we refer, in particular, to the common mistake among Westerners with 
regard to certain preparatory processes of Yoga, where their ignorance 
only wishes to see a kind of method of ‘physical training’ or a special 
‘therapy.’ Moreover, this error is basically the least serious and the least 
dangerous, because it is the one whose consequences go the least far: it 
runs little more risk than the obtaining of an opposite result to the that 
which is desired due to ‘practices’ being carried out inconsiderately and 
uncontrollably, and to ruin one’s health by believing it to be improved. This does not interest us in anything except that there is a deviation in 
the use of these ‘practices’ which, in reality, are made for an entirely

--- PAGE BREAK ---

340 
The Veil of Isisimproved. This does not interest us in anything except that there is a deviation in 
the use of these ‘practices’ which, in reality, are made for an entirely

--- PAGE BREAK ---

340 
The Veil of Isis

different use, as far as possible from the physiologic domain, and the nat-
ural repercussions of which are merely an ‘accident’ to which it is not 
appropriate to attach the slightest importance. However, it must be 
added that these same ‘practices’ may also have repercussions in the psy-
chic domain, i.e., in the subtle modes of the individual, which considera-
bly increases the danger: without suspecting it in the least, we can thus 
open the door to ‘influences’ of all kinds, against which we are all the 
less prejudiced so that sometimes we do not even suspect their existence, 
and even more that we are unable to discern their true nature. But at the 
least there is no ‘spiritual’ or ‘initiatic’ pretension, whereas it is quite 
different for those who seek so-called ‘powers,’ i.e., in sum, extraordinary 
‘phenomena,’ or for those who try to ‘center’ their consciousness on 
lower extensions of human individuality, mistaken for higher states 
simply because they are outside a setting in which the activity of the 
ordinary man is generally closed from; we will return to the first of these 
two cases again, for it is on the second that we wish to insist on now. 
Indeed, here again it is the attraction of the ‘phenomenon’ that is most 
often at the root of the error: those who behave in this way wish to obtain 
results that are ‘sensory,’ and this is what they believe to be a ‘realiza-
tion’; however, this is to say that everything that is truly spiritual escapes 
them entirely. Of course, it is not a question of denying the reality of the 
‘phenomena’ in question as such; they are all too real, we might say, and 
they are all the more dangerous: what we are questioning is their value 
and their interest, and that is what the illusion is about. If there was only 
a waste of time and effort again, the evil would not be very great, but, in 
general, the being who attaches himself to these things then becomes 
unable to overcome them and go beyond them; the cases of these indi-
viduals is well known in Oriental traditions, those who have become 
mere producers of ‘phenomena’ that will never reach the slightest spir-
ituality. But there is more: there may be a kind of ‘reverse’ development, 
which not only does not bring any valid acquisition, but always moves 
away from spiritual ‘realization’ until it is to be definitively lost in those 
inferior extensions of his individuality to which we were alluded mo-
ments ago, and by which he can only come into contact with the ‘infra-
human.’ His situation is then hopeless, or at least there is only one, which 
is a ‘disintegration’ of the conscious being. It is there, one could say in 
all rigor, that is a true ‘descent to Hell’ without any possible ‘recovery’; 
as for the outcome, it corresponds to one of the most unfavorable and 
‘sinister’ meanings of this ‘second death’ of which we have spoken in a 
previous article: it is properly the ‘inverted’ shadow of the ‘second death’ 
of initiation.o one of the most unfavorable and 
‘sinister’ meanings of this ‘second death’ of which we have spoken in a 
previous article: it is properly the ‘inverted’ shadow of the ‘second death’ 
of initiation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---favorable and 
‘sinister’ meanings of this ‘second death’ of which we have spoken in a 
previous article: it is properly the ‘inverted’ shadow of the ‘second death’ 
of initiation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
341 
One can never be too wary in this regard of any appeal to the ‘sub-
conscious,’ to ‘instinct,’ to infrarational ‘intuition,’ or even to an ill-de-
fined ‘life force,’ in a word all those vague and obscure things that lead 
more or less directly to a contact with the lower states. All the more, we 
must beware of everything that induces beings to ‘coalesce,’ we might 
willingly say ‘to dissolve,’ in a kind of ‘cosmic consciousness’ exclusive 
of all ‘transcendence,’ and therefore of all effective spirituality; this is the 
ultimate consequence of all the anti-metaphysical errors that terms such 
as ‘pantheism,’ ‘immanentism,’ and ‘naturalism’ designate, all things 
closely related to each other, a consequence which some would certainly 
retreat from if they knew what they were really talking about. In fact, it 
is there that spirituality is taken ‘backwards,’ to substitute it in place of 
the opposite, since this leads to its definitive loss, and this is what ‘Sa-
tanism,’ properly speaking, consists of; whether it is conscious or uncon-
scious, it does not change the results, and we must not forget that the 
‘unconscious Satanism’ of some, more numerous than ever in our age of 
intellectual disorder, is never anything but an instrument at the service 
of the ‘conscious Satanism’ of the representatives of ‘counter-initiation.’ 
We have sometimes had the opportunity to point out the initiatic 
symbolism of the ‘journey’ accomplished through the Ocean represent-
ing the psychic domain, which must be crossed, avoiding all dangers, to 
reach the goal; but what of the one who would throw himself in the mid-
dle of this Ocean and have no other inspiration than to drown in it? This 
is exactly what this ‘fusion’ with a ‘cosmic consciousness’ means, which 
is only the confused and indistinct whole of ‘psychic influences’ which, 
although some may imagine otherwise, have certainly nothing in com-
mon with the ‘spiritual influences,’ even if they sometimes imitate them 
in some of their external manifestations. Those who commit this fatal 
mistake simply forget or ignore the distinction between the ‘Upper Wa-
ters’ and the ‘Lower Waters’; instead of rising to the Ocean from above, 
they sink into the abyss of the Ocean below; instead of concentrating all 
their powers to direct them to the informal world, which alone can be 
called ‘spiritual,’ they disperse in the infinitely changing and fleeting di-
versity of forms of the subtle manifestation, without suspecting that 
what they are taking for a plentitude of ‘life’ is actually only the kingdom 
of death.the infinitely changing and fleeting di-
versity of forms of the subtle manifestation, without suspecting that 
what they are taking for a plentitude of ‘life’ is actually only the kingdom 
of death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Confusion of the Psychic and the Spiritual 
De la confusion du psychique et du spirituel, March 1935.are taking for a plentitude of ‘life’ is actually only the kingdom 
of death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Confusion of the Psychic and the Spiritual 
De la confusion du psychique et du spirituel, March 1935.

We have already pointed out on many occasions the unfortunate ten-
dency of some people in the West to confuse the two domains of the 
psychic and the spiritual; we are forced to observe so many manifesta-
tions of this tendency in various forms that we must return to this subject 
once again, unfortunate as it is to deal with it. Indeed, we see all too often 
the consequences that may result: spreading this confusion is, whether 
we like it or not, to commit beings to be irretrievably lost in the chaos of 
the ‘intermediary world,’ and, in this way, to play the game of the ‘sa-
tanic’ forces that govern what we have called ‘counter-initiation.’ 
It is important here to be precise in order to avoid any misunderstand-
ing: no development of the possibilities of a being, even in a lower order, 
can be regarded as essentially ‘malefic’ in itself; everything depends on 
the use that is made of it, and, first and foremost, it is necessary to con-
sider whether this development is taken for an end in itself, or on the 
contrary, for a simple means to achieve a goal of a superior order. Indeed, 
as we have often pointed out, anything can serve as an opportunity and 
‘support’ depending on the circumstances of each particular case for 
those who embark on the path that will lead them to spiritual ‘realiza-
tion’; this is especially true at the beginning, because of the diversity of 
the individual natures whose influence is then at its peak, but it is still so 
in later stages, to a certain extent, as long as the limits of the individuality 
are not exceeded. On the other hand, anything can be as much of an ob-
stacle as it can be a ‘support,’ if the being stops there and is allowed to 
be deluded and misled by certain appearances of ‘realization’ which does 
not have any value on its own and are only accidental and contingent 
results, even if they may be regarded as results from any point of view; 
this danger of illusion and aberration always exists precisely as long as 
we are still in the order of individual possibilities. 
The most gross example, if we can say, of such a mistake is that which 
refers to possibilities of a purely corporeal and physiologic order, in this 
we refer, in particular, to the common mistake among Westerners with 
regard to certain preparatory processes of Yoga, where their ignorance 
only wishes to see a kind of method of ‘physical training’ or a special 
‘therapy.’ Moreover, this error is basically the least serious and the leastparatory processes of Yoga, where their ignorance 
only wishes to see a kind of method of ‘physical training’ or a special 
‘therapy.’ Moreover, this error is basically the least serious and the least

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
343 
dangerous, because it is the one whose consequences go the least far: it 
runs little more risk than the obtaining of an opposite result to the that 
which is desired due to ‘practices’ being carried out inconsiderately and 
uncontrollably, and to ruin one’s health by believing it to be improved.

This does not interest us in anything except that there is a deviation in 
the use of these ‘practices’ which, in reality, are made for an entirely 
different use, as far as possible from the physiologic domain, and the nat-
ural repercussions of which are merely an ‘accident’ to which it is not 
appropriate to attach the slightest importance.

However, it must be 
added that these same ‘practices’ may also have repercussions in the psy-
chic domain, i.e., in the subtle modes of the individual, which considera-
bly increases the danger: without suspecting it in the least, we can thus 
open the door to ‘influences’ of all kinds, against which we are all the 
less prejudiced so that sometimes we do not even suspect their existence, 
and even more that we are unable to discern their true nature.

But at the 
least there is no ‘spiritual’ or ‘initiatic’ pretension, whereas it is quite 
different for those who seek so-called ‘powers,’ i.e., in sum, extraordinary 
‘phenomena,’ or for those who try to ‘center’ their consciousness on 
lower extensions of human individuality, mistaken for higher states 
simply because they are outside a setting in which the activity of the 
ordinary man is generally closed from; we will return to the first of these 
two cases again, for it is on the second that we wish to insist on now.

Indeed, here again it is the attraction of the ‘phenomenon’ that is most 
often at the root of the error: those who behave in this way wish to obtain 
results that are ‘sensory,’ and this is what they believe to be a ‘realiza-
tion’; however, this is to say that everything that is truly spiritual escapes 
them entirely.But at the 
least there is no ‘spiritual’ or ‘initiatic’ pretension, whereas it is quite 
different for those who seek so-called ‘powers,’ i.e., in sum, extraordinary 
‘phenomena,’ or for those who try to ‘center’ their consciousness on 
lower extensions of human individuality, mistaken for higher states 
simply because they are outside a setting in which the activity of the 
ordinary man is generally closed from; we will return to the first of these 
two cases again, for it is on the second that we wish to insist on now.

Indeed, here again it is the attraction of the ‘phenomenon’ that is most 
often at the root of the error: those who behave in this way wish to obtain 
results that are ‘sensory,’ and this is what they believe to be a ‘realiza-
tion’; however, this is to say that everything that is truly spiritual escapes 
them entirely.

Of course, it is not a question of denying the reality of the 
‘phenomena’ in question as such; they are all too real, we might say, and 
they are all the more dangerous: what we are questioning is their value 
and their interest, and that is what the illusion is about.

If there was only 
a waste of time and effort again, the evil would not be very great, but, in 
general, the being who attaches himself to these things then becomes 
unable to overcome them and go beyond them; the cases of these indi-
viduals is well known in Oriental traditions, those who have become 
mere producers of ‘phenomena’ that will never reach the slightest spir-
ituality.

But there is more: there may be a kind of ‘reverse’ development, 
which not only does not bring any valid acquisition, but always moves 
away from spiritual ‘realization’ until it is to be definitively lost in those 
inferior extensions of his individuality to which we were alluded mo-
ments ago, and by which he can only come into contact with the ‘infra-
human.’ His situation is then hopeless, or at least there is only one, which 
is a ‘disintegration’ of the conscious being.--- PAGE BREAK ---

If there was only 
a waste of time and effort again, the evil would not be very great, but, in 
general, the being who attaches himself to these things then becomes 
unable to overcome them and go beyond them; the cases of these indi-
viduals is well known in Oriental traditions, those who have become 
mere producers of ‘phenomena’ that will never reach the slightest spir-
ituality. But there is more: there may be a kind of ‘reverse’ development, 
which not only does not bring any valid acquisition, but always moves 
away from spiritual ‘realization’ until it is to be definitively lost in those 
inferior extensions of his individuality to which we were alluded mo-
ments ago, and by which he can only come into contact with the ‘infra-
human.’ His situation is then hopeless, or at least there is only one, which 
is a ‘disintegration’ of the conscious being. It is there, one could say in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

344 
The Veil of Isisra-
human.’ His situation is then hopeless, or at least there is only one, which 
is a ‘disintegration’ of the conscious being. It is there, one could say in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

344 
The Veil of Isis

all rigor, that is a true ‘descent to Hell’ without any possible ‘recovery’; 
as for the outcome, it corresponds to one of the most unfavorable and 
‘sinister’ meanings of this ‘second death’ of which we have spoken in a 
previous article: it is properly the ‘inverted’ shadow of the ‘second death’ 
of initiation. 
One can never be too wary in this regard of any appeal to the ‘sub-
conscious,’ to ‘instinct,’ to infrarational ‘intuition,’ or even to an ill-de-
fined ‘life force,’ in a word all those vague and obscure things that lead 
more or less directly to a contact with the lower states. All the more, we 
must beware of everything that induces beings to ‘coalesce,’ we might 
willingly say ‘to dissolve,’ in a kind of ‘cosmic consciousness’ exclusive 
of all ‘transcendence,’ and therefore of all effective spirituality; this is the 
ultimate consequence of all the anti-metaphysical errors that terms such 
as ‘pantheism,’ ‘immanentism,’ and ‘naturalism’ designate, all things 
closely related to each other, a consequence which some would certainly 
retreat from if they knew what they were really talking about. In fact, it 
is there that spirituality is taken ‘backwards,’ to substitute it in place of 
the opposite, since this leads to its definitive loss, and this is what ‘Sa-
tanism,’ properly speaking, consists of; whether it is conscious or uncon-
scious, it does not change the results, and we must not forget that the 
‘unconscious Satanism’ of some, more numerous than ever in our age of 
intellectual disorder, is never anything but an instrument at the service 
of the ‘conscious Satanism’ of the representatives of ‘counter-initiation.’ 
We have sometimes had the opportunity to point out the initiatic 
symbolism of the ‘journey’ accomplished through the Ocean represent-
ing the psychic domain, which must be crossed, avoiding all dangers, to 
reach the goal; but what of the one who would throw himself in the mid-
dle of this Ocean and have no other inspiration than to drown in it? This 
is exactly what this ‘fusion’ with a ‘cosmic consciousness’ means, which 
is only the confused and indistinct whole of ‘psychic influences’ which, 
although some may imagine otherwise, have certainly nothing in com-
mon with the ‘spiritual influences,’ even if they sometimes imitate them 
in some of their external manifestations. Those who commit this fatal 
mistake simply forget or ignore the distinction between the ‘Upper Wa-
ters’ and the ‘Lower Waters’; instead of rising to the Ocean from above, 
they sink into the abyss of the Ocean below; instead of concentrating all 
their powers to direct them to the informal world, which alone can be 
called ‘spiritual,’ they disperse in the infinitely changing and fleeting di-
versity of forms of the subtle manifestation, without suspecting that 
what they are taking for a plentitude of ‘life’ is actually only the kingdom 
of death.the infinitely changing and fleeting di-
versity of forms of the subtle manifestation, without suspecting that 
what they are taking for a plentitude of ‘life’ is actually only the kingdom 
of death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Arts and Their Traditional Conception 
Les arts et leur conception traditionnelle, April 1935.ey are taking for a plentitude of ‘life’ is actually only the kingdom 
of death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Arts and Their Traditional Conception 
Les arts et leur conception traditionnelle, April 1935.

We have often insisted that the profane sciences are only the product of 
a relatively recent degeneration, due to the incomprehension of the old 
traditional sciences, or rather only a few of the sciences, the others hav-
ing fallen entirely into oblivion. What is true in this regard for sciences 
is equally true for the arts, and, moreover, the distinction between the 
arts was much less marked in the past than it is today; the Latin word 
artes was sometimes also applied to the sciences, and in the Middle Ages 
the enumeration of the ‘liberal arts’ brought together things that the 
modern ones would make into both categories. This remark alone would 
suffice to show that art was then something other than what is now con-
ceived under the name, that it implied a real body of knowledge; this 
knowledge could obviously only be of the order of the traditional sci-
ences. 
Only in this way can it be understood that in certain initiatic organi-
zations of the Middle Ages, such as the ‘Fedeli d’Amore,’ the seven ‘lib-
eral arts’ were put in correspondence with the ‘heavens,’ i.e. states that 
identified themselves with the different degrees of initiation.418 This re-
quired that the arts, as well as the sciences, be capable of a transposition 
giving them a real esoteric value; what makes such a transposition pos-
sible is the very nature of traditional knowledge, which, of whatever or-
der they may be, are always essentially attached to the transcendent 
principles. This knowledge thus receives a meaning that can be said to 
be symbolic, since it is based on the correspondence that exists between 
the various orders of reality; what we must insist on is that this is not 
something that would be accidentally added to them, but, on the con-
trary, what constitutes the most profound essence of all normal and le-
gitimate knowledge, and which, as such, is inherent in the sciences and 
arts from their very origin and remains so long as they have not under-
gone any deviation. 
It is not surprising that the arts can be considered from this point of 
view if we observe that the crafts themselves, in their traditional concep-o long as they have not under-
gone any deviation. 
It is not surprising that the arts can be considered from this point of 
view if we observe that the crafts themselves, in their traditional concep-

418 See The Esoterism of Dante, ch. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

346 
The Veil of Isisrts can be considered from this point of 
view if we observe that the crafts themselves, in their traditional concep-

418 See The Esoterism of Dante, ch. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

346 
The Veil of Isis

tion, serve as a basis for initiation, as we have shown on another occa-
sion.419 Moreover, we must recall in this connection what we said then, 
that the distinction between arts and crafts appears to be specifically 
modern and exists only due to the consequence of the same degeneration 
which gave rise to the profane point of view, the latter expressing noth-
ing but the very negation of the traditional spirit. At heart, whether it 
was art or a craft, there was always the application and the implementa-
tion of some knowledge of a superior order to one degree or another that 
was closely related to initiatic knowledge itself; moreover, the direct im-
plementation of initiatic knowledge also received the name art, as we 
clearly see by expressions such as those of the ‘sacerdotal art’ and the 
‘royal art,’ which respectively relate to applications of the ‘greater mys-
teries’ and the ‘lesser mysteries.’ 
If we now consider the arts by giving this word a more restricted and, 
at the same time, a more usual meaning, i.e. what is more precisely called 
the ‘fine arts,’ we can say, according to the preceding, that each must 
constitute a symbolic language adapted to the expression of certain 
truths by means of forms which are, for some, of a visual order, and for 
others, of the auditory or acoustic order, hence their current division into 
two groups, the ‘plastic arts’ and the ‘phonetic arts.’ We have explained 
in previous studies that this distinction, as well as that of two kinds of 
corresponding rites based on these same categories of symbolic forms, 
relate in their origin to the difference that exists between the traditions 
of sedentary peoples and those of nomadic peoples.420 Whether it is arts 
of one or the other kind, it is easy to see in a very general way that they 
have the character that is all the more symbolic since the civilization it-
self is more strictly traditional, for what makes their true value then is 
less what they are in themselves than the possibilities of expression they 
provide beyond what ordinary language is limited to. In short, their pro-
ductions are primarily intended to serve as ‘supports’ for meditations, as 
‘points of support’ for an understanding as profound and extensive as 
possible, which is the very raison d’être for all symbolism;421 everything, 
down to the most minute detail, must be determined by this considera-t’ for an understanding as profound and extensive as 
possible, which is the very raison d’être for all symbolism;421 everything, 
down to the most minute detail, must be determined by this considera-

419 Initiation and Crafts, April 1934. 
420 See Cain and Abel, January 1932, and The Rite and the Symbol, February 1935. 
421 It is the Hindu notion of pratīka, which is no more an ‘idol’ than a work of 
imagination and individual fantasy; these two Western interpretations, some-
how opposing each other, are equally false.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tion of pratīka, which is no more an ‘idol’ than a work of 
imagination and individual fantasy; these two Western interpretations, some-
how opposing each other, are equally false.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
347 
tion and subordination to that purpose, without any unnecessary addi-
tion, without meaning or intended to play a merely ‘decorative’ or ‘or-
namental’ role.422 
We see that such a conception is as far removed as possible from all 
modern and profane theories, whether it be that of ‘art for the purpose 
of art’ for example, which basically amounts to saying that art is what it 
must be when it means nothing, or that of ‘moralizing’ art, which is ob-
viously not worth any more in terms of knowledge. Traditional art is 
certainly not a ‘game,’ as the term is dear to some psychologists, or a way 
to simply provide the man with a kind of special pleasure that is qualified 
as being ‘superior’ without any understanding as to why, because, since 
it is only a question of pleasure, everything is reduced to pure individual 
preferences between which no hierarchy can logically be established; nor 
is it a vain sentimental declaration, for which ordinary language is assur-
edly more than sufficient, without any need for recourse to forms which 
are more or less mysterious or enigmatic, and which is much more com-
plicated than what they would have to express in any case. This is an 
occasion for us to recall the perfect nullity of the ‘moral’ interpretations 
that some claim to attribute to all symbolism, for these are things that 
cannot be overemphasized, including initiatic symbolism properly speak-
ing: if it were only similar trivialities, we do not see why or how we 
would have ever thought of ‘veiling’ them in any way, which they do 
very well when they are stated by profane philosophy, and better than 
simply saying that there is in fact no symbolism or initiation. 
That being said, one may wonder which among the various tradi-
tional sciences are those whose arts are most directly dependent, which, 
naturally, does not exclude that they also have more or less constant re-
lations with others, for everything here is necessarily connected and 
bound in the fundamental doctrine of unity in which the multiplicity of 
its application can in no way destroy or even affect; the conception of 
sciences that are narrowly ‘specialized’ and completely separated from 
each other is clearly anti-traditional, inasmuch as it manifests a defect of 
principle, and is characteristic of the ‘analytic’ mind which inspires and 
governs the profane sciences, while any traditional point of view can 
only be essentially ‘synthetic.’ Subject to this reservation, it can be said 
that what constitutes the very basis of all the arts is principally an appli-
cation of the science of rhythm in its different forms, a science which 
itself is immediately connected with that of numbers; of course, when we 
speak of the science of numbers, it is not a question of profane arithmeticof rhythm in its different forms, a science which 
itself is immediately connected with that of numbers; of course, when we 
speak of the science of numbers, it is not a question of profane arithmetic

422 The degeneration of certain symbols into motifs of ornamentation, because 
we have ceased to understand its meaning, is one of the characteristic features 
of profane deviation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

348 
The Veil of Isiscertain symbols into motifs of ornamentation, because 
we have ceased to understand its meaning, is one of the characteristic features 
of profane deviation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

348 
The Veil of Isis

as is understood by the modern ones, but of that which is best known in 
the examples of the Kabbalah and Pythagorism, and the equivalents 
which exist also under various expressions and with more or less devel-
opment in all the traditional doctrine. 
What we have just said may seem obvious especially for the phonetic 
arts, whose productions are all constituted by ensembles of rhythms un-
folding over time; poetry owes to its rhythmic character to have primi-
tively been the mode of ritual expression of the ‘language of the Gods’ 
or the ‘sacred language’ par excellence,423 a function of which is even 
kept until a time relatively recent to us, when ‘literature’ had not yet 
been invented.424 As for music, it would certainly be pointless to insist 
upon it, and its digital base is still recognized by the modern ones them-
selves, though distorted by the loss of traditional data; formerly, as is 
particularly clear in the Far-East, changes could only be made in music 
in accordance with certain changes occurring in the state of the world 
according to the cyclic periods, because the musical rhythms were inti-
mately bound up with both the human and social order, and the cosmic 
order, and even expressed the relations existing between them in a cer-
tain way; the Pythagorean conception of the ‘harmony of the spheres’ is 
related precisely to the same order of considerations. 
For the plastic arts, whose productions develop in extension in space, 
the same thing may not appear so immediately, and yet it is none the less 
rigorously true; only, the rhythm is then fixed in simultaneity, so to 
speak, instead of taking place in succession as in the previous case. We 
can especially understand this by noting that in this second group the 
typical and fundamental art is architecture, the others, such as sculpting 
and painting, are in fact mere dependencies in their original purpose; 
however, in architecture the rhythm is expressed directly by the propor-
tions existing between the various parts of the ensemble, and also by ge-
ometric forms, which are ultimately, from the point of view that we en-
visage, only the translation into space of numbers and their relation-
ships.425 Here again, geometry must obviously be considered in a verys, which are ultimately, from the point of view that we en-
visage, only the translation into space of numbers and their relation-
ships.425 Here again, geometry must obviously be considered in a very

423 See The Language of Birds, November 1931. 
424 It is curious to note that modern ‘scholars’ have come to apply this word 
‘literature’ to all indistinctly, even to the Sacred Scriptures that they claim to 
study in the same way as all other writings and by the same methods; when they 
speak of ‘Biblical poems’ or ‘Vedic poems,’ while completely disregarding what 
poetry was for the ancients, their intention is still to reduce everything to some-
thing purely human. 
425 In this connection, it should be noted that Plato’s ‘Geometer God’ identifies 
itself properly with Apollo, who presides over all the arts; this, which is also 
directly derived from Pythagorism, has a particular importance with regard to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
349 
different way from that of the profane mathematicians, and whose ante-
riority in relation to this brings the most complete denial to those who 
wish to attribute to this science an ‘empiric’ and utilitarian origin; on the 
other hand, we have here an example of how, as we said above, science 
is linked to the traditional point of view, so much so that one could even 
look at it as being in some way only expressions of the same truths in 
different languages, which is only a natural consequence of the ‘law of 
correspondence’ that is the very foundation of all symbolism. 
However brief and incomplete, these few notions will at least be 
enough to make it understood what is most essential in the traditional 
conception of the arts and what differentiates it most profoundly from 
the profane conception, in its basis as applications of certain sciences, in 
its meaning as various modes of symbolic language, and in its destination 
as means to help man come closer to true knowledge.profane conception, in its basis as applications of certain sciences, in 
its meaning as various modes of symbolic language, and in its destination 
as means to help man come closer to true knowledge.

the filiation of certain traditional Hellenic doctrines and their attachment to a 
‘Hyperborean’ origin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

So-Called Psychic ‘Powers’ 
Des prétendus « pouvoirs » psychiques, May 1935.e filiation of certain traditional Hellenic doctrines and their attachment to a 
‘Hyperborean’ origin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

So-Called Psychic ‘Powers’ 
Des prétendus « pouvoirs » psychiques, May 1935.

In speaking recently of the confusion between the psychic and the spir-
itual, and the attraction of ‘phenomena’ as the primary cause of this er-
ror, we have referred to the case of those who seek so-called ‘powers,’ 
what they call powers is nothing but the faculty of producing more or 
less extraordinary ‘phenomena.’ Indeed, most of the pseudo-esoteric or 
pseudo-initiatic schools of the modern West do not propose anything 
besides it; this is a real obsession for the great majority of their adherents 
who delude themselves about the values of these ‘powers’ to the point of 
taking them as signs of a spiritual development, or even as its culmina-
tion, whereas, even when they are not a mere mirage of the imagination, 
they belong only to the psychic domain and are most often only an ob-
stacle to the acquisition of all true spirituality. 
For some, this illusion is often accompanied by a more or less exces-
sive interest in ‘magic,’ whose cause is still the same passion for ‘phe-
nomena’ which is so characteristic of the Western mentality; here is an-
other mistake that is worthy of note: the truth is that there are no ‘magic 
powers,’ although we meet this expression at every moment, not only in 
those of whom we speak, but also in those who strive to fight their 
tendencies, all being no less ignorant that they are from the essence of 
things. As we have often said, magic is in fact only one science like any 
other and should be treated as such; the phenomena with which it deals, 
strange or exceptional as they may be, are for this reason not any more 
‘transcendent’ than others, all this is purely ‘physical,’ in the proper and 
original meaning of the word. When provoking such phenomena, the 
magician does so by applying the knowledge he has of certain natural 
laws; then there is no extraordinary ‘power,’ any more than there is in 
him who, having studied any science, puts the results into practice. Will 
we say, as an example, that a doctor has ‘powers’ because, knowing 
which remedy is suitable for a particular disease, he cures it by means of 
the remedy in question? Between the magician and the one that has psy-
chic ‘powers,’ there is a difference comparable to that which exists in the 
corporeal order between the one who performs a certain work with the 
help of a machine and the one who realizes it by only the means of the 
strength or ability of his body; both operate well in the same domain, butbetween the one who performs a certain work with the 
help of a machine and the one who realizes it by only the means of the 
strength or ability of his body; both operate well in the same domain, but

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
351 
not in the same way.

On the other hand, whether magic or ‘powers,’ 
there is, we repeat, absolutely nothing spiritual or initiatic; if we mark 
the difference between the two things, it is not that one is worth more 
than the other in our point of view, but it is always necessary to know 
exactly what one is talking about and to dispel the confusion which exists 
in this subject.

In certain individuals, psychic ‘powers’ are something quite sponta-
neous, the effect of a simple natural disposition which develops itself; it 
is quite obvious that in this case there is no point in drawing any vanity 
any more than any other aptitude, since they do not bear witness to any 
desired ‘realization,’ and even the one who bears these powers may not 
even suspect the existence of such a thing: if he has never heard of ‘ini-
tiation,’ he will certainly not come to the idea of believing himself ‘initi-
ated’ because he sees things that everyone does not see, because they 
sometimes have ‘premonitory’ dreams, or because they sometimes heal 
a patient by simple contact, without knowing how this is done them-
selves.

But there is also the case where similar ‘powers’ are acquired or 
artificially developed as the result of certain special ‘training’; this is 
something more dangerous because it rarely goes without causing a cer-
tain imbalance.

At the same time, it is in this case that the illusion occurs 
most easily: there are people who are convinced that they have obtained 
certain ‘powers,’ which are in fact perfectly imaginary, either simply un-
der the influence of their desire and a kind of ‘fixed idea,’ or by the effect 
of a suggestion exerted on them by one of those circles in which such 
‘training’ is usually practiced.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But there is also the case where similar ‘powers’ are acquired or 
artificially developed as the result of certain special ‘training’; this is 
something more dangerous because it rarely goes without causing a cer-
tain imbalance. At the same time, it is in this case that the illusion occurs 
most easily: there are people who are convinced that they have obtained 
certain ‘powers,’ which are in fact perfectly imaginary, either simply un-
der the influence of their desire and a kind of ‘fixed idea,’ or by the effect 
of a suggestion exerted on them by one of those circles in which such 
‘training’ is usually practiced. It is here especially that we speak of ‘ini-
tiation’ by mistake, by identifying it more or less with the acquisition of 
these famous ‘powers’; therefore it is not surprising that weak or igno-
rant minds allow themselves to be so fascinated by such pretensions, so 
that it suffices to reduce the mere observation of the existence of the first 
case of which we have spoken to nothing, since, in this, there are ‘pow-
ers’ which are quite similar, if not even more developed and more au-
thentic, without there being any trace of ‘initiation,’ real or supposed. What is perhaps the most odd and most difficult thing to understand is 
that the possessors of these spontaneous ‘powers,’ if they happen to 
come into contact with these same pseudo-initiatic circles, are sometimes 
led to believe that they too are ‘initiates’; they should certainly know 
better regarding the real character of these faculties, which occur in 
many otherwise very ordinary children to one degree or another, alt-
hough often they quickly disappear afterwards. The only excuse for all 
these illusions is that none who incite them and maintain in themselves 
or others have any notion of what true initiation is; naturally, this does 
not mitigate the danger in any way, either as to the psychic and even

--- PAGE BREAK ---

352 
The Veil of Isisthemselves 
or others have any notion of what true initiation is; naturally, this does 
not mitigate the danger in any way, either as to the psychic and even

--- PAGE BREAK ---

352 
The Veil of Isis

physiologic disturbances which are the usual companion of these sorts 
of things, or as to the more distant but even more serious consequences 
of a development of inferior possibilities which, as we have said before, 
go directly opposite of spirituality. 
It is particularly important to note that the ‘powers’ in question may 
very well coexist with the most complete doctrinal ignorance, as it is all 
too easy to see in most ‘clairvoyants’ and ‘healers,’ for example; this 
alone would sufficiently prove that they do not have the slightest con-
nection with initiation, the aim of which can only be pure knowledge. At 
the same time, it shows that their attainment is devoid of any real inter-
est, since the one who possesses these powers is no more advanced in 
the realization of his own being, a realization which is one with 
knowledge itself; they represent only all contingent and transient acqui-
sitions, exactly comparable in this to the corporeal development, which 
at least does not present the same dangers, and even the few advantages, 
which are no less contingent, which their exercise can bring certainly do 
not compensate for the inconveniences to which we have just alluded. 
Yet these advantages are too often only to astonish and be admired by 
the naïve, or to satisfy other desires which are no less vain and puerile; 
displaying these ‘powers’ is already showing a mentality incompatible 
with all initiation, even at the most basic level. What of those who use it 
to pretend to be ‘grand initiates?’ Let us not insist on this, because it is 
nothing more than charlatanism, even if the ‘powers’ in question are real 
in their order; in fact, it is not the reality of ‘phenomena’ as such that 
matters above all, but rather the value and scope that should be attributed 
to them. 
There is no doubt that even among those whose good faith is incon-
testable, the role of suggestion is great in all this; to convince oneself of 
this, it is only necessary to consider a case such as that of the ‘clairvoy-
ants,’ whose so-called ‘revelations’ are always in accordance with their 
own ideas, those of their milieu, or the school to which they belong. Sup-
pose, however, that these things are real, which is more likely to occur 
when ‘clairvoyance’ is spontaneous than when it has been artificially de-
veloped; even in this case, one does not understand why what is seen or 
heard in the psychic world would have more interest or more importance 
than that in the corporeal world, which everyone can see and hear while 
walking on the street: people whom are unknown or indifferent to him, 
incidents which do not concern him in any way, fragments of incoherent 
or even unintelligible conversations, and so on. The first is more excus-
able to mistake it, for he must have some difficulty in recognizing that 
all his efforts only result in such a derisory result, but, as for the sponta-
neous clairvoyant, this should seem quite natural to him, as it is indeed,must have some difficulty in recognizing that 
all his efforts only result in such a derisory result, but, as for the sponta-
neous clairvoyant, this should seem quite natural to him, as it is indeed,

--- PAGE BREAK ---culty in recognizing that 
all his efforts only result in such a derisory result, but, as for the sponta-
neous clairvoyant, this should seem quite natural to him, as it is indeed,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
353 
and, if it were too often persuaded that it is extraordinary, he would 
never think of worrying more about what he encounters in the psychic 
realm than of its analogue in the corporeal domain, or of looking for the 
marvelous or complicated meanings which is utterly lacking in the vast 
majority of cases. To tell the truth, there is indeed a reason for every-
thing, even the most minute and seemingly indifferent fact, but it matters 
so little to us that we do not take it into account and do not need to look 
into it, at least when it comes to what is commonly called ‘ordinary life,’ 
i.e. events of the corporeal world; if the same rules were observed with 
regard to the psychic world, we would be spared from such ravings! It is 
true that it would require a degree of mental equilibrium, which ‘clair-
voyants’ are unfortunately seldom endowed with, even those that are 
spontaneous, and even more so those who have undergone the psychic 
‘training’ we spoke of above. However that may be, this total ‘disinter-
estedness’ with regard to phenomena is none the less strictly necessary 
for anyone who, being provided with faculties of this kind, nevertheless 
wish to undertake a spiritual realization; as for the one who does not 
have it, far from striving to obtain it, he must, on the contrary, consider 
that it is an advantage for him in view of this same realization, in the 
sense that he will thus have fewer obstacles to discard; we will return to 
this last point next time. 
In sum, the very word ‘powers,’ when so employed, is wrong to evoke 
the idea of a superiority which these things do not entail in anyway; if 
we can accept this, it could only be a mere synonym of ‘faculties,’ which 
has, etymologically, a meaning that is almost identical: there are many 
possibilities of being so, but possibilities that are not ‘transcendent,’ since 
they are entirely of the individual order, and thus are far from the highest 
and the most deserving of attention even in this order. As for attributing 
to them an initiatic value, if only as an auxiliary or preparatory value, 
that would be the opposite of the truth; as this alone counts in our eyes, 
we must say things as they are without any regard to what may please 
or displease anyone. The possessors of psychic ‘powers’ would certainly 
be very wrong to hold us against them, because they would only give us 
even more reason by showing their incomprehension and lack of spirit-
uality: indeed, how could one describe the fact of keeping to an individ-
ual prerogative, or rather to its appearances, to the point of preferring it 
to knowledge and truth any differently?426irit-
uality: indeed, how could one describe the fact of keeping to an individ-
ual prerogative, or rather to its appearances, to the point of preferring it 
to knowledge and truth any differently?426

426 Let it not be opposed to what we said above, that spontaneous ‘powers’ could 
be the result of some initiation received ‘in astral,’ if not in ‘previous existences’; 
when we speak of initiation, we mean only serious things, not phantasmagoria 
of dubious taste.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Rejection of ‘Powers’ 
Le rejet des « pouvoirs », June 1935.ious existences’; 
when we speak of initiation, we mean only serious things, not phantasmagoria 
of dubious taste.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Rejection of ‘Powers’ 
Le rejet des « pouvoirs », June 1935.

In our previous article, we have shown that there is little interest in the 
alleged claims of ‘psychic’ powers and the absence of any relation be-
tween their development and a realization of the spiritual or initiatic or-
der; before departing from this subject, we must still insist that such an 
achievement is truly harmful in most cases rather than just being indif-
ferent. In fact, it constitutes a ‘distraction’ in the strictly etymological 
sense of the word: the man who lets himself be absorbed by the multiple 
activities of the corporeal world will never manage to ‘center’ his con-
sciousness in higher realities, nor, consequently, develop the possibilities 
corresponding to these realities in himself; even more so will he who is 
lost and dispersed in multiplicity of the psychic world with its indefinite 
modes, which is incomparably greater and more varied, will never suc-
ceed in ridding himself of it, especially if he does not realize the value of 
these illusions that do not involve the exercise of corporeal activities. 
Therefore anyone who has the will to depart on an initiatic path, not 
only must they never seek to acquire or develop these famous ‘powers,’ 
but must, even if they are spontaneous and accidentally developed, re-
move them pitilessly as obstacles diverting him from the single goal he 
is aiming for. It is not necessary to see there necessarily, as some might 
readily believe, ‘temptations’ or ‘diabolic tricks’ in the literal sense; there 
is nevertheless something that, as we explained when we spoke of the 
question of initiatic ‘trials,’ the ‘profane’ world, by which we must un-
derstand as the whole ensemble of both the psychic and corporeal do-
mains, seem to try every means to retain the one who aims to escape it. 
There is, then, a reaction of adverse forces, which, like many difficulties 
of another order, can only be due to a kind of unconscious hostility from 
the milieu. Of course, since man cannot isolate himself completely from 
this milieu and make himself completely independent until he has 
reached the goal, this does not exclude that these manifestations are at 
the same time the very natural, though accidental, results of the internal 
work in which he engages, and whose external repercussions sometimes 
take the most unexpected forms, far surpassing all that might be imag-
ined by those who have not had the opportunity to realize for themselves.he engages, and whose external repercussions sometimes 
take the most unexpected forms, far surpassing all that might be imag-
ined by those who have not had the opportunity to realize for themselves.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
355 
On the other hand, even those who naturally possess certain psychic 
faculties are thereby, as we have already said, at a certain disadvantage 
with regard to their spiritual development; not only is it essential that 
they totally lose interest and attach no importance to it, but it may even 
be necessary for them to reduce the exercise to a minimum, if not to sup-
press it altogether.

In fact, it is advisable to restrict the use of the corpo-
real sense as much as possible, at least during certain more or less pro-
longed periods, in order to not be distracted from them, the same is 
equally true of these psychic faculties; moreover, while man could not 
live if he stopped the exercise of his senses completely and indefinitely, 
there is obviously no such thing in other cases, and no serious inconven-
ience can result from this ‘inhibition.’ On the contrary, the being can 
only benefit in terms of his organic and mental equilibrium, and conse-
quently find himself in better conditions to undertake developments of 
possibilities of a superior order, without risking being confused by a 
more or less pathologic and abnormal state.

The producers of extraordinary ‘phenomena’ are, in most cases, be-
ings inferior in respect of the intellectual and spiritual, or entirely devi-
ated by the special ‘training’ to which they are subjected; it is easy to 
understand that he who has spent a part of his life exclusively practicing 
the production of some ‘phenomena’ has become incapable of anything 
else, and that the possibilities of another order are now irremediably 
closed.In fact, it is advisable to restrict the use of the corpo-
real sense as much as possible, at least during certain more or less pro-
longed periods, in order to not be distracted from them, the same is 
equally true of these psychic faculties; moreover, while man could not 
live if he stopped the exercise of his senses completely and indefinitely, 
there is obviously no such thing in other cases, and no serious inconven-
ience can result from this ‘inhibition.’ On the contrary, the being can 
only benefit in terms of his organic and mental equilibrium, and conse-
quently find himself in better conditions to undertake developments of 
possibilities of a superior order, without risking being confused by a 
more or less pathologic and abnormal state.

The producers of extraordinary ‘phenomena’ are, in most cases, be-
ings inferior in respect of the intellectual and spiritual, or entirely devi-
ated by the special ‘training’ to which they are subjected; it is easy to 
understand that he who has spent a part of his life exclusively practicing 
the production of some ‘phenomena’ has become incapable of anything 
else, and that the possibilities of another order are now irremediably 
closed.

This is what generally happens to those who yield to the attrac-
tion of the psychic domain: even if they had first undertaken a work of 
initiatic realization, they are then stopped on this path and will not go 
any further, they are happy if they stay there and do not allow them-
selves to be carried away little by little in the direction which, as we have 
explained previously, leads properly away from spirituality and can only 
ultimately lead to ‘disintegration’ of the conscious being; however, even 
leaving aside this extreme case, the mere pausing of all spiritual devel-
opment is already a rather serious consequence in itself and which 
should give food for thought to those who are completely blinded by the 
illusions of the ‘intermediate world.’ 
It may be objected that there are authentic initiatic organizations that 
exercise certain individuals for the development of these ‘powers,’ but 
the truth is that, in this case, the individuals in question are those in 
whom initiatic ‘qualifications’ are lacking, and who, at the same time, 
anoint special aptitudes in the psychic order, as this is all they are capable 
of.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The producers of extraordinary ‘phenomena’ are, in most cases, be-
ings inferior in respect of the intellectual and spiritual, or entirely devi-
ated by the special ‘training’ to which they are subjected; it is easy to 
understand that he who has spent a part of his life exclusively practicing 
the production of some ‘phenomena’ has become incapable of anything 
else, and that the possibilities of another order are now irremediably 
closed. This is what generally happens to those who yield to the attrac-
tion of the psychic domain: even if they had first undertaken a work of 
initiatic realization, they are then stopped on this path and will not go 
any further, they are happy if they stay there and do not allow them-
selves to be carried away little by little in the direction which, as we have 
explained previously, leads properly away from spirituality and can only 
ultimately lead to ‘disintegration’ of the conscious being; however, even 
leaving aside this extreme case, the mere pausing of all spiritual devel-
opment is already a rather serious consequence in itself and which 
should give food for thought to those who are completely blinded by the 
illusions of the ‘intermediate world.’ 
It may be objected that there are authentic initiatic organizations that 
exercise certain individuals for the development of these ‘powers,’ but 
the truth is that, in this case, the individuals in question are those in 
whom initiatic ‘qualifications’ are lacking, and who, at the same time, 
anoint special aptitudes in the psychic order, as this is all they are capable 
of. Moreover, under such conditions, psychic development is guided and 
controlled so as to present the minimum of inconveniences and dangers; 
these beings even benefit from the bond that is thus established with a 
traditional organization, albeit at an inferior level, and this, for its part,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

356 
The Veil of Isisers; 
these beings even benefit from the bond that is thus established with a 
traditional organization, albeit at an inferior level, and this, for its part,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

356 
The Veil of Isis

can use them for purposes of which they themselves will not be aware, 
not because it is deliberately concealed from them, but because they 
would be utterly incapable of understanding it given the limitation of 
their possibilities. 
It goes without saying that the dangers of which we have just spoken 
no longer exist for those who have reached a certain degree of initiatic 
realization; one can even say that he has all the ‘powers’ implicitly, with-
out having to develop them in any particular way, because he dominates 
the forces of the physical world ‘from above,’ but, in general, he does not 
exercise them, because he no longer has any interest in them. In a similar 
way, the one who has penetrated certain traditional sciences in their 
deepest essence is also totally indifferent to their application and never 
makes any use of them; pure knowledge is sufficient, and it is really the 
only thing that matters, all the rest being mere contingencies. Moreover, 
all manifestations of these things are necessarily a ‘descent’ in a sense, 
even if this is only apparent and cannot affect the being itself; it must not 
be forgotten that the unmanifest is superior to the manifest, and that, 
consequently, the fact of remaining in this ‘non-manifestation’ will be, if 
one may say, the most adequate expression of the state that the being 
has realized internally. This is what some people symbolize when saying 
‘the night is preferable to the day,’ and it is also what is represented by 
the figure of the turtle hidden inside its shell. Consequently, if it happens 
that such a being manifests certain ‘powers,’ it will only be in quite ex-
ceptional cases and for particular reasons which will necessary escape 
the appreciation of the external world, which are naturally totally differ-
ent reasons from those which the ordinary producers of ‘phenomena’ 
may have; apart from these cases, its only mode of action will be what 
the Far Eastern tradition designates as the ‘non-acting activity,’ which is 
precisely because of its character of non-manifestation, the very pleni-
tude of activity. 
In this connection, we shall recall the perfect insignificance of phe-
nomena that is quite similar but proceeding from very different causes, 
and which are not of the same order; thus, it is easily conceivable that 
the being who has a high spiritual degree, if he has occasional cause of 
any phenomenon, will not act in the same way as the one who has ac-
quired the faculty as a result of psychic ‘training,’ and that its action will 
be exercised according to all other modes. The comparison between ‘the-
urgy’ and ‘magic’ would also give rise to the same remark. This truth 
should be easily recognized even by those who stick to the purely ‘exo-
teric’ domain, because, although many cases of ‘levitation’ or ‘biloca-
tion,’ for example, can be found in the history of saints, it is certainly as 
much in the history of sorcerers; the appearances are exactly the same inalthough many cases of ‘levitation’ or ‘biloca-
tion,’ for example, can be found in the history of saints, it is certainly as 
much in the history of sorcerers; the appearances are exactly the same in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
357 
both, but no one will conclude that the causes are also the same. From 
the purely theological point of view, of two similar facts in all points, one 
may be considered a miracle, while the other will not be, and to discern 
them it will be necessary to resort to marks of another order independent 
of the facts themselves; from a natural point of view, we could say that a 
fact will be a miracle if it is due to the action of a spiritual influence, and 
that it will not be so if it is due only to that of a psychic influence. This 
is illustrated particularly clear by the struggle of Moses and the magi-
cians of Pharaoh, who also represents that of the respective powers of 
initiation and counter-initiation; it is well understood that, as we have 
already had occasion to explain, counter-initiation can only exert its ac-
tion in the psychic domain, and all that is of the spiritual domain is ab-
solutely forbidden from them by its very nature. 
We think we have now said enough on this subject, and if we have 
insisted so much on it, it is because we have seen the necessity of it all 
too often. To conclude in a few words, we will say that initiation should 
not aim at acquiring ‘powers’ which, like the very world in which they 
are exercised, ultimately belong only to the domain of the ‘Great Illu-
sion’; for the man in the process of spiritual development, it is not a ques-
tion of attaching himself even more strongly to it by new bonds, but, on 
the contrary, of freeing himself from it, and this liberation cannot be ob-
tained by anything except Knowledge alone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Errors Concerning Initiation 
De quelques erreurs concernant l’initiation, July 1935.lf from it, and this liberation cannot be ob-
tained by anything except Knowledge alone.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Some Errors Concerning Initiation 
De quelques erreurs concernant l’initiation, July 1935.

Although we have already pointed out in our previous articles that there 
are many errors regarding the nature and purpose of initiation, it is not 
superfluous to insist even more on some of these points, for all that we 
have had occasion to read on this subject brings us almost every day new 
proof of a general misunderstanding. Naturally, we cannot think of 
pointing out all these errors one by one and in detail, which would be 
too tedious and uninteresting; it is better to confine ourselves to consid-
ering certain ‘typical’ cases, which has the advantage of dispensing us 
from making direct allusions to a particular author or school at the same 
time, since it must be understood that these remarks have a scope quite 
independent of any question of ‘personalities.’ 
We will recall first, but without insisting upon it, the conceptions ac-
cording to which initiation is something of the merely ‘moral’ or ‘social’ 
order; these are too limited and ‘terrestrial,’ and the grossest error is al-
ways far from the most dangerous. We will only say, to put an end to all 
confusion in this regard, that such conceptions do not even really apply 
to the first part of initiation which antiquity designated by the name 
‘lesser mysteries’; these concern human individualities in the integral de-
velopment of its possibilities, therefore beyond the corporeal mode 
whose activity is exercised in the domain which is common to all men. 
We do not see what the value or even the raison d’être of an alleged ini-
tiation which would be limited to repeating, by disguising it in a more or 
less enigmatic form, what is most banal in profane education, which is 
most vulgarly ‘within the reach of everyone.’ Anyway, we have no in-
tention of denying that initiatic knowledge can have applications in the 
social order, as in any order, but this is a very different question: first, 
these contingent applications do not constitute the object of initiation; 
second, they have in themselves a very different character from what we 
have just spoken of, because they start from principles which have noth-
ing to do with the precepts of current ‘morality,’ and they proceed by 
means elusive to the profane by virtue of the very nature of things; it is 
therefore far from what someone in a recent article called “the preoccu-
pation with living properly”!and they proceed by 
means elusive to the profane by virtue of the very nature of things; it is 
therefore far from what someone in a recent article called “the preoccu-
pation with living properly”!

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
359 
The subtlest, and hence most formidable, errors occur when one 
speaks with regard to initiation of a ‘communication’ with higher states 
or ‘spiritual worlds,’ and there is all too often the illusion of taking as 
‘superior’ what is not really true here.

We should repeat here all that we 
have already said about the confusion between the psychic and the spir-
itual, because it is this one that is most frequently committed in this re-
gard: the ‘psychic’ states are not ‘superior’ or ‘transcendent’ since they 
are part of the individual human state; when we speak of the higher 
states of being, without any abuse of language, we exclusively mean su-
pra-individual states.

Some even go further in this confusion and take for 
‘spiritual’ all that does not fall under the ordinary and ‘normal’ senses; 
we have even seen the so-called ‘etheric’ world, i.e.

simply the subtlest 
part of the corporeal world, qualified as such!

In these conditions, it is to 
be highly feared that the ‘communication’ in question may be reduced to 
‘clairvoyance,’ to ‘clairaudience,’ or the exercise of some other psychic 
faculty of the same kind and no less insignificant, even when it is real.

This is what happens almost always in fact, and basically all the pseudo-
initiatic schools of the modern West are more or less at this point; we 
have said enough on this subject before that there is no longer any need 
to insist on it, because it must be too obvious that all this has absolutely 
nothing to do with true initiation for any who has followed our exposés.

But this is not all: let us admit that, in the thinking of some, it is really 
a communication with the higher states; it will not suffice to characterize 
it as initiation yet.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is what happens almost always in fact, and basically all the pseudo-
initiatic schools of the modern West are more or less at this point; we 
have said enough on this subject before that there is no longer any need 
to insist on it, because it must be too obvious that all this has absolutely 
nothing to do with true initiation for any who has followed our exposés. But this is not all: let us admit that, in the thinking of some, it is really 
a communication with the higher states; it will not suffice to characterize 
it as initiation yet. Indeed, such communication is also established by 
rites of the purely exoteric order, especially by religious rites; it should 
not be forgotten that, in this case also, ‘spiritual influences’ truly come 
into play, although for purposes quite different from those related to the 
initiatic domain. The intervention of a ‘non-human’ element can define, 
in a general way, everything that is authentically traditional; the pres-
ence of this common character is not a sufficient reason to not make nec-
essary distinctions, and in particular to confuse the religious domain and 
the initiatic domain, or even to consider between them a simple differ-
ence of degree at most, whereas there is really a difference of nature, and 
even, we may say, of a profound nature. This confusion is very common 
among those who claim to study initiation ‘from the outside,’ with in-
tentions that can be very diverse; therefore it is indispensable to de-
nounce it expressly: esoterism is not the ‘inner’ part of a religion as such, 
even when it takes its base and its point of support in it as happens in 
certain traditional forms; nor is initiation a kind of special religion re-
served for a minority, as some seem to imagine, for example, those who 
speak of ancient mysteries by calling them ‘religious.’ It is not possible

--- PAGE BREAK ---

360 
The Veil of Isisfor us to develop all the differences that separate the religious and initi-
atic domains here, which would take us very far, but it will suffice to 
make it clear that religion considers being only in the individual human 
state and is not intended to draw it out, but, on the contrary, to ensure 
the most favorable conditions in this very state, while initiation is essen-
tially aimed at exceeding the possibilities of this state and making it pos-
sible for the passage to the higher states, and even, finally, to lead beyond 
any conditioned state whatsoever.

With regard to initiation, it follows from this that mere communica-
tion with the higher states cannot be regarded as an end, but only as a 
starting point: if this communication is to be established first of all by the 
action of a ‘spiritual influence,’ it is to then allow an effective acquisition 
of these states, and not simply, as in the religious order, to bring down a 
‘grace’ on the being which connects it in a certain way while not pene-
trating it.

To express this in a way that may be more easily understand-
able, we will say that if, for example, someone can come into contact with 
the angels without ceasing to be locked up in his own individual and 
human conditions, he will not be further advanced from the initiatic 
point of view; here it is not a question of communicating with other be-
ings who are in an ‘angelic’ state, but of attaining and realizing oneself 
as such in a supra-individual state, not, of course, as being human, which 
would obviously be absurd, but as being manifested as human in a certain 
state which also has in itself the possibilities of all other states.With regard to initiation, it follows from this that mere communica-
tion with the higher states cannot be regarded as an end, but only as a 
starting point: if this communication is to be established first of all by the 
action of a ‘spiritual influence,’ it is to then allow an effective acquisition 
of these states, and not simply, as in the religious order, to bring down a 
‘grace’ on the being which connects it in a certain way while not pene-
trating it.

To express this in a way that may be more easily understand-
able, we will say that if, for example, someone can come into contact with 
the angels without ceasing to be locked up in his own individual and 
human conditions, he will not be further advanced from the initiatic 
point of view; here it is not a question of communicating with other be-
ings who are in an ‘angelic’ state, but of attaining and realizing oneself 
as such in a supra-individual state, not, of course, as being human, which 
would obviously be absurd, but as being manifested as human in a certain 
state which also has in itself the possibilities of all other states.

All initi-
atic realization is therefore essentially and purely ‘internal,’ contrary to 
this ‘exit of the self’ which constitutes ‘ecstasy’ in the proper and etymo-
logical sense of the word; this is certainly not the only difference, but at 
least one of the great differences which exist between the ‘mystic’ states, 
which belong entirely to the religious domain, and the initiatic states.

It is here that we must always come back to at last, because the con-
fusion of the initiatic point of view with the mystic point of view is that 
which is most frequently committed, and in a way which does not seem 
always completely involuntary, the most serious ‘deniers’ of esoterism, 
we mean the religious exoterists who refuse to admit anything beyond 
their own domain, consider this assimilation or ‘annexation’ more clever 
than a brutish negation.360 
The Veil of Isis

All initi-
atic realization is therefore essentially and purely ‘internal,’ contrary to 
this ‘exit of the self’ which constitutes ‘ecstasy’ in the proper and etymo-
logical sense of the word; this is certainly not the only difference, but at 
least one of the great differences which exist between the ‘mystic’ states, 
which belong entirely to the religious domain, and the initiatic states. It is here that we must always come back to at last, because the con-
fusion of the initiatic point of view with the mystic point of view is that 
which is most frequently committed, and in a way which does not seem 
always completely involuntary, the most serious ‘deniers’ of esoterism, 
we mean the religious exoterists who refuse to admit anything beyond 
their own domain, consider this assimilation or ‘annexation’ more clever 
than a brutish negation. To tell the truth, this is a rather new attitude, or 
one which at least has become very general in recent years; to disguise 
the most clearly initiatic Oriental doctrines as ‘mysticism’ has been a 
particularly urgent task of theirs, we do not have to look for the reasons 
for doing so, but only to notice this fact, of which we have already had 
the opportunity to report. However, in the religious sphere, there would 
be something which might be better suited to a rapprochement, or rather 
to an appearance of rapprochement in certain respects: this is what we

--- PAGE BREAK ---n the religious sphere, there would 
be something which might be better suited to a rapprochement, or rather 
to an appearance of rapprochement in certain respects: this is what we

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
361 
call the term ‘ascetic,’ because at least there is an ‘active’ method, instead 
of the absence of method and the ‘passivity’ that characterizes mysticism, 
but it goes without saying that these similarities are entirely external, 
and, on the other hand, this ‘ascetic’ perhaps only has goals too visibly 
limited to be advantageously used in this way, while with mysticism you 
never know exactly where you are going, and this very vagueness is cer-
tainly conducive to confusion. Only those who engage in this deliberate 
work, not those who follow them more or less unconsciously, seem to 
suspect that there is nothing vague or nebulous in all that relates to ini-
tiation, but, on the contrary, it deals with very precise and ‘positive’ 
things; all that we can present here shows it sufficiently, and besides, 
when we spoke of the conditions of initiation, we have explicitly indi-
cated the reasons why it is incompatible with mysticism. The question 
probably has other aspects which we will perhaps return someday; for 
the moment we must be content with having once more underlined this 
particularly insidious character of this confusion, which is calculated to 
deceive minds that would not allow themselves to be caught up in the 
grosser deformations of the modern pseudo-initiation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Hindu Theory of the Five Elements 
La théorie hindoue des cinq éléments, August-September 1935.s to be caught up in the 
grosser deformations of the modern pseudo-initiation.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Hindu Theory of the Five Elements 
La théorie hindoue des cinq éléments, August-September 1935.

We know that in the Hindu doctrine the ‘cosmological’ point of view is 
represented principally by the Vaiśeṣika and, in another aspect, by the 
Sāṃkhya, which can be characterized respectively as ‘analytic’ and ‘syn-
thetic.’ The name Vaiśeṣika is derived from viśeṣa, which means ‘distinc-
tive character’ and, consequently, ‘individual thing’; it therefore properly 
designates the branch of the doctrine that applies to the knowledge of 
things in distinctive and individual fashion. This point of view is the one 
that corresponds most precisely to what the Greeks, especially in the 
‘pre-Socratic’ period, called ‘physical philosophy,’ being subject to the 
differences which the respective modes of thought of two peoples neces-
sarily entail. However, we prefer to use the term ‘cosmology’ to avoid 
any equivocation and to better mark the profound difference between 
what we are dealing with here and the physics of the moderns; indeed, 
this is how cosmology was understood in the Western Middle Ages. 
Understanding in its object that which relates to sensory or corporeal 
things, which are eminently of the individual order, Vaiśeṣika deal with 
the theory of the elements, which are the constitutive principles of the 
bodies, with more detail than other branches of the doctrines; however, 
it must be remarked that we are obliged to appeal to the latter, especially 
to Sāṃkhya, when it comes to the question of what are the most univer-
sal principles from which these elements proceed. According to the 
Hindu doctrine, these are five in number; they are called bhūta in San-
skrit, a word derived from the verbal root bhū, which means ‘to be,’ but 
more particularly in the sense of ‘to subsist,’ i.e. that which designates 
the manifested being considered in its ‘substantial’ aspect (the ‘essential’ 
aspect being expressed by the root as). Consequently, a certain idea of 
‘becoming’ also is attached to this word, because it is on the side of ‘sub-
stance’ that the root of all ‘becoming’ is, as opposed to the immutability 
of the ‘essence’; it is in this sense that Prakṛti or the ‘Universal Substance’ 
can be appropriately designated as ‘Nature,’ a word which, like its Greek 
equivalent phusis, precisely implies everything above by its etymological 
derivation and the very idea of ‘to become.’ The elements are therefore 
regarded as substantial determinations, or, in other words, as modifica-recisely implies everything above by its etymological 
derivation and the very idea of ‘to become.’ The elements are therefore 
regarded as substantial determinations, or, in other words, as modifica-

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
363 
tions of Prakṛti, modifications which have only a purely accidental char-
acter in relation to this one, such as corporeal existence itself, as a mode 
defined by a certain set of determined conditions which is nothing more 
than a mere accident in relation to the Universal Existence envisaged in 
its entirety.

If we now consider the ‘essence’ correlatively to the ‘substance’ in the 
being, these two aspects being complementary to each other and corre-
sponding to what we can call the two poles of the universal manifesta-
tion, which amounts to saying that they are the respective expressions 
of Puruṣa and Prakṛti in this manifestation, it will be necessary for these 
substantial determinations which are the five corporeal elements to cor-
respond to an equal number of essential determinations or of ‘elementary 
essences,’ which are, one could say, the ‘archetypes,’ the ideal or ‘formal’ 
principles in the Aristotelian sense of the latter word, which no longer 
belong to the corporeal domain, but that of the subtle manifestation.

Sāṃkhya considers in this fact five elementary essences, which have re-
ceived the name tanmātra: this term literally means a ‘measure’ or an 
‘assignment’ delimiting the proper domain of a certain quality or ‘quid-
dity’ in the Universal Existence.

It goes without saying that these 
tanmātra, by the very fact that they are of the subtle order, are in no way 
perceptible by the senses as the corporeal elements and their combina-
tions; they are only ‘conceivable’ ideally, and they cannot receive partic-
ular designations except by analogy with the different orders of sensible 
qualities which correspond to them, since it is the quality which here is 
the contingent expression of the essence.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Sāṃkhya considers in this fact five elementary essences, which have re-
ceived the name tanmātra: this term literally means a ‘measure’ or an 
‘assignment’ delimiting the proper domain of a certain quality or ‘quid-
dity’ in the Universal Existence. It goes without saying that these 
tanmātra, by the very fact that they are of the subtle order, are in no way 
perceptible by the senses as the corporeal elements and their combina-
tions; they are only ‘conceivable’ ideally, and they cannot receive partic-
ular designations except by analogy with the different orders of sensible 
qualities which correspond to them, since it is the quality which here is 
the contingent expression of the essence. In fact, they are usually re-
ferred to by the very names of these qualities: auditory or sound (śabda), 
tangible (sparśa), visible (rūpa, with the double meaning of form and 
color), sapid (rasa), olfactory (gandha); but we say that these designations 
should be taken only as analogical, because these qualities can be con-
sidered here only in the principal state and ‘non-developed’ in a way, 
since it is only by the bhūta that they will be, as we shall see, actually 
manifested in the sensory order. The conception of tanmātra is necessary 
when we want to relate the notion of elements to the principles of Uni-
versal Existence, to which it is still related, but this time on the ‘substan-
tial’ side by another order of considerations of which we will have to 
speak later: on the other hand, this conception obviously does not have 
to intervene when one confines oneself to the study of individual exist-
ences and, as such, sensory qualities, and that is why it is undoubtfully a 
question of Vaiśeṣika, which, by definition, is placed precisely in this last 
point of view. We will recall that the five elements recognized by the Hindu doctrine 
are the following: ākāśa, ether; vāyu, air; tejas, fire; ap, water; pṛthvī,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

364 
The Veil of Isisof view. We will recall that the five elements recognized by the Hindu doctrine 
are the following: ākāśa, ether; vāyu, air; tejas, fire; ap, water; pṛthvī,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

364 
The Veil of Isis

earth. This order is that of their development or their differentiation from 
the ether, which is the primordial element; it is always in this order that 
they are enumerated in all the texts of the Veda where it is mentioned, 
especially in the passages of the Chāndogy-Upaniṣad and Taittirīya-
Upaniṣad where their genesis is described, and their order of resorption 
or return to the undifferentiated state is naturally the opposite of this. 
On the other hand, each element corresponds to a sensory quality which 
is regarded as its own quality, that which essentially manifests its nature 
and by which this is known to us; the correspondence thus established 
between the five elements and the five senses is as follows: ether to hear-
ing (stotra), air to touch (tvac), fire to sight (cakṣus), water to taste 
(rasanā), earth to smell (ghrāṇa), the order of development of the senses 
being also that of the elements to which they are linked and on which 
they directly depend, and this order is, of course, in conformity with that 
in which we have already enumerated the sensory qualities by relating 
them principally to the tanmātras. Moreover, any quality which is man-
ifested in an element is equally so in the following, no longer as their 
proper belonging, but in so far as they proceed from the preceding ele-
ments; it would be contradictory indeed to suppose that the very process 
of the development of the manifestation, thus gradually taking place, can 
lead at a later stage to the return to the unmanifested state of which has 
already been developed in stages of lesser differentiation. 
Before going further, we can, with regard to the number of elements 
and their order of derivation, as well as their correspondence with the 
sensory qualities, point out certain important differences with the theo-
ries of these Greek ‘philosophic physicists’ to which we alluded at the 
beginning. First, most of them have admitted only four elements, not rec-
ognizing the ether as a separate element; in this, curious enough, they 
agree with the Jains and the Buddhists, who are in opposition on this 
with orthodox Hindu doctrine, as is the case with many other points. 
However, we must make some exceptions, especially with Empedocles 
who admitted the five elements, but developed them in the following or-
der: ether, fire, earth, water, and air, which seems difficult to justify; 
again, according to some,427 this philosopher also would have admitted 
only four elements, which are then enumerated in a different order; 
earth, water, air, and fire. This last order is exactly the opposite as found 
in Plato; so, it may be necessary to no longer see the order of production 
of the elements, but on the contrary their order of resorption into one 
another. According to various accounts, the Orphics and the Pythagore-
ans recognized the five elements, which is perfectly normal given the 
strictly traditional character of their doctrines; later, Aristotle admittedto various accounts, the Orphics and the Pythagore-
ans recognized the five elements, which is perfectly normal given the 
strictly traditional character of their doctrines; later, Aristotle admitted

427 Karl Ludwig Struve, De Elementis Empedoclis. (Dorpati: M. G. Grenzii, 1805).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
365 
them; in any case, the role of the ether has never been so important or so 
clearly defined among the Greeks as among the Hindus, at least in their 
exoteric schools. In spite of certain texts of Phaedon and Timaeus, which 
are undoubtedly of Pythagorean inspiration, Plato generally only consid-
ers four elements: for him, fire and earth are the extreme elements, air 
and water are the mean elements, and this order differs from the tradi-
tional order of the Hindus in that air and fire are interchanged; one may 
wonder if there is not a confusion between the order of production, if it 
is indeed really the same as Plato himself wanted to hear, and a distribu-
tion according to what one would call degrees of subtlety, which we will 
find again. Plato agrees with the Hindu doctrine by attributing visibility 
to fire as its own quality, but departs from it by attributing tangibility to 
earth, instead of attributing it to air. It seems rather difficult to find a 
rigorously established correspondence between the elements and the 
sensory qualities among the Greeks; it is easy to understand that this is 
so, because, considering only four elements, one should immediately per-
ceive a gap in this correspondence, the number of five uniformly regard-
ing the senses everywhere.to understand that this is 
so, because, considering only four elements, one should immediately per-
ceive a gap in this correspondence, the number of five uniformly regard-
ing the senses everywhere.

In Aristotle we find considerations of a very different character, in 
which there is also a question of qualities, but which are not the properly 
alleged sensory qualities; these considerations are in fact based on the 
combinations of hot and cold, which are respectively principles of expan-
sion and condensation, with the dry and the wet; fire is hot and dry, air 
is hot and humid, water is cold and wet, ground is cold and dry. The 
groupings of these four qualities, which are opposed two by two, there-
fore concern only the four ordinary elements, to the exclusion of the 
ether, which is justified by the remark that this, as the primordial ele-
ment, must contain within itself sets of opposites or complementary

--- PAGE BREAK ---

366 
The Veil of Isisclusion of the 
ether, which is justified by the remark that this, as the primordial ele-
ment, must contain within itself sets of opposites or complementary

--- PAGE BREAK ---

366 
The Veil of Isis

qualities, thus coexisting in the neutral state insofar as it perfectly bal-
ances one with the other prior to their differentiation, which can be re-
garded as resulting precisely from a break in this original equilibrium. 
The ether must therefore be represented as situated at the point where 
the oppositions do not yet exist, but from which they occur, i.e., in the 
center of the cruciform figure whose branches correspond to the other 
four elements; this representation is indeed that adopted by the Hermet-
ists of the Middle Ages, who expressly recognize the ether under the 
name ‘quintessence’ (quinta essentia), which implies an enumeration of 
the elements in an ascending order, or regressive, i.e., inverse to that of 
their production, for otherwise the ether would be the first element and 
not the fifth. It may also be remarked that it is in reality a ‘substance’ and 
not an ‘essence,’ in this regard the expression used shows a frequent con-
fusion in medieval Latin terminology, where the distinction between ‘es-
sence’ and ‘substance,’ in the sense that we have indicated, seems to have 
never been made very clearly, as we can only too easily realize in scho-
lastic philosophy.428 
While we are at these comparisons, we must still, on the other hand, 
warn against a false assimilation which sometimes arises in the Chinese 
doctrine, where we find something that is also ordinarily called the ‘five 
elements’; these are enumerated thus: water, wood, fire, earth, metal, this 
order being considered, in this case again, as that of their production. 
What can be deceptive is that the number is the same on both sides, and 
that, out of five terms, three have equivalent denominations, but what 
could the other two correspond to, and how to make the order indicated 
here coincide with that of the Hindu doctrine.429 The truth is that, not-
withstanding the apparent similarities, this is an entirely different point 
of view, which would be irrelevant to examine here; to avoid confusion, 
it would certainly be much better to translate the Chinese word wǔxíngarent similarities, this is an entirely different point 
of view, which would be irrelevant to examine here; to avoid confusion, 
it would certainly be much better to translate the Chinese word wǔxíng

428 In the figure at the lead of Leibnitz’s Dissertatio de Arte Combinatoria, which 
reflects the Hermetists’ conception, the ‘quintessence’ is figured in the center of 
the cross of the elements (or, if we want the double cross of elements and qual-
ities), by a rose with five petals, thus forming the Rosicrucian symbol. The ex-
pression quinta essentia can also be related to the ‘fivefold nature of the ether,’ 
which must be understood not as five different ‘ethers’ as some moderns have 
imagined (which is in contradiction with the indifferentiation of the primordial 
element), but of the ether envisaged in itself and as a principle of the four other 
elements; this is the alchemical interpretation of this five-petal rose which we 
have just spoken of. 
429 These ‘five elements’ are also arranged according to a cruciform figure 
formed by the double opposition of water and fire, wood and metal, but here the 
center is occupied by the earth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---‘five elements’ are also arranged according to a cruciform figure 
formed by the double opposition of water and fire, wood and metal, but here the 
center is occupied by the earth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
367 
into something other than ‘elements,’ for example, as it was proposed,430 
into ‘agents,’ which is closer to its real meaning. 
These remarks being made, we must now reject first, if we wish to 
specify the notion of the elements without insisting on it at length, sev-
eral erroneous opinions fairly commonly spread about this subject in our 
time. First of all, it is scarcely necessary to say, if the elements are the 
constitutive principles of the bodies, it is in a very different sense than 
that in which the chemists envisage the constitution of these bodies, 
when they regard them as resulting of the combination of certain ‘simple 
bodies’ or things self-styled as such: on the one hand, the multiplicity of 
the so-called simple bodies clearly oppose this assimilation, and, on the 
other hand, it is by no means proven that there are really simple bodies, 
this name being only given to those which chemists cannot decompose. 
In any case, the elements are not simple bodies, but the substantial prin-
ciples from which bodies are formed; we must not be deceived by the fact 
that they are designated analogically by names which may be at the same 
time those of certain bodies, to which they are in no way identical for 
that purpose, and every body, whatever it may be, proceeds in fact from 
all five elements, although in its nature there may be a certain predomi-
nance of one or the other. 
More recently, what has been attempted is the assimilation of ele-
ments to the different physical states of matter as modern physicists un-
derstand it, i.e., in sum to its different degrees of condensation, occurring 
from the homogeneous primordial ether, which fills the whole extant, 
uniting together all the parts of the corporeal world. From this point of 
view, from the densest to the most subtle, i.e., in an order opposite to 
their differentiation, we make a correspondence between the earth and 
the solid state, water and the liquid state, air and the gaseous state, and 
fire to an even more rare state, quite similar to what some physicists have 
called the ‘radiant state,’ and which should then be distinguished from 
the etheric state. We find there the vain concern which is so common 
nowadays, to accord traditional ideas with profane scientific concep-
tions; this is not to say that such a point of view cannot contain any part 
of truth, in the sense that we may admit that each of these physical states 
has certain more particular relations with a certain element, but this is 
nothing more than a correspondence and not an assimilation, which 
would be incompatible with the constant coexistence of all the elements 
in any body, whatever state presents itself. It would be even less legiti-
mate to want to go further than to pretend to identify the elements with 
the sensory qualities which, from another point of view, are connecteder state presents itself. It would be even less legiti-
mate to want to go further than to pretend to identify the elements with 
the sensory qualities which, from another point of view, are connected

430 Marcel Granet, La Pensée chinoise. (Paris: La Renaissance du livre, 1934), p. 
313.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

368 
The Veil of Isise sensory qualities which, from another point of view, are connected

430 Marcel Granet, La Pensée chinoise. (Paris: La Renaissance du livre, 1934), p. 
313.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

368 
The Veil of Isis

with them much more directly. On the other hand, the order of increas-
ing condensation thus established between the elements is the same as 
that which we have found in Plato: he places fire before air and immedi-
ately after ether, as if it was the first differentiating element within this 
original cosmic medium, so it is not in this way that one can find the 
justification of the traditional order affirmed by the Hindu doctrine. 
Moreover, we must always take the greatest care to avoid confining our-
selves exclusively to a point of view that is too systematic, i.e., one that 
is too narrowly limited and particularized; it would certainly be misun-
derstanding the theory of Aristotle and Hermetists that we have indi-
cated, that seek, under the pretext that it involves principles of expansion 
and condensation, to interpret it in favor of an identification of elements 
with the various physical states just mentioned. 
If one is absolutely interested in finding a point of comparison with 
physical theories, in the present meaning of the word, it would undoubt-
edly be more accurate to consider the elements as representing different 
vibratory modes of matter by referring to their correspondence with the 
sensory qualities, the modes under which it is successively perceptible to 
each of our senses; when we say successively, it must be understood that 
this is only a purely logical succession.431 Only, when one speaks thus of 
the vibratory modes of matter, as well as when it is a question of its 
physical states, it is a point to which one must pay attention: it is that 
among the Hindus at least (and even among the Greeks to a certain ex-
tent), we do not find the notion of matter in the sense of modern physi-
cists; the proof of this is that, as we have already remarked elsewhere, 
there exists in Sanskrit no word which can even be translated as ‘matter.’ 
If, therefore, it is permissible to use this notion of matter to sometimes 
interpret the conceptions of the ancients in order to make oneself under-
stood more easily, one must never do so with certain precautions, but it 
is possible to envisage vibratory states, for example, without necessarily 
appealing to the special properties which the moderns essentially attrib-
ute to matter. Despite this, such a conception seems even more apt to 
analogically indicate what the elements are by means of an image, if we 
can say so, than to really define them; perhaps this is basically all that 
can be done in the language that we currently have at our disposal, as a 
result of the oblivion into which the traditional ideas have fallen in the 
Western world.perhaps this is basically all that 
can be done in the language that we currently have at our disposal, as a 
result of the oblivion into which the traditional ideas have fallen in the 
Western world.

431 It goes without saying that one cannot think in anyway of realizing, assuming 
a chronological succession in the exercise of the different senses, a conception 
in the style of the ideal pillar that Condillac imagined in his famous Treatise on 
the Sensations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
369 
However, we will add this: the sensory qualities express, in relation 
to our human individuality, the conditions that characterize and deter-
mine the corporeal existence as a particular mode of the Universal Exist-
ence, since it is by these qualities that we know the body to the exclusion 
of everything else; we can therefore see in the elements the expression 
of these same conditions of corporeal existence, no longer from the hu-
man point of view, but from the cosmic point of view.

It is not possible 
for us to give here the questions which it would include, but at least one 
can immediately understand by this how the sensory qualities proceed 
from the elements, as a translation or ‘microcosmic’ reflection of the cor-
responding ‘macrocosmic’ realities.

It is also understood that the bodies, 
being properly defined by the set of conditions in question, are thereby 
constituted as such by the elements in which they are ‘substantialized’; 
and this, it seems, is the most precise notion that one can give of these 
same elements.

Following this we shall proceed to other considerations which will 
show even better how the conception of elements is connected not only 
with the special conditions of corporeal existence, but also with condi-
tions of existence of a more universal order and, more specifically, to the 
very conditions of every manifestation.

We know how important the 
Hindu doctrine is to the consideration of the three guṇāḥ: this term des-
ignates constitutive and primordial qualities or attributions of the beings 
envisaged in their different states of manifestation, that they derive from 
the ‘substantial’ principle of their existence, because, from the universal 
point of view, they are inherent in Prakṛti, in which they are in perfect 
equilibrium in the ‘indistinction’ of pure undifferentiated potentiality.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Following this we shall proceed to other considerations which will 
show even better how the conception of elements is connected not only 
with the special conditions of corporeal existence, but also with condi-
tions of existence of a more universal order and, more specifically, to the 
very conditions of every manifestation. We know how important the 
Hindu doctrine is to the consideration of the three guṇāḥ: this term des-
ignates constitutive and primordial qualities or attributions of the beings 
envisaged in their different states of manifestation, that they derive from 
the ‘substantial’ principle of their existence, because, from the universal 
point of view, they are inherent in Prakṛti, in which they are in perfect 
equilibrium in the ‘indistinction’ of pure undifferentiated potentiality. Any manifestation or modification of the ‘substance’ represents a rup-
ture of this equilibrium; the manifested beings thus participate in the 
three guṇāḥ to varying degrees, and they are not states, but general con-
ditions to which they are subjected in any state, by which they are in 
some way connected, which determine the present tendency of their ‘be-
coming.’ We do not have to enter into a complete account of the guṇāḥ 
here, but only to consider its application to the distinction of the ele-
ments; we will not even return to the definition of each guṇa, which we 
have already given on several occasions. We will only recall, for this is 
what matters most here, that sattva is represented as an ascending ten-
dency, tamas as a descending tendency, and rajas, which is an interme-
diary between the two, as an expansion in the horizontal direction. The three guṇāḥ must be found in each of the elements as in all that 
belongs to the domain of universal manifestation; they are found in dif-
ferent proportions, establishing between these elements a kind of hierar-
chy, which can be regarded as analogous to the hierarchy which, from

--- PAGE BREAK ---manifestation; they are found in dif-
ferent proportions, establishing between these elements a kind of hierar-
chy, which can be regarded as analogous to the hierarchy which, from

--- PAGE BREAK ---

370 
The Veil of Isis

another incomparably more extensive point of view, established in the 
same way between the multiple states of the Universal Existence, alt-
hough there are only simple terms included within one and the same 
state. In water and earth, but especially in the earth, it is predominately 
tamas; physically, this downward and compressive force corresponds to 
gravitation or gravity. Rajas has predominance in the air; this element is 
regarded as endowed essentially with a transverse movement. In fire, it 
is predominately sattva, because the fire is the luminous element; the as-
cending force is symbolized by the tendency of the flame to rise, and it is 
physically translated by the expanding power of heat, as this power op-
poses the condensation of bodies.element; the as-
cending force is symbolized by the tendency of the flame to rise, and it is 
physically translated by the expanding power of heat, as this power op-
poses the condensation of bodies.

To give a more precise interpretation of this, we can outline the dis-
tinction of elements as occurring within a sphere: in this sphere, the two 
ascending and descending tendencies we have spoken of will be exer-
cised according to the two opposite directions taken on the same vertical 
axis, in opposing directions from each other and going respectively to 
the two poles; as for the expansion in the horizontal direction, which 
marks a balance between these two tendencies, it will be accomplished 
naturally in the plane perpendicular to the middle of this vertical axis, 
i.e. the plane of the equator. If we now consider the elements as being 
distributed in this sphere according to the tendencies which predominate 
in them, earth, by virtue of the descending tendency of gravitation, must 
occupy the lowest point, which is regarded as the region of darkness and 
which is the bottom of the waters at the same time, while the equator 
marks their surface, according to a symbolism which is common to all 
the cosmogonic doctrines in whatever traditional form they belong. 
Water thus occupies the lower hemisphere, and if the descending ten-
dency is still affirmed in the nature of this element, we cannot say that

--- PAGE BREAK ---atever traditional form they belong. 
Water thus occupies the lower hemisphere, and if the descending ten-
dency is still affirmed in the nature of this element, we cannot say that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
371 
its action is exercised in an exclusive (or almost exclusive, necessary co-
existence of the three guṇāḥ in all things preventing the extreme limit 
from ever being attained in any mode of manifestation whatsoever), for, 
if we consider any point in the lower hemisphere other than the pole, the 
radius which corresponds to this point has an oblique direction, an inter-
mediary between the descending vertical and the horizontal. We may 
therefore regard the tendency marked by such a direction as decompos-
ing into two others of which it is the resultant, which will respectively 
be the actions of tamas and rajas; if we relate these two actions to the 
qualities of water, the vertical component, as a function of tamas, will 
correspond to density, and the horizontal component, as a function of 
rajas, to fluidity. The equator marks the intermediate region, which is 
that of air, a neutral element which keeps the balance between the two 
opposing tendencies, like rajas between tamas and sattva, to the point 
where these two tendencies neutralize each other and which, extending 
transversely on the surface of the waters, separates and delimits the re-
spective zones of water and fire. Indeed, the upper hemisphere is occu-
pied by fire, in which the action of sattva predominates, but where that 
of rajas is still exercised, because the tendency in each point of this hem-
isphere, indicated as previously for the lower hemisphere, is the inter-
mediate between the horizontal and the ascending vertical this time: the 
horizontal component, as a function of rajas, will correspond to heat 
here, and the vertical component, as a function of sattva, to light, as heat 
and light are considered as two complementary terms that unite in the 
nature of the igneous element.correspond to heat 
here, and the vertical component, as a function of sattva, to light, as heat 
and light are considered as two complementary terms that unite in the 
nature of the igneous element.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

372 
The Veil of IsisIn all this, we have not yet spoken of the ether: as it is the highest and 
the most subtle of all the elements, we must place it at the highest point, 
i.e.

the highest pole, which is the region of pure light, as opposed to the 
lower pole which is, as we have said, the region of darkness.

Thus, the 
ether dominates the sphere of the other elements; but, at the same time, 
it must also be considered as enveloping and penetrating all these ele-
ments, of which it is the principle, because of the state of undifferentia-
tion which characterizes it, and which allows it to realize a true ‘omni-
presence’ in the corporeal world; as Śaṅkarācārya says in Ātma-Bodhaḥ, 
“the ether is poured everywhere and it penetrates both the exterior and 
the interior of things.” We can therefore say that among the elements the 
ether alone reaches the point where the action of sattva is exercised in 
the highest degree; we cannot locate it exclusively, as we did for the earth 
at the opposite point, we must consider it as occupying the whole of the 
elementary domain at the same time, whatever the geometric represen-
tation used to symbolize the whole of this domain.

If we have adopted 
the representation by a spherical figure, it is not only because it is the 
one that allows the easiest and clearest interpretation, but it is also, and 
above all, because it agrees better than any other with the general prin-
ciples of cosmogonic symbolism as can be found in all traditions; there 
would be very interesting comparisons in this regard, but we cannot en-
ter into these developments here, which would deviate too far from the 
subject of the present study.

Before leaving this part of our exposé, we have one last remark to 
make: if we take the elements in the order in which we have distributed 
them in their sphere, going from highest to lowest, i.e.372 
The Veil of Isis

If we have adopted 
the representation by a spherical figure, it is not only because it is the 
one that allows the easiest and clearest interpretation, but it is also, and 
above all, because it agrees better than any other with the general prin-
ciples of cosmogonic symbolism as can be found in all traditions; there 
would be very interesting comparisons in this regard, but we cannot en-
ter into these developments here, which would deviate too far from the 
subject of the present study. Before leaving this part of our exposé, we have one last remark to 
make: if we take the elements in the order in which we have distributed 
them in their sphere, going from highest to lowest, i.e. from the most 
subtle to the most dense, we find the exact order indicated by Plato, but 
here this order, which we may call hierarchical, is not to be confused 
with the order of production of the elements and this must be carefully 
distinguished. In fact, air occupies an intermediate rank between fire and 
water, but it is nonetheless produced before the fire and, to tell the truth, 
the reason for these two different situations is basically the same: it is 
that air is a neutral element in a way, and which, by the same token, 
corresponds to a state of less differentiation than fire and water, because 
the two ascending and descending tendencies are still in perfect equilib-
rium between the two. On the contrary, this equilibrium is broken in fa-
vor of the ascending tendency in fire and in favor of the descending ten-
dency in water, the opposition manifested between the respective quali-
ties of these two elements clearly marks the state of greater differentia-
tion to which they correspond. If we look from the point of view of the 
production of the elements, we must look at their differentiation as tak-
ing place from the center of the sphere, the primordial point where we

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
373 
will then place the ether as their principle; from there, we will first have 
the horizontal expansion, corresponding to air, then the manifestation of 
the ascending tendency, corresponding to fire, and then that of the de-
scending tendency, corresponding first to water and then to the earth, 
the stopping point and the final end of all elementary differentiation.

We must now go into some details regarding the properties of each 
of the five elements, and first establish that the first of them, ākāśa or 
ether, is indeed a real element and distinct from the others.

Indeed, as we 
have already pointed out above, some, notably the Buddhists, do not rec-
ognize it as such on the pretext that it is nīrūpa, i.e.

‘without form,’ due 
to its homogeneity they look at it as a ‘non-entity’ and identify it with 
emptiness, because, for them, the homogeneous can only be a pure emp-
tiness.

The theory of the ‘universal void’ (sarva śūnyatā) is presented 
here as a direct and logical consequence of atomism, for if there are only 
those atoms that have a positive existence in the corporeal world, and if 
these atoms must move to aggregate with one another thus forming all 
bodies, this movement will be able to take place only in the void.

How-
ever, this consequence is not accepted by the school of Kaṇāda, the rep-
resentative of Vaiśeṣika, but this view is precisely heterodox in that it 
admits atomism, which, naturally, this ‘cosmological’ point of view is not 
at all integral in itself; conversely, the Greek ‘philosophic physicists’ who 
do not count ether among the elements are far from being all atomists, 
and they seem more to ignore it rather than expressly reject it.The theory of the ‘universal void’ (sarva śūnyatā) is presented 
here as a direct and logical consequence of atomism, for if there are only 
those atoms that have a positive existence in the corporeal world, and if 
these atoms must move to aggregate with one another thus forming all 
bodies, this movement will be able to take place only in the void.

How-
ever, this consequence is not accepted by the school of Kaṇāda, the rep-
resentative of Vaiśeṣika, but this view is precisely heterodox in that it 
admits atomism, which, naturally, this ‘cosmological’ point of view is not 
at all integral in itself; conversely, the Greek ‘philosophic physicists’ who 
do not count ether among the elements are far from being all atomists, 
and they seem more to ignore it rather than expressly reject it.

Be that as 
it may, the Buddhists’ opinion easily refutes itself by pointing out that 
there can be no empty space, such a conception being contradictory: in 
the entire domain of universal manifestation, which space is apart, there 
cannot be emptiness, because emptiness, which can only be conceived 
negatively, is not a possibility of manifestation; moreover, this concep-
tion of an empty space would be that of a container without content, 
which is obviously meaningless.

The ether is therefore what occupies all 
space, but it should not be confused with space itself, because this, being 
only a container, i.e.

in sum a condition of existence and not an inde-
pendent entity, cannot be the substantial principles of bodies, nor can it 
give birth to other elements.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The ether is therefore what occupies all 
space, but it should not be confused with space itself, because this, being 
only a container, i.e. in sum a condition of existence and not an inde-
pendent entity, cannot be the substantial principles of bodies, nor can it 
give birth to other elements. Ether is therefore not space, but rather the 
content of the space envisaged prior to any differentiation in this state of 
primordial undifferentiation, which is like an image of Prakṛti’s ‘indis-
tinctness’ in relation to this special domain of manifestation which is the 
corporeal world, the ether already contains in power, not only all the 
elements, but also all the bodies, and its homogeneity even makes it fit 
to receive all forms in its modifications. Being the principle of corporeal 
things, it possesses quantity, which is a fundamental attribute common

--- PAGE BREAK ---

374 
The Veil of Isisto all bodies; moreover, it is regarded as essentially simple, always be-
cause of its homogeneity, and it is regarded as impenetrable, because it 
is that which penetrates everything.

Being established in this way, the existence of the ether presents itself 
quite differently than a mere hypothesis, this shows the profound differ-
ence which separates the traditional doctrine from all modern scientific 
theories.

However, another objection is to be considered: ether is a real 
element, but that does not suffice to prove that it is a distinct element; in 
other words, it could be that the element that is spread throughout the 
whole corporeal space (we mean the space capable of containing bodies) 
is not other than air, and then it is air that would actually be the primor-
dial element.

The response to this objection is that each of our senses 
makes us know, as its own object, a quality distinct from those known 
by the other senses, but a quality can exist only in something to which it 
is related as an attribute is in relation to it, and, as each sensory quality 
is thus attributed to an element of which it is the characteristic property, 
it is necessary that five senses correspond to five distinct elements.

The sensory quality which is related to the ether is sound; this re-
quires some explanation, which will be easily understood if one consid-
ers the mode of production of sound by vibratory movement, which is 
far from being a recent discovery as some might believe, because Kaṇāda 
expressly declares that “sound is propagated by waves, wave after wave, 
radiating in all directions from a given center.” Such a movement propa-
gates around its starting point by concentric waves, uniformly distrib-
uted in all directions of space, giving rise to the figure of an indefinite 
and unclosed spheroid.The response to this objection is that each of our senses 
makes us know, as its own object, a quality distinct from those known 
by the other senses, but a quality can exist only in something to which it 
is related as an attribute is in relation to it, and, as each sensory quality 
is thus attributed to an element of which it is the characteristic property, 
it is necessary that five senses correspond to five distinct elements.

The sensory quality which is related to the ether is sound; this re-
quires some explanation, which will be easily understood if one consid-
ers the mode of production of sound by vibratory movement, which is 
far from being a recent discovery as some might believe, because Kaṇāda 
expressly declares that “sound is propagated by waves, wave after wave, 
radiating in all directions from a given center.” Such a movement propa-
gates around its starting point by concentric waves, uniformly distrib-
uted in all directions of space, giving rise to the figure of an indefinite 
and unclosed spheroid.

This is the least differentiated movement of all, 
because of what we call its ‘isotropism,’ and that is why it will be able to 
give birth to all the other movements, which will differ from in it in so 
far as they will no longer be uniform in all directions; likewise, all the 
more particularized forms will proceed from the original spherical form.

Thus, the differentiation of the originally homogeneous ether, the differ-
entiation which gives rise to the other elements, originates in an elemen-
tary movement occurring in the manner we have just described, from an 
initial point in this indefinite cosmic medium, but this elementary move-
ment is nothing else than the prototype of the sonic ripple.374 
The Veil of Isis

This is the least differentiated movement of all, 
because of what we call its ‘isotropism,’ and that is why it will be able to 
give birth to all the other movements, which will differ from in it in so 
far as they will no longer be uniform in all directions; likewise, all the 
more particularized forms will proceed from the original spherical form. Thus, the differentiation of the originally homogeneous ether, the differ-
entiation which gives rise to the other elements, originates in an elemen-
tary movement occurring in the manner we have just described, from an 
initial point in this indefinite cosmic medium, but this elementary move-
ment is nothing else than the prototype of the sonic ripple. The auditory 
sensation is the only one that makes us directly perceive a vibratory 
movement; even if we admit, with most modern physicists, that the other 
sensations come from a transformation of similar movements, it is none 
the less true that they differ qualitatively as sensations, which is the only 
essential consideration here. Furthermore, after what has just been said, 
it is in the ether that the cause of sound lies, but it is well understood that 
this cause must be distinguished from the various media which can serve

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
375 
secondarily to the propagation of sound, and which contribute to make 
it perceptible to us by amplifying the elementary etheric vibrations, all 
the more so as these mediums become more dense.

Let us finally add, in 
this connection, that the sound quality is equally sensory in the other 
four elements, as these all proceed from the ether.

Apart from these con-
siderations, the attribution of the sound quality to the ether, i.e.

the first 
of the elements, has yet another profound reason, which is related to the 
doctrine of the primordiality and the perpetuity of sound; this is a point 
to which we can only make a simple allusion in passing.

The second element, the one that first differentiates from ether, is 
vāyu or air; the word vāyu, derived from the verbal root vā, which means 
‘to go’ or ‘to move,’ properly designates the breath of the word, and, con-
sequently, mobility is considered as the essential character of this ele-
ment.

More precisely, air is, as we have already said, regarded as en-
dowed with a transversal movement, a movement in which all the direc-
tions of space no longer play the same role as in the spheroidal move-
ment, which we have had to consider previously, but which, on the con-
trary, proceeds in a certain particular direction; therefore, it is the recti-
linear motion which gives rise to the determination of this direction.

This 
propagation of the movement according to certain determined directions 
implies a rupture of the homogeneity of the cosmic medium; we there-
fore have a complex motion, which, no longer being ‘isotropic,’ must be 
constituted by a combination or a coordination of elementary vibratory 
movements.

Such a movement gives rise to equally complex forms, and, 
as the form is what firstly affects touch, the tangible quality can be re-
ferred as belonging to air, as this element is, by its mobility, the principle 
of the differentiation of forms.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This 
propagation of the movement according to certain determined directions 
implies a rupture of the homogeneity of the cosmic medium; we there-
fore have a complex motion, which, no longer being ‘isotropic,’ must be 
constituted by a combination or a coordination of elementary vibratory 
movements. Such a movement gives rise to equally complex forms, and, 
as the form is what firstly affects touch, the tangible quality can be re-
ferred as belonging to air, as this element is, by its mobility, the principle 
of the differentiation of forms. It is therefore by the effect of mobility that 
air is made sensible to us; analogically, moreover, atmospheric air be-
comes sensitive to touch only by its displacement, but, following the re-
mark we made above in a general way, we must be careful not to identify 
the element air with this atmospheric air, which is a body, as some did 
not fail to do in noting some similarities of this type. Thus, Kaṇāda de-
clares that air is colorless, but it is very easy to understand that this must 
be so without referring to the properties of atmospheric air, for color is 
a quality of fire, and this is logically posterior to air in the order of de-
velopment of the elements; this quality is not yet manifested at the stage 
represented by air. The third element is tejas or fire, which manifests itself to our senses 
in two principle aspects, as light and heat; the quality which belongs to 
it in its own right is visibility, and in this respect it is under its luminous 
aspect that fire must be considered, this is too obvious to warrant any 
explanation, because it is obviously by light alone that the bodies are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

376 
The Veil of Isists luminous 
aspect that fire must be considered, this is too obvious to warrant any 
explanation, because it is obviously by light alone that the bodies are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

376 
The Veil of Isis

made visible. According to Kaṇāda, “light is colored, and it is the princi-
ple of the coloring of bodies.” Color is therefore a characteristic property 
of light: in light itself, it is white and resplendent; in the various bodies, 
it is variable, and we can distinguish among its modifications as simple 
colors and mixed or blended colors. It should be noted that the Pythago-
reans, reported by Plutarch, also affirmed that “colors are nothing but a 
reflection of light, modified in different ways”; it would be very wrong 
to see a discovery of modern science here. Furthermore, in its caloric as-
pect, fire is sensitive to touch, in which it produces the impression of 
temperature; air is neutral in this respect, since it is anterior to fire, heat 
is an aspect of it, as for cold, it is regarded as a characteristic property of 
water. Thus, with regards to temperature as well as to the action of the 
two ascending and descending tendencies that we have previously de-
fined, fire and water oppose one another, while air is in a state of equi-
librium between these two elements. Moreover, if we consider that cold 
increases the density of the bodies by contracting them, while heat di-
lates and subtilizes them, we will recognize without difficulty that the 
correlation of heat and cold with fire and water respectively is included, 
as a special application and a simple consequence, in the general theory 
of the three guṇāḥ and their distribution throughout the elementary do-
main. 
The fourth element, ap or water, has for its characteristic properties, 
besides the cold of which we have just spoken, density or gravity, which 
it has in common with earth, and fluidity or viscosity, which is the qual-
ity which is essentially different from all other elements; we have already 
pointed out the correlation of these two properties with the respective 
actions of tamas and rajas. Furthermore, the sensory quality that corre-
sponds to water is flavor; it may be incidentally remarked, though there 
is no point in attaching too much importance to considerations of this 
type, that this is in agreement with the opinion of modern physiologists 
who think that a body is ‘sapid’ only so far as it can dissolve in saliva, in 
other words, flavor in any body is a consequence of fluidity. 
Finally, the fifth and final element is pṛthvī or earth, which no longer 
possesses fluidity as water corresponds to the most condensed body 
mode of all; it is in this element that we find gravity at its highest degree, 
which manifests itself in the descent or fall of bodies. The sensory quality 
that is peculiar to earth is smell; therefore, this quality is regarded as 
residing in solid particles which, detaching themselves from bodies, meet 
the organ of smell. On this point again, there does not seem to be any 
disagreement with the current physiologic theories; but, even if there 
was some disagreement, it would not matter, because the error shouldsmell. On this point again, there does not seem to be any 
disagreement with the current physiologic theories; but, even if there 
was some disagreement, it would not matter, because the error should

--- PAGE BREAK ---t again, there does not seem to be any 
disagreement with the current physiologic theories; but, even if there 
was some disagreement, it would not matter, because the error should

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
377 
then be on the side of profane science and not of traditional doctrine in 
any case. 
In conclusion, we shall say a few words of the way in which the Hindu 
doctrine envisages the organs of the senses in relation to the elements: 
since each sensory quality proceeds from an element in which it essen-
tially resides, the organ by which this quality is perceived to be in con-
formity with it, i.e. that it is itself of the nature of the corresponding ele-
ment. It is thus that the real organs of the senses are constituted, and it 
is necessary, contrary to the Buddhists’ opinion, to distinguish them 
from the external organs, i.e. from the parts of the human body which 
are only their seats and their instruments. Thus, the true organ of hearing 
is not the pavilion of the ear, but the portion of the ether which is con-
tained in the inner ear that vibrates under the influence of a sound ripple; 
Kaṇāda observes that it is not the first wave nor the intermediate waves 
that make the sound, but the final wave that comes into contact with the 
organ of hearing. Likewise, the true organ of sight is not the globe of the 
eye, nor even the retina, but a luminous principle which resides in the 
eye that comes into communication with the light emanating or reflected 
from the external objects; the brightness of the eye is not ordinarily vis-
ible, but it can become so in certain circumstances, especially in animals 
that see in the darkness of the night. Moreover, it should be noted that 
the ray of light through which the visual perception takes place, and 
which extends between the eye and the perceived object, can be consid-
ered in both directions, on the one hand as starting at the eye and reach-
ing the object, and secondly, reciprocally, as coming from the object to-
wards the pupil of the eye; a similar theory of vision is found among the 
Pythagoreans, and this also accords with Aristotle’s definition of sensa-
tion, conceived as “the common act of the perceiver and the perceived.” 
Considerations of the same type could be given to the organs of each of 
the other senses; we believe, through these examples, we have given suf-
ficient indications in this regard. 
Such is, in its broad outlines and interpreted as precisely as possible, 
the Hindu theory of the element, which, in addition to its own self-inter-
est, is capable of making us more generally understand what is the ‘cos-
mological’ point of view in traditional doctrines.the Hindu theory of the element, which, in addition to its own self-inter-
est, is capable of making us more generally understand what is the ‘cos-
mological’ point of view in traditional doctrines.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f the element, which, in addition to its own self-inter-
est, is capable of making us more generally understand what is the ‘cos-
mological’ point of view in traditional doctrines.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Myths, Mysteries, and Symbols 
Mythes, mystères et symbols, October 1935. 
We have spoken occasionally of a certain degeneration of symbolism as 
having given birth to ‘mythology,’ taking this word in the sense that it is 
most usually given, which is indeed true when it comes to so-called ‘clas-
sic’ antiquity, but which would not validly apply outside the period of 
Greek and Latin civilizations. We therefore believe that the use of this 
term everywhere should be avoided, the act of which can only give rise 
to unpleasant equivocations and unjustified assimilations; if the use im-
poses this restriction, it must be said that the word ‘myth,’ in itself and 
in its original meaning, contains nothing which marks such a later de-
generation, solely due to a more or less complete incomprehension of 
what remains a very ancient tradition. It should be added, if one can 
speak of ‘myths’ as far as this tradition itself is concerned, provided that 
the true meaning of the word is restored, there was no such thing as 
‘mythology,’ which, as the modern ones would understand it, is nothing 
more than a study undertaken ‘from the outside’ and therefore, one may 
say, involving a misunderstanding in the second degree. 
Sometimes it has been attempted to establish a distinction between 
‘myths’ and ‘symbols’ which does not seem well-founded to us: for some, 
where myth is a narrative with a meaning other than that which the 
words composing it express directly and literally, the symbol would es-
sentially be a figurative representation of certain ideas by a geometric 
scheme or by any design; the symbol would properly then be a graphic 
mode of expression and the myth a verbal mode. There is here a totally 
unacceptable restriction, as can be easily understood by all that we have 
already stated on other occasions: indeed, any image which is taken to 
represent an idea, to express it or to suggest it in anyway and to whatever 
degree, is thereby a sign or, amounting to the same thing, a symbol of 
that idea. It does not matter whether it is a visual image or any other kind 
of image, because it introduces no essential difference here and does not 
absolutely change the very principle of symbolism. In any case, the latter 
is always based on a relationship of analogy or correspondence between 
the idea that is to be expressed and the image, be it graphic, verbal, or 
otherwise, by which it is expressed. We have said elsewhere that we 
could consider the symbols as being mainly divided into those that areis to be expressed and the image, be it graphic, verbal, or 
otherwise, by which it is expressed. We have said elsewhere that we 
could consider the symbols as being mainly divided into those that are

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd the image, be it graphic, verbal, or 
otherwise, by which it is expressed. We have said elsewhere that we 
could consider the symbols as being mainly divided into those that are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
379 
graphic and those that are acoustic; from this point of view, the words 
themselves are and cannot be anything other than symbols. One could 
even, instead of speaking of an idea and an image as we have just done, 
speak more generally of two realities of any kind, of different orders, 
between which there exists a correspondence having both its foundation 
in the nature of both: in these conditions, a reality of a certain order can 
be represented by a reality of another order, and this is then a symbol. 
Having thus recalled the principle of symbolism once again, we see 
that it is obviously capable of a multitude of different modalities, myth is 
only a particular case constituting one of these modes; we could say that 
the symbol is the genus, and myth is one of its species. In other words, 
one can envisage a symbolic narrative as well as a symbolic drawing, or 
many other things that have the same character and play the same role; 
myths are symbolic accounts, as are ‘parables,’ which do not basically 
and essentially differ from them, it does not seem to us that there is an-
ything there that gives rise to the slightest confusion, since we have un-
derstood the general notion of symbolism. 
That being said, it is necessary to specify the proper meaning of the 
word ‘myth’ itself, which may lead us to certain important remarks 
which relate to the character and function of symbolism envisaged in the 
more definite sense in which it differs from ordinary language and op-
poses it in certain respects. We commonly look at the word ‘myth’ as 
being a synonym of ‘fable,’ simply meaning a fiction of some kind, most 
often of a more or less poetic character; this is the effect of the degener-
ation of which we spoke at the beginning, and the Greeks, whose lan-
guage is borrowed for this term, certainly have their share of responsi-
bility in what is really a profound alteration and a deviation from the 
original meaning. In fact, with the Greeks, individual fantasy soon began 
to give free rein to all forms of art, which, instead of remaining strictly 
hieratic and symbolic, as among the Egyptians and peoples of the Orient, 
soon took a completely different direction, aiming much less to instruct 
and more to please, resulting in productions which are almost devoid of 
any real meaning where we find no trace of this eminently ‘exact’ science 
that is true symbolism; this is, in short, the beginning of what we may 
call profane art and it coincides appreciably with that of equally profane 
thought which, due to the exercise of the same individual fantasy in an-
other domain, was to be known under the name ‘philosophy.’ Aesthetic 
fantasy was exercised in particular on the pre-existing myths: poets, who 
were by then no longer sacred and possessing the ‘supra-human’ influ-
ence as at their origin, by developing and modifying myths with their 
own imagination, by surrounding them with superfluous and vain orna-hen no longer sacred and possessing the ‘supra-human’ influ-
ence as at their origin, by developing and modifying myths with their 
own imagination, by surrounding them with superfluous and vain orna-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

380 
The Veil of Isispra-human’ influ-
ence as at their origin, by developing and modifying myths with their 
own imagination, by surrounding them with superfluous and vain orna-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

380 
The Veil of Isis

ments, obscured and distorted myths so that it often became very diffi-
cult to rediscover their meaning and to identify their essential elements, 
except perhaps in comparison with similar symbols that may be encoun-
tered elsewhere which have not undergone the same deformation; it can 
be said that finally myth was no more, at least for the greatest number, 
but a misunderstood symbol which remains for the modern ones. But this 
is only an abuse and, we might say, ‘profanation’ in the true sense of the 
word; what must be considered is that the myth was essentially a sym-
bolic narrative before any deformation, as we have said above, and this 
was its sole raison d’être, and, from this point of view already, ‘myth’ is 
not entirely synonymous with ‘fable,’ because this latter word (in Latin 
fabula, from fari, to speak) does not etymologically indicate any narra-
tive, without specifying the intention or the character in any way; here 
too, the meaning of ‘fiction’ came to be attached to it only later. There is 
more: these two terms ‘myth’ and ‘fable,’ which we have come to take as 
equivalents, are derived from roots which in reality have an opposite 
meaning, for while the root of ‘fable’ refers to the spoken word, that of 
‘myth,’ strange as it may seem at first glance when related to a recitation, 
refers to silence. 
Indeed, the Greek word muthos, ‘myth,’ originates with the root mu, 
and this root (which is found in the Latin mutus, mute) represents the 
closed mouth, and hence silence.432 This is the meaning of the word 
muein, to close one’s mouth, to be silent (and, by an analogic extension, 
it also comes to mean the eyes, literally and figuratively); the review of 
some of the derivatives of this verb is particularly informative. Thus, 
from muo (and to the infinitive muein) two other verbs are immediately 
derived which differ only a little in form, muao and mueo; the first has 
the same meanings as muo, and we must add another derivative, mullo, 
which means to close the lips, and also to murmur without opening the 
mouth (the Latin murmur is also the root mu extended by the letter R and 
repeated, so as to represent a dull and continuous noise produced with 
the mouth closed). As for mueo, and this is what is most important, it 
means initiation (into ‘mysteries,’ whose name is derived from the same 
root as we shall later see, and precisely by means of mueo and mustes), 
and, consequently, both to instruct (but firstly to instruct without words, 
as it actually was in the mysteries) and to consecrate; we should even say 
in the first place to consecrate, if one understands by ‘consecration,’ as it 
ordinarily should be, the transmission of a ‘spiritual influence,’ or the rite 
by which it is regularly transmitted. What later came from this latterate, if one understands by ‘consecration,’ as it 
ordinarily should be, the transmission of a ‘spiritual influence,’ or the rite 
by which it is regularly transmitted. What later came from this latter

432 The Mutus Liber of the Hermetists is literally the ‘Silent Book,’ i.e. without 
verbal commentary, but it is also the book of symbols at the same time, as sym-
bolism can truly be regarded as the ‘language of silence.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---iterally the ‘Silent Book,’ i.e. without 
verbal commentary, but it is also the book of symbols at the same time, as sym-
bolism can truly be regarded as the ‘language of silence.’

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
381 
meaning, in Christian ecclesiastic language, that of conferring ordina-
tion, which is indeed also a ‘consecration’ in this sense, though in a dif-
ferent order from that of the initiatic. 
But it will be said, if the word ‘myth’ has such an origin, how is it that 
it could have been used to designate a narrative of some kind? This idea 
of ‘silence’ must be related here to things which, because of their very 
nature, are inexpressible, at least directly and by ordinary language; one 
of the general functions of symbolism is indeed to suggest the inexpress-
ible, to make it approachable, or even better ‘to assert,’ by the transposi-
tions it allows to perform from one order to another, from the inferior to 
the superior, from what is most immediately grasped to that which is 
much more difficult, and this is precisely the premier destination of 
myths. Moreover, even in the ‘classical’ period, Plato still resorts to the 
use of myths when he wishes to expose conceptions that go beyond the 
scope of his usual dialectical means; these myths, which he certainly has 
not ‘invented’ rather he only ‘adapted,’ for they bear the indisputable 
mark of a traditional teaching (as do certain processes which he uses for 
the interpretation of words), these myths, we say, are far from being 
nothing more than the more or less negligible literary ornaments that 
modern commentators and ‘critics’ see all too often, for whom it is as-
suredly more convenient to dismiss them thus without any other exam-
ination than to give an approximate explanation. On the contrary, they 
respond to what is most profound in Plato’s thought, that which is re-
moved from individual contingencies, because of this very profoundness, 
it can only be expressed symbolically; the dialectic often contains a cer-
tain amount of ‘play’ in it, which is very much in keeping with the Greek 
mentality, but when it is abandoned for the myth, we can be sure that 
the game has stopped and that it is dealing with things that have a ‘sa-
cred’ character. 
In myth, what is said is something else than what one wishes to say; 
we may remark in passing that this is also what the word ‘allegory’ ety-
mologically means (from allos agoreuo, literally ‘to say something else’), 
which gives us yet another example of the deviations of meaning due to 
common usage, because it now only designates a conventional and ‘lit-
erary’ representation of purely moral or psychological intention, and 
which, more often than not, manifests into what is commonly called ‘per-
sonified abstractions’; it is scarcely necessary to say that nothing could 
be further from true symbolism. But, to return to myth, if he does not say 
what he means, he suggests it by this analogical correspondence which’; it is scarcely necessary to say that nothing could 
be further from true symbolism. But, to return to myth, if he does not say 
what he means, he suggests it by this analogical correspondence which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

382 
The Veil of Isishing could 
be further from true symbolism. But, to return to myth, if he does not say 
what he means, he suggests it by this analogical correspondence which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

382 
The Veil of Isis

is the foundation and the very essence of all symbolism; thus, we might 
say, to keep quiet while speaking is where myth has gotten its name.433 
What remains is for us to draw attention to the kinship between the 
words ‘myth’ and ‘mystery,’ both stemming from the same root: the 
Greek word musterion, ‘mystery,’ is also directly related to the idea of 
‘silence’; this can be interpreted in several different but interrelated 
meanings, each of which has its own raison d’être in a certain point of 
view. First, let us remark that, according to the derivation which we have 
indicated previously (of mueo), the principal meaning of this word is that 
which refers to initiation, and it is thus indeed, that it must be understood 
that is what was called ‘mysteries’ in Greek antiquity. On the other hand, 
what still shows the truly odd fate of certain words is that another term 
closely related to the ones we have just mentioned is that of ‘mysticism,’ 
which, etymologically, applies to everything regarding the mysteries: 
mustikos, in fact, is the adjective of mustes, initiated; it is therefore origi-
nally equivalent to ‘initiatic’ and refers to everything that relates to ini-
tiation, both in its doctrine and its very purpose (but, in this ancient 
sense, it can never be applied to people). Now, among the modern ones, 
this same word ‘mystic,’ alone among all these terms of common stock, 
has come to exclusively designate something which, as we have ex-
plained on different occasions, has absolutely nothing in common with 
initiation and is even the opposite of it in some respects.  
Let us return to the various meanings of the word ‘mystery’: in the 
most immediate sense, we would say the most gross or at least the most 
exterior, the mystery is what we should not speak of, what we should 
keep silent, or what is forbidden to make known to the outside; it is thus 
that we hear it most commonly, even when it comes to the ancient mys-
teries, and, in the more common meaning it later received, the word 
hardly has any meaning other than that. However, this prohibition of 
revealing certain rites and certain teachings must in fact, while taking 
into account the considerations of expediency which may certainly have 
played a part in them, but which are never more than a purely contingent 
consideration, should be considered especially as having a symbolicthe considerations of expediency which may certainly have 
played a part in them, but which are never more than a purely contingent 
consideration, should be considered especially as having a symbolic

433 We can remark that this is what these words of Christ also signify, which 
confirms the fundamental identity of the ‘myth’ and the ‘parable’ that we have 
pointed out above: “For those who are on the outside (an expression exactly 
equivalent to that of ‘profane’), I speak to them in parables, for they look but do 
not see and hear but do not listen” (Matthew, 13:13; Mark, 4:11-12; Luke, 8:10). 
There are those who only grasp what is said literally and who are unable to go 
beyond to reach the inexpressible, and to whom, therefore, “knowing the mys-
tery of the Kingdom of Heaven has not been given”; the use of the word ‘mys-
tery’ in this last sentence of the Gospel is especially noteworthy in connection 
with the considerations that follow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---gdom of Heaven has not been given”; the use of the word ‘mys-
tery’ in this last sentence of the Gospel is especially noteworthy in connection 
with the considerations that follow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
383 
value; we have already explained ourselves on this point when we have 
dealt with the true nature of initiatic secrecy. What has been called the 
‘discipline of secrecy,’ which was just as prevalent in the primitive Chris-
tian church as in the ancient mysteries (which some opponents of eso-
terism seem to forget a little too easily), is very far from what appears as 
a simple precaution against hostility, which is very real and often dan-
gerous, due to the misunderstanding of the profane world; we see there 
other reasons of a much more profound order, and which can be indi-
cated by the other meanings contained in the word ‘mystery.’ Further, in 
this connection, it is not by mere coincidence that there is a close simi-
larity between the words ‘sacred’ (sacratum) and ‘secret’ (secretum): in 
both, they are what is set apart (secernere, to set apart, whence the parti-
ciple secretum), reserved, separated from the profane domain; in the same 
way, the consecrated place is called templum, whose root tem (which is 
found in the Greek temno, cut, retrench, separate, whence temenos, sa-
cred enclosure) also expresses the same idea, and ‘contemplation,’ whose 
name comes from the same root, is still effectively related to this idea by 
its strictly ‘interior’ character.434 
According to the second meaning of the word ‘mystery,’ which is al-
ready less external, it designates what one must receive in silence,435 
what is not advisable to discuss; from this point of view, all the tradi-
tional doctrines, including the religious dogmas which constitute a spe-
cial case, can be called mysteries (the meaning of this word then extend-
ing to domains other than the initiatic domain, but where they also exert 
a ‘supra-human’ influence), because they are truths that, by their very 
nature, are above all discussion.436 We can say, to relate this meaning to 
the first, to unknowingly spread among the profane the mysteries thus 
heard, it is inevitable to engage them in discussion, a profane process par 
excellence, with all the inconveniences which may result from it and 
which can be summed up perfectly by the word ‘profanation’ which we 
already used previously referring to another subject, which must be 
taken here in its most literal and complete meaning; the destructive worke summed up perfectly by the word ‘profanation’ which we 
already used previously referring to another subject, which must be 
taken here in its most literal and complete meaning; the destructive work

434 It is therefore etymologically absurd to speak of ‘contemplating’ any external 
spectacle, as the modern ones sometimes do, for whom the true meaning of 
words seems to be completely lost in many cases. 
435 We can recall here the prescription of silence imposed on the disciples in 
certain initiatic schools, especially in the Pythagorean school. 
436 This is nothing other than the very infallibility that is inherent in any tradi-
tional doctrine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

384 
The Veil of Isisitiatic schools, especially in the Pythagorean school. 
436 This is nothing other than the very infallibility that is inherent in any tradi-
tional doctrine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

384 
The Veil of Isis

of modern ‘criticism’ of any tradition is too eloquent an example of what 
we wish to say to make it necessary to insist further.437 
Finally, there is a third meaning, the most profound of all, according 
to which the mystery is properly inexpressible, that one can only con-
template in silence (and it is advisable to remember here what we said 
just now about the origin of the word ‘contemplation’); as the inexpress-
ible is also the incommunicable, the prohibition of revealing the sacred 
teaching symbolizes, in this new point of view, the impossibility of ex-
pressing in words the true mystery which this teaching is only clothing 
so to speak, manifesting and veiling the entirety.438 The teaching con-
cerning the inexpressible can obviously only suggest it by means of ap-
propriate images, which will be like the supports of contemplation; from 
what we have explained, this amounts to saying that such teaching nec-
essarily takes the symbolic form. Such was always, and among all peo-
ples, one of the essential characteristics of the initiation into mysteries, 
by whatever name it has been designated; we can therefore say that sym-
bols, and in particular, myths, when this teaching was translated into 
words, truly constitute the very language of initiation in their premiere 
destination.signated; we can therefore say that sym-
bols, and in particular, myths, when this teaching was translated into 
words, truly constitute the very language of initiation in their premiere 
destination.

437 This meaning of the word ‘mystery,’ which is also attached to the word ‘sa-
cred’ because of what we have said above, is marked very clearly in this precept 
of the Gospel: “Do not give what is holy to dogs, and do not throw pearls before 
swine, lest they trample them underfoot, and turn against you and tear you 
apart” (Matthew, 7:6). It will be noted that the profane are symbolically repre-
sented here by the animals considered as ‘impure,’ in the ritual sense of this 
word. 
438 The vulgar conception of ‘mysteries,’ especially when applied to the religious 
domain, implies a manifest confusion between ‘inexpressible’ and ‘incompre-
hensible,’ a confusion that is completely unjustified, except in relation to the 
intellectual limitations of certain individualities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dharma 
Dharma, October 1935.and ‘incompre-
hensible,’ a confusion that is completely unjustified, except in relation to the 
intellectual limitations of certain individualities.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Dharma 
Dharma, October 1935.

The word dharma seems to be one of the Sanskrit terms that confuses 
most translators and this is not without reason, because, in fact, it has 
multiple meanings and it is certainly impossible to make its meaning 
known uniformly by a single word in another language; perhaps it is 
even better to keep it as is purely and simply, provided it is explained by 
commentary. Mr. Gualtherus H. Mees, who devoted a recent book to-
wards this topic,439 which, although being confined almost exclusively to 
the social point of view, shows more understanding than is found in most 
Westerners, rightly points out that if there is in this term a certain inde-
terminacy, being by no means synonymous with being vague, it does not 
prove that the conceptions of the ancients have lacked clarity or that they 
have not been able to distinguish between the different aspects of what 
is in question. This claimed vagueness, of which we could find many ex-
amples, rather indicates that the thought of the ancients was much less 
restricted than that of the modern ones, and, instead of being analytical 
like them, it was essentially synthetic. Moreover, there remains some-
thing of this indeterminacy in a term such as ‘law,’ for example, which 
also encloses very different meanings from each other; this word ‘law’ is 
precisely, along with the word ‘order,’ one of those which, in many cases, 
may render the idea of dharma in the least imperfect way. 
We know that dharma is derived from the root dhṛ, which means to 
carry, support, sustain, maintain;440 it is therefore properly a principle of 
conservation of being, and therefore of stability, so far as it is compatible 
with the conditions of manifestation, since all the applications of dharma 
always relate to the manifested world. Thus, it is not possible to admit, 
as the author seems to be disposed towards, that this term could be more 
or less a substitute for Ātmā, with the only difference being that it wouldifested world. Thus, it is not possible to admit, 
as the author seems to be disposed towards, that this term could be more 
or less a substitute for Ātmā, with the only difference being that it would

439 Gualtherus Hendrik Mees, Dharma and Society (London: Luzac and Co., 1935). 
The greatest part of this book deals more with the question of varṇāsaḥ or castes, 
but this point of view deserves to be the subject of another article. 
440 Whatever the author may say, a root commonality with the word ‘form’ 
seems unlikely to us, and we do not clearly see what consequences might be 
drawn from it in any case.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

386 
The Veil of Isisbe ‘dynamic’ instead of ‘static.’ Ātmā is nonmanifest, therefore immuta-
ble; dharma is only an expression, if you will, in the sense that it reflects 
the principal immutability in the order of manifestation.

It is ‘dynamic’ 
only to the extent that manifestation necessarily implies ‘becoming,’ but 
it is what makes ‘becoming’ not become a pure change, always maintain-
ing through change itself, a certain relative stability.

It is also important 
to note in this respect, that the root dhṛ is almost identical, in form and 
meaning, to another root dhru, from which the word dhruva designating 
the ‘pole’ derives.

Effectively, it is this idea of the ‘pole’ or ‘axis’ of the 
manifested world that we must refer to if we really wish to understand 
the notion of dharma: it is what remains invariable at the center of rev-
olutions of all things, regulating the course of change by the very fact 
that it does not participate in it.

We must not forget that, by the synthetic 
nature of the thought that it expresses, language is here much more 
closely related to symbolism than in modern languages, and that it is 
from symbolism that the multiplicity of meanings of which spoke a mo-
ment ago is held; perhaps one could even show that the conception of 
dharma is directly related to the symbolic representation of the ‘axis’ by 
the figure of the ‘Tree of the World.’ 
Moreover, Mr.

Mees rightly points out the kinship between the notion 
of dharma and that of ṛta, which etymologically has the meaning of ‘rec-
titude’ (in the same way that Dé of the Far-Eastern tradition is also very 
close to dharma), which obviously still recalls the idea of the ‘axis,’ being 
of a constant and invariable direction.We must not forget that, by the synthetic 
nature of the thought that it expresses, language is here much more 
closely related to symbolism than in modern languages, and that it is 
from symbolism that the multiplicity of meanings of which spoke a mo-
ment ago is held; perhaps one could even show that the conception of 
dharma is directly related to the symbolic representation of the ‘axis’ by 
the figure of the ‘Tree of the World.’ 
Moreover, Mr.

Mees rightly points out the kinship between the notion 
of dharma and that of ṛta, which etymologically has the meaning of ‘rec-
titude’ (in the same way that Dé of the Far-Eastern tradition is also very 
close to dharma), which obviously still recalls the idea of the ‘axis,’ being 
of a constant and invariable direction.

At the same time, this term ṛta is 
identical to the word ‘rite,’ and it might be said that the latter, at least at 
its origin, designates all that is accomplished in accordance with order; 
it comes to take a more restricted meaning only as a result of the degen-
eration that gives rise to a ‘profane’ activity in any domain whatsoever.

It must be understood that the rite always retains the same character, 
and that it is the non-ritual activity that is somehow deviated: all that is 
only ‘convention’ or ‘custom,’ without any profound reason that did not 
originally exist, and ritual, traditionally considered, has nothing to do 
with it, which can never be anything other than a forgery or parody.

But 
there is something more: when we speak here of conformity to order, we 
must not only mean human order, but also, and even above all, the cos-
mic order; in any traditional conception there is always a strict corre-
spondence between one and the other, and it is precisely the rite that 
maintains their relations in a conscious manner, implying a collaboration 
between man, in the sphere where his activity is exercised, and the cos-
mic order itself in a way.386 
The Veil of Isis

It must be understood that the rite always retains the same character, 
and that it is the non-ritual activity that is somehow deviated: all that is 
only ‘convention’ or ‘custom,’ without any profound reason that did not 
originally exist, and ritual, traditionally considered, has nothing to do 
with it, which can never be anything other than a forgery or parody. But 
there is something more: when we speak here of conformity to order, we 
must not only mean human order, but also, and even above all, the cos-
mic order; in any traditional conception there is always a strict corre-
spondence between one and the other, and it is precisely the rite that 
maintains their relations in a conscious manner, implying a collaboration 
between man, in the sphere where his activity is exercised, and the cos-
mic order itself in a way. Likewise, the notion of dharma is not limited to man, but extends to 
all beings and all their states of manifestation; that is why a purely social

--- PAGE BREAK ---cos-
mic order itself in a way. Likewise, the notion of dharma is not limited to man, but extends to 
all beings and all their states of manifestation; that is why a purely social

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
387 
conception cannot be sufficient to allow it to be understood in depth: this 
is nothing more than a particular application, which must never be sep-
arated from the primordial and universal ‘law’ or ‘norm’ of which it is 
only the translation in the specifically human mode. Without a doubt, we 
can speak of a proper dharma of each being (svadharma) or of each group 
of beings, such as a human collectivity for example, but this is really only 
a particularization of the dharma in relation to the special conditions of 
this being or of this group, whose nature and constitution are necessarily 
analogous to those of the whole of which it is a part, that this whole is 
either a certain state of existence or even the whole manifestation, for 
analogy always applies to all levels and degrees. We then see that we are 
far from a ‘moral’ conception: if an idea such as that of ‘justice’ is some-
times appropriate to render the meaning of dharma, it is only in so far as 
it is a human expression of equilibrium or harmony, i.e., one of the as-
pects of maintaining cosmic stability. All the more so that an idea of ‘vir-
tue’ can apply here only insofar as it indicates that the actions of a being 
are in conformity with its own nature, and, by the same token, with the 
total order that has its reflection or its image in the nature of each being. 
In the same way, if we consider a human collectivity and not an isolated 
individuality, the idea of ‘legislation’ only enters into the idea of dharma 
because this legislation must normally be an adaptation of the cosmic 
order to the social milieu; this character is particularly visible with regard 
to the institution of castes, as we will see in a future article. In this way, 
all the secondary meanings of the word dharma are explained; there is 
no difficulty except when we wish to consider them separately and with-
out seeing how they are derived from a common principle, which is, one 
might say, the fundamental unity to which their multiplicity is re-
duced.441 
Before concluding this overview, we must still, to more precisely sit-
uate the notion of dharma, indicate the place it occupies among the goals 
that the traditional Hindu scriptures assign to human life. These goals 
are four in number and are thus listed in an ascending hierarchical order: 
artha, kāma, dharma, mokṣa; the final, ‘Deliverance,’ is only the supreme 
goal, and, being beyond the domain of manifestation, it is of an order 
entirely different from the other three and out of proportion to these, as 
the absolute is out of proportion to the relative. As for the first three 
goals, which all relate to the manifest, artha includes all that is good ofe other three and out of proportion to these, as 
the absolute is out of proportion to the relative. As for the first three 
goals, which all relate to the manifest, artha includes all that is good of

441 It is easy to also understand that the social application of dharma is always 
translated, if one wishes to use modern language, as ‘duty’ and not as ‘right’: the 
proper dharma of a being can obviously only express itself only by what he must 
do himself, and not by what others must do to him, which is naturally the 
dharma of these other beings.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

388 
The Veil of Isis

the corporeal order; kāma is desire, whose satisfaction constitutes the 
good of the psychic order; since dharma is superior to this, its realization 
must be considered as properly pertaining to the spiritual order, which 
accords with the character of the universality that we have recognized. 
However, it goes without saying that all these goals, including dharma 
itself, being always contingent as beyond the manifestation they cannot 
be envisaged, can never be but subordinated to the supreme goal, to 
which they are in fact only means. Each of these same aims is also sub-
ordinate to those which are superior to it, being still relative; when they 
are listed only with the exclusion of mokṣa, it is then a point of view 
limited to the consideration of the manifested, and only thus can dharma 
sometimes also appear as the highest goal offered to man. We will later 
see that theses goals are more particularly in correspondence with the 
varṇaḥ; we can say right now that this correspondence essentially rests 
on the theory of the three guṇāḥ, which shows that, here again, the hu-
man order appears as indissolubly bound to the entire cosmic order.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Symbolism and Philosophy 
Symbolisme et philosophie, November 1935.uṇāḥ, which shows that, here again, the hu-
man order appears as indissolubly bound to the entire cosmic order.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Symbolism and Philosophy 
Symbolisme et philosophie, November 1935.

The philosophers, who claim to take hold of the most diverse of things 
as if their competence extends to everything, sometimes also deal with 
symbolism, therein they arrive at the strangest ideas and theories; this is 
how some people wished to constitute a ‘psychology of symbolism,’ per-
haps we will return to this subject. However, some of them recognize 
that symbolism does not belong to philosophy, but they intend to give 
this assertion a clearly unfavorable meaning, as if symbolism was some-
thing inferior and even negligible in their eyes; one may even wonder if 
they are simply confusing it with the pseudo-symbolism of certain liter-
ary men, thus taking an abusive and diverted use of the word for its true 
meaning. In reality, if symbolism is a ‘form of thought’ as is said, which 
is true from a certain point of view, but does not prevent it from being 
something else first and foremost, as we will say later, as philosophy is 
something radically different and opposing it in many regards. We can 
go further: this form of thought that represents philosophy corresponds 
only to a very special point of view and is valid only in a rather limited 
domain, of which its greatest fault is perhaps not knowing, or not want-
ing to know, its limits. Symbolism, as we have explained often, has a very 
different meaning; even seeing it as nothing more than two forms of 
thought would be a grave mistake to place them on the same plane. That 
philosophers are of a different opinion does not prove anything; to put 
things in their proper place, we must above all consider these impartially, 
which the philosophers cannot do in this case. As for us, we are well 
convinced that, as philosophers, they will never be able to penetrate the 
most profound meaning of the least symbol, because there is something 
there which is entirely outside their way of thinking and which neces-
sarily exceeds their comprehension. 
Those who already know all that we have said elsewhere regarding 
philosophy cannot be surprised to see ourselves attributing to it only a 
relative and secondary importance; moreover, without even reaching the 
essence of things and in order to realize that its position can only be sub-
ordinate, it is sufficient to remember that every mode of expression nec-
essarily has a symbolic character, in the most general meaning of this 
term, in relation to what it expresses. Philosophers can only use butsufficient to remember that every mode of expression nec-
essarily has a symbolic character, in the most general meaning of this 
term, in relation to what it expresses. Philosophers can only use but

--- PAGE BREAK ---

390 
The Veil of Isisexpression nec-
essarily has a symbolic character, in the most general meaning of this 
term, in relation to what it expresses. Philosophers can only use but

--- PAGE BREAK ---

390 
The Veil of Isis

words, and, as we recalled in our previous articles, these words in them-
selves are and can be nothing but symbols; therefore, it is, in a certain 
sense, philosophy which enters the domain of symbolism, which is con-
sequently subordinate to it, and not the inverse. 
However, there is, in a certain relation, an opposition between phi-
losophy and symbolism, if one understands the latter in the more re-
stricted sense which is most habitually given to it: this opposition con-
sists in what philosophy is, as all that is expressed in the ordinary forms 
of language is essentially analytic, while symbolism itself is essentially 
synthetic. The form of language is, by definition, ‘discursive’ as it is the 
proper instrument of human reason, of which it follows and copies the 
march as precisely as possible; on the contrary, symbolism properly 
speaking is truly ‘intuitive,’ which, quite naturally, renders it incompa-
rably more apt than language to serve as a point of support for intellec-
tual and supra-rational intuition, this is why it forms, as we have already 
said, the mode of expression par excellence of all initiatic education. As 
for philosophy, it represents in a way the type of discursive thought 
(which, naturally, does not mean that all discursive thought has a specif-
ically philosophic character) that imposes limitations which it cannot 
free itself from; on the other hand, symbolism, as a support for intuitive 
thought, opens truly unlimited possibilities. 
Philosophy, through its discursive character, is exclusively rational, 
since this character is that which belongs to reason itself; the domain of 
philosophy and its possibilities cannot extend in any case beyond what 
reason is capable of attaining, and yet it represents only a certain partic-
ular use of this faculty, for it is evident, if only because of the existence 
of independent sciences, that there is in the very order of rational 
knowledge, many things which are not within the purview of philoso-
phy. Moreover, it is not a question here of challenging the value of reason 
in its own domain so long as it does not claim to exceed it, but this value 
can only be relative just as this domain is relative; besides, does the word 
ratio itself not originally have the meaning of ‘relation’? We will not even 
dispute the legitimacy of the dialectic, even within certain limitations, 
although philosophers all too often abuse it, but this dialectic must never 
be anything but a means, not an end within itself, and, moreover, it may 
be that this means is not applicable to all indistinctly; to be aware of this, 
one must only go beyond the bounds of the dialectic, and that is why the 
philosopher cannot do as such. 
Even admitting that philosophy goes as far as is theoretically possible, 
meaning to the extreme limits of the domain of reason, it will still be very 
little in truth, because, to use an Evangelical expression, “only one thingphy goes as far as is theoretically possible, 
meaning to the extreme limits of the domain of reason, it will still be very 
little in truth, because, to use an Evangelical expression, “only one thing

--- PAGE BREAK ---s theoretically possible, 
meaning to the extreme limits of the domain of reason, it will still be very 
little in truth, because, to use an Evangelical expression, “only one thing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
391 
is necessary,” and it is precisely this thing which will always remain for-
bidden to him, because it is above and beyond all rational knowledge. 
What can the discursive methods of philosophy do in the face of the in-
expressible, which is, as we explained in our last article, the ‘mystery’ in 
the most true and profound meaning of the word? Symbolism, on the 
contrary, has the essential function of making this inexpressible ‘asser-
tion’ able to provide the support which will enable intellectual intuition 
to reach it effectively; who, having understood this, would still dare to 
deny the immense superiority of symbolism and to dispute that its reach 
is incomparably beyond that of any possible philosophy? So excellent 
and so perfect as a philosophy may be (and it is certainly not modern 
philosophies that would reach such a hypothesis), it remains ‘only a piece 
of straw,’ this word being from Saint Thomas Aquinas himself, which 
should not be brought to depreciate philosophic thought beyond meas-
ure. 
But there is something else: considering symbolism as a ‘form of 
thought,’ it is only considered in the purely human relation, which is the 
only one under which a comparison with philosophy is possible; it must 
doubtlessly be considered in this way, but, in truth, it is far from being 
sufficient and represents only the outermost side of the question. We 
have all too often had occasion to insist on the ‘non-human’ side of sym-
bolism so that it is not necessary to return to it at great length; what is 
sufficient, in fact, is to state that it has its foundation in the very nature 
of beings and things, i.e. in perfect conformity with the laws of this na-
ture, and to reflect that the natural laws themselves are only at their es-
sence an expression and externalization, so to speak, of the Divine or 
Principle Will. The true foundation of symbolism is, let us repeat once 
again, the correspondence that exists between all the orders of reality, 
which connects them to each other, and which consequently extends to 
natural order taken as a whole alongside supernatural order itself; by 
virtue of this correspondence, the whole of nature is itself only a symbol, 
i.e. it receives its true meaning only if it is regarded as a support for rais-
ing us to the knowledge of supernatural truths, or ‘metaphysics’ in the 
true sense of this word, which is precisely the essential function of sym-
bolism and what is also the profound raison d’être of all ‘traditional sci-
ence.’442 By this very fact, there is in symbolism something whose origin 
goes higher and further than humanity, and one could say that this origin 
is in the very work of the Divine Word: it is firstly in the universal man-ct, there is in symbolism something whose origin 
goes higher and further than humanity, and one could say that this origin 
is in the very work of the Divine Word: it is firstly in the universal man-

442 Therefore, the world is like a divine language for those who know how to 
understand it: according to the Biblical expression, ”Cæli enarrant gloriam Dei” 
(Psalm. 18:2).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

392 
The Veil of Isise world is like a divine language for those who know how to 
understand it: according to the Biblical expression, ”Cæli enarrant gloriam Dei” 
(Psalm. 18:2).

--- PAGE BREAK ---

392 
The Veil of Isis

ifestation itself, and then, especially in relation to humanity, in the Pri-
mordial Tradition, which is also a ‘revelation’ of the Word; this Tradition, 
which all the others are only derivative forms, is incorporated, so to 
speak, into symbols which have been transmitted from age to age with-
out having any ‘historical’ origin attributed to them, and the process of 
this kind of symbolic incorporation is still analogous, in its order, to that 
of the manifestation.443 
In the face of these qualifications professing symbolism’s transcend-
ent value, what can philosophy ever lay claim to? The origin of symbol-
ism is truly identical to the origin of time, if it is not, in a sense, beyond 
time, since time includes only a specific mode of manifestation. Moreo-
ver, no authentically traditional symbol can be attributed to a human in-
ventor; should this not all be food for thought for those that are capable? 
On the contrary, all philosophy only goes back to a definitive period, in 
sum, a period that is always recent, even if it is a question of ‘classical’ 
antiquity which is only a very relative antiquity (which proves that, even 
in the humane, this form of thought is not essential);444 it is the work of 
a man whose name is known to us as well as the dates on which he lived, 
and it is in this very name which is usually used to designate it, which 
shows there is nothing here but the human and individual. This is why 
we said earlier that we cannot think of making a comparison between 
philosophy and symbolism unless we consider it exclusively on the hu-
man side, since, for the rest, we cannot find in the philosophic order any 
equivalence or correspondence whatsoever. 
At best, philosophy is ‘human wisdom,’ but it is only that in any case, 
and this is why we say that it is something very little at essence; it is only 
that because it is a perfectly rational speculation, and reason is a purely 
human faculty, the very one by which the individual human nature is 
defined as such. ‘Human wisdom,’ as well as ‘worldly wisdom,’ in the 
sense that the ‘world’ is understood in the Gospel;445 in the same sense, 
we could still say just as well ‘profane wisdom.’ All these expressions areman wisdom,’ as well as ‘worldly wisdom,’ in the 
sense that the ‘world’ is understood in the Gospel;445 in the same sense, 
we could still say just as well ‘profane wisdom.’ All these expressions are

443 In this connection, let us recall once again, in order to leave no room for 
ambiguity, that we absolutely refuse to attribute the name ‘tradition’ to all the 
purely human and ‘profane’ things which, in our time, is all too often applied in 
an abusive manner to any philosophic doctrine. 
444 There is reason to wonder why philosophy originated in the sixth century 
B.C., a period with rather odd characteristics, as we have pointed out on differ-
ent occasions. 
445 In Sanskrit, the word laukika, ‘worldly’ (derived from loka, ‘world’), is often 
taken with the same acceptance as in the Evangelic language, i.e. with the mean-
ing of ‘profane,’ and this concordance seems very worthy to us to note.

--- PAGE BREAK ---m loka, ‘world’), is often 
taken with the same acceptance as in the Evangelic language, i.e. with the mean-
ing of ‘profane,’ and this concordance seems very worthy to us to note.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
393 
synonymous at their essence, and they clearly indicate that what is in-
volved is not true wisdom, it is at most a shadow.446 Moreover, let us 
insist again, even a philosophy that is as perfect as possible is truly under 
this shadow and can pretend to be nothing more, but, in fact, most phi-
losophies are not even that, they are only constructions devoid of any 
solid foundation, more or less fanciful hypotheses, simple individual 
opinions without authority and real significance. 
In concluding, we can summarize in a few words the substance of our 
thought: philosophy is only ‘profane knowledge,’ while symbolism, un-
derstood in its true sense, is essentially part of ‘sacred science.’ We know 
very well that most of our contemporaries, if not the majority, are unfor-
tunately unable to make the distinction between these two orders of 
knowledge as is appropriate (if a ‘profane’ knowledge truly deserves this 
title); naturally, it is not these that we are addressing, because it is only 
‘sacred science’ that we intend to concern ourselves with.

446 Moreover, even considering the proper meaning of words, philosophia is not 
sophia, ‘wisdom’; it can only be a preparation or routing in relation to it, so it 
could be said that philosophy becomes illegitimate as soon as it is no longer 
intended to lead to something beyond it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n only be a preparation or routing in relation to it, so it 
could be said that philosophy becomes illegitimate as soon as it is no longer 
intended to lead to something beyond it.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Varṇaḥ 
Varna, November 1935. 
Mr. Gualtherus H. Mees, in his book Dharma and Society which we have 
already spoken of, expands on the question of castes; he does not accept 
this word in the sense we understand it, but he prefers to keep the San-
skrit word varṇaḥ without translation or rendering it by an expression 
such as that of ‘natural classes,’ which, in fact, quite well defines what it 
is, since it is truly a hierarchical distribution of human beings in accord-
ance with the specific nature of each of them. However, it is to be feared 
that the word ‘classes,’ even accompanied by a qualifier, evokes the idea 
of something more or less comparable to the social classes of the Occi-
dent which are purely and truly artificial, and which have nothing in 
common with a traditional hierarchy, of which they represent at most a 
kind of parody or caricature. For our part, we find that it is better to use 
the word ‘castes,’ which certainly has only a very conventional value, 
but which, at the least, has been made expressly to designate the Hindu 
organization; Mr. Mees reserves it for the multiple castes that actually 
exist in present-day India, and in which he wishes to see something quite 
different from the original varṇāsaḥ. We cannot share this way of think-
ing, because these are really only secondary subdivisions, due to a greater 
complexity or differentiation of the social organization, and, whatever 
their multiplicity, they are nevertheless still part of the four varṇāsaḥ, 
which alone constitute the fundamental hierarchy and remain neces-
sarily invariable as an expression of traditional principles and a reflection 
of the cosmic order in the human social order. 
There is, under this distinction that Mr. Mees wishes to establish be-
tween varṇaḥ and ‘caste,’ an idea which seems largely inspired by the 
Bergsonian theories on ‘open societies’ and ‘closed societies,’ although 
he never explicitly refers to these: he tries to distinguish between two 
aspects of the dharma, one which corresponds more or less to varṇaḥ and 
the other to ‘caste,’ whose predominance would assert itself alternately 
in what he calls ‘periods of life’ and ‘periods of forms,’ to which he re-
spectively attributes ‘dynamic’ and ‘static’ characters. We have no inten-
tion of discussing here these philosophico-historic conceptions which 
obviously do not rely on traditional data; it is more interesting for us to 
point out a misunderstanding regarding the word jāti, which the authorhere these philosophico-historic conceptions which 
obviously do not rely on traditional data; it is more interesting for us to 
point out a misunderstanding regarding the word jāti, which the author

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
395 
believes to designate what he calls ‘caste,’ whereas, in reality, it is simply 
used as an equivalent or synonym of varṇaḥ.

The word jāti literally 
means ‘birth,’ but it should not be understood, at least not exclusively or 
in principle, in the sense of ‘heredity’; it designates the individual nature 
of the being as a set of possibilities which it will develop during its exist-
ence, insofar as it is necessarily determined from its very birth.

This na-
ture results first and foremost from the being in itself, and secondly from 
the influences of the milieu, of which heredity properly speaking is apart 
of.

It must also be added that this very milieu is normally determined by 
a certain law of ‘affinity,’ to conform as closely as possible to the proper 
tendencies of the being who is born there; we say normally because there 
may be more or fewer exceptions, at least in a period of confusion like 
the Kali-Yuga.

That being so, we do not see at all what an ‘open’ caste 
might be, if we understand by that (and what else could we understand?) 
that an individual would have the possibility of changing castes in a 
given moment; that would imply in him a change of nature which is just 
as inconceivable as a sudden change of species in the life of an animal or 
plant (and it may be remarked that the word jāti also has the meaning of 
‘species,’ which further justifies this comparison).

An apparent change 
of caste would be nothing more than the reparation of an error, in the 
case where one would have first attributed to the individual a caste which 
was not really his; the fact that such an error can sometimes occur (pre-
cisely because of the confusion of the Kali-Yuga) does not preclude, in a 
general way, the possibility of determining the true caste from birth.

If 
Mr.--- PAGE BREAK ---

An apparent change 
of caste would be nothing more than the reparation of an error, in the 
case where one would have first attributed to the individual a caste which 
was not really his; the fact that such an error can sometimes occur (pre-
cisely because of the confusion of the Kali-Yuga) does not preclude, in a 
general way, the possibility of determining the true caste from birth. If 
Mr. Mees seems to believe that the consideration of heredity would in-
tervene only then, it is because he probably does not know that the 
means of this determination can be provided by certain traditional sci-
ences, if only through astrology (which, naturally, here is something 
quite different from the claimed ‘scientific astrology’ of some modern 
Westerners and has nothing to do with the ‘conjectural’ or ‘divinatory’ 
art, nor with the empiricism of statistics and calculation of probabilities). This being established, let us return to the very notion of varṇaḥ: this 
word properly means ‘color,’ but also, by extension, ‘quality’ in general, 
and that is why it can be taken to designate individual nature; Mr. Mees 
quite rightly dismisses the bizarre interpretation proposed by some, who 
wish to see in the meaning of ‘color’ the proof that the distinction of the 
varṇāsaḥ was originally based on differences of race, of which it is abso-
lutely impossible to find confirmation anywhere. The truth is that if col-
ors are actually attributed to varṇāsaḥ, it is purely symbolic, and the ‘key’ 
of this symbolism is given by the correspondence with the guṇāḥ, a cor-
respondence which is particularly indicated very explicitly in this text of 
the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa: “When Brahmā, in accordance with his design, wished

--- PAGE BREAK ---

396 
The Veil of Isisāḥ, a cor-
respondence which is particularly indicated very explicitly in this text of 
the Viṣṇu-Purāṇa: “When Brahmā, in accordance with his design, wished

--- PAGE BREAK ---

396 
The Veil of Isis

to produce the world, beings in which sattva prevailed came from his 
mouth; others in which rajas was predominant came from his chest; oth-
ers in which rajas and tamas were great came from his thighs; finally, 
others came from his feet, having as their main characteristic tamas. Of 
these beings, the four varṇāsaḥ were composed, the Brāhmaṇāḥ, the 
Kṣatriyāḥ, the Vaiśyāḥ, and the Śūdrāḥ.” Sattva being represented by the 
color white, this is naturally attributed to the Brāhmaṇāḥ; likewise, red, 
the representative color of rajas, is attributed to the Kṣatriyāḥ; the 
Vaiśyāḥ, characterized by a mixture of the two lower guṇau, carries the 
symbolic color of yellow; finally, black, the color of tamas, is conse-
quently the one that suits the Śūdrah.

The hierarchization of varṇāsaḥ, thus determined by the guṇāḥ which 
predominate respectively in them, is superimposed exactly over that of 
the elements, as we have explained in our recent study on this subject; 
this is immediately shown by comparing the diagram opposite the one 
we gave then. It must only be remarked, for the sake of completeness, 
that the place of the ether must be occupied here by Haṃsa, i.e., by the 
single primordial caste that existed in the Kṛta-Yuga, and which con-
tained the four later varṇāsaḥ in principle and undifferentiation, in the 
same way that the ether contains the four other elements. 
On the other hand, Mr. Mees, while also defending himself from push-
ing these analogies too far, tries to indicate a correspondence of the four 
varṇāsaḥ with the four āśramāḥ or regular stages of existence, which we 
will not examine here, and also with the four purposes of human life of 
which we have spoken previously regarding dharma; in the latter case,

--- PAGE BREAK ---egular stages of existence, which we 
will not examine here, and also with the four purposes of human life of 
which we have spoken previously regarding dharma; in the latter case,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
397 
the very fact that it is a quaternary division has induced it to be mani-
festly inaccurate. Indeed, it is obviously inadmissible that we propose as 
a goal, even if it is the most inferior of all, to obtain something that cor-
responds purely and simply to tamas; the distribution, if carried out as-
cending from below, must, in fact, begin at the degree which is immedi-
ately superior to that, as indicated by our second diagram, and it is easy 
to understand that dharma corresponds to sattva, kāma to rajas, and ar-
tha to a mixture of rajas and tamas. At the same time, the relation of 
these goals with the character and the role of the three higher varṇāsaḥ 
(i.e., of those whose members possess the ārya and dvija qualities) then 
appear on their own: the function of the Vaiśya refers to the acquisition 
of artha or the goods of the corporeal order; kāma, where desire is the 
motive for the activity which is proper to the Kṣatriya; and the Brāhmaṇa 
is truly the representative and the natural guardian of the dharma. As for 
mokṣa, this supreme goal is, as we have already said, an order entirely 
different from the other three, without any measure in common with 
them. It is therefore beyond all that corresponds to the particular func-
tions of the varṇāsaḥ, and it cannot be contained just as transient and 
contingent goals are in the sphere which represents the domain of con-
ditioned existence, since it is precisely the liberation of this very exist-
ence; naturally, it is also beyond the three guṇāḥ, which concern only the 
states of universal manifestation.main of con-
ditioned existence, since it is precisely the liberation of this very exist-
ence; naturally, it is also beyond the three guṇāḥ, which concern only the 
states of universal manifestation.

These few considerations show quite clearly that when it comes to 
traditional institutions, a purely ‘sociological’ point of view is insuffi-
cient to get to the essence of things, since the true foundation of these 
institutions is of a strictly ‘cosmological’ order; it goes without saying

--- PAGE BREAK ---

398 
The Veil of Isis

that certain shortcomings in this respect must not prevent us from rec-
ognizing the merit of Mr. Mees’ work, which is certainly far superior to 
most of the work that other Westerners have devoted to the same ques-
tions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Synthesis and Syncretism 
Synthèse et syncrétisme, December 1935.which is certainly far superior to 
most of the work that other Westerners have devoted to the same ques-
tions.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Synthesis and Syncretism 
Synthèse et syncrétisme, December 1935.

Among those of our contemporaries who claim to study traditional doc-
trines without penetrating their essence, especially those who consider 
them from a ‘historic’ and academic point of view, have an unfortunate 
tendency to confuse ‘synthesis’ and ‘syncretism.’ This remark applies in 
a very general way to the ‘profane’ study of the doctrines of the exoteric 
order as well as those of the esoteric order; the distinction between them 
is seldom made, and the soi-disant ‘science of religions’ deals with a mul-
titude of things which, in reality, have nothing ‘religious’ about them, as 
is the case in the initiatic ‘mysteries’ of antiquity. This ‘science’ itself 
clearly affirms its ‘profane’ character, positing in principle that he who 
is outside of all religion, and who, consequently, cannot have any reli-
gion (we would rather say tradition, without specifying any particular 
modality), that an entirely external knowledge is the only one qualified 
to deal with it ‘scientifically.’ The truth is that, under the pretext of dis-
interested knowledge, a clearly anti-traditional intention is concealed: it 
is a ‘criticism’ intended above all, in the minds of its promotes and less 
consciously in those who follow them, to destroy all tradition, by wishing 
to think of it as a set of psychological facts, social or otherwise, but in all 
cases as being purely human. We will not dwell on this point further, 
because, currently, we propose only to point out a confusion which can 
obviously exist independent of this anti-traditional intention although 
characteristic of the ‘profane’ mentality. 
‘Syncretism,’ understood in its true meaning, is nothing more than a 
simple juxtaposition of elements from various sources, gathered ‘from 
the outside,’ so to speak, without any principle of a more profound order 
unifying them. It is obvious that such an assemblage cannot truly consti-
tute a doctrine, any more than a heap of stones constitute a building; 
even if some who superficially consider fall under this doctrine, this illu-
sion cannot withstand scrutiny. There is no need to go far to find authen-
tic examples of this syncretism: modern counterfeits of tradition, such as 
Occultism and Theosophy, are nothing other than this at essence; no-
tions borrowed from various traditional forms, being generally misun-
derstood and distorted, are mixed with conceptions belonging to philos-
ophy and profane science. There are also philosophical theories formeded from various traditional forms, being generally misun-
derstood and distorted, are mixed with conceptions belonging to philos-
ophy and profane science. There are also philosophical theories formed

--- PAGE BREAK ---

400 
The Veil of Isisalmost entirely from fragments of other theories, and here syncretism 
usually takes the name of ‘eclectism’; this case is less serious in fact than 
the preceding one, because it is only a matter of philosophy, i.e.

of pro-
fane thought which, at least, does not try to pretend to be something else.

Syncretism, in any case, is always an essentially profane process, by 
its very ‘externality’; not only is it not synthesis, but, in a sense, it is quite 
the opposite.

Indeed, synthesis, by definition, begins with principles, i.e.

from what is most internal; one might say, it goes from the center to the 
circumference, while syncretism stands at the circumference itself, in 
pure multiplicity, in an ‘atomic’ sense by the indefinite detail of elements 
taken one by one, considered in themselves and for themselves, sepa-
rated from their principle, i.e.

separated from their true raison d’être.

Therefore, syncretism has an entirely analytical character, whether it 
likes it or not; it is true that no one speaks so often or so willingly of 
synthesis as certain ‘syncretists,’ but this proves only one thing: they feel 
that if they recognized the true nature of their composite theories, they 
would confess that they are not the depositories of any tradition, and the 
work they have done is no different from the work that the premier ‘re-
searcher’ came to by somehow assembling the various notions that he 
would have drawn from books.

If they have an obvious interest in passing their syncretism off as syn-
thesis, the error of those we spoke of at the beginning usually occurs in 
the inverse: when they find themselves in the presence of a real synthe-
sis, they seldom label it as syncretism.Therefore, syncretism has an entirely analytical character, whether it 
likes it or not; it is true that no one speaks so often or so willingly of 
synthesis as certain ‘syncretists,’ but this proves only one thing: they feel 
that if they recognized the true nature of their composite theories, they 
would confess that they are not the depositories of any tradition, and the 
work they have done is no different from the work that the premier ‘re-
searcher’ came to by somehow assembling the various notions that he 
would have drawn from books.

If they have an obvious interest in passing their syncretism off as syn-
thesis, the error of those we spoke of at the beginning usually occurs in 
the inverse: when they find themselves in the presence of a real synthe-
sis, they seldom label it as syncretism.

The explanation of such an atti-
tude is very simple: adhering to the point of view which is the most nar-
rowly profane and the most external as can be conceived, they have no 
consciousness of what is of another order, as they do not wish or cannot 
admit that certain things escape them, they naturally seek to reduce eve-
rything to processes that are within the reach of their own understand-
ing.

Imagining that all doctrine is only the work of one or more human 
individuals, without any intervention of superior elements (for it must 
not be forgotten that this is the fundamental postulate of all their ‘sci-
ence’), they attribute to these individuals what they themselves would be 
capable of doing in such a case; it goes without saying that they do not 
care at all about whether the doctrine they study in their own way is or 
is not the expression of the truth, because such a question, not being 
‘historical,’ does not even arise for them.400 
The Veil of Isis

The explanation of such an atti-
tude is very simple: adhering to the point of view which is the most nar-
rowly profane and the most external as can be conceived, they have no 
consciousness of what is of another order, as they do not wish or cannot 
admit that certain things escape them, they naturally seek to reduce eve-
rything to processes that are within the reach of their own understand-
ing. Imagining that all doctrine is only the work of one or more human 
individuals, without any intervention of superior elements (for it must 
not be forgotten that this is the fundamental postulate of all their ‘sci-
ence’), they attribute to these individuals what they themselves would be 
capable of doing in such a case; it goes without saying that they do not 
care at all about whether the doctrine they study in their own way is or 
is not the expression of the truth, because such a question, not being 
‘historical,’ does not even arise for them. It is even doubtful that the idea 
has ever occurred to them that there can be a truth of a different order 
than simple ‘truth of fact,’ which alone can be an object of erudition; as 
for the interest that such a study may present for them in these condi-
tions, we must admit that we cannot render it so, because it is a mentality 
that is foreign to us.

--- PAGE BREAK ---René Guénon 
401 
Be that as it may, what is particularly important to notice is that the 
false conception that wants to see syncretism in traditional doctrines has 
the direct and inevitable consequence of what may be called the theory 
of ‘borrowing’: when one finds the existence of similar elements in two 
different doctrinal forms, one hastens to suppose that one of them must 
have borrowed from the other.

Of course, this is not a question of the 
common origin of traditions, nor of their authentic filiation with the reg-
ular transmission and the successive adaptations that it entails; all this, 
escaping the means of investigation available to the profane historian, 
does not exist for him.

They wish to speak only of loans in the grossest 
sense of the word, of a kind of copy or plagiarism of a tradition by an-
other with whom it has been in contact as a result of all contingent cir-
cumstances, of an accidental incorporation of detached elements, not an-
swering to any profound reason, and that is indeed what the definition 
of syncretism implies.

Moreover, one does not wonder if it is not normal 
that the same truth receives more or less similar expressions or at least 
those that are comparable between them, independently of all borrow-
ing, and they cannot ask this, since, as we said earlier, they are resolved 
to ignore the existence of this truth.They wish to speak only of loans in the grossest 
sense of the word, of a kind of copy or plagiarism of a tradition by an-
other with whom it has been in contact as a result of all contingent cir-
cumstances, of an accidental incorporation of detached elements, not an-
swering to any profound reason, and that is indeed what the definition 
of syncretism implies.

Moreover, one does not wonder if it is not normal 
that the same truth receives more or less similar expressions or at least 
those that are comparable between them, independently of all borrow-
ing, and they cannot ask this, since, as we said earlier, they are resolved 
to ignore the existence of this truth.

Furthermore, this last explanation 
would be insufficient without the notion of primordial traditional unity, 
but at least it would represent a certain aspect of reality; let us add that 
it must in no way be confused with another theory, no less profane than 
that of ‘loans,’ although of a different kind, which invokes what is com-
monly called the ‘unity of the human mind,’ by hearing in this an exclu-
sively psychological meaning, where, in fact, such a unity does not exist, 
and implying that any doctrine is merely a product of the ‘human mind,’ 
so that this ‘psychologism’ does not consider the question of doctrinal 
truths any more than the ‘historicism’ of proponents of syncretic expla-
nations does.

We will also point out that the same idea of syncretism and ‘borrow-
ing,’ applied more specifically to the traditional scriptures, gives rise to 
the search for hypothetical ‘sources’ and the assumption of ‘interpola-
tions,’ which is, as we know, one of the greatest resources of ‘criticism’ 
in its destructive work, whose sole real goal is the negation of any ‘supra-
human’ inspiration.

This is closely related to the anti-traditional inten-
tion that we indicated at the beginning; let us just note this in passing, 
since this point of view is not what we intend to develop at the moment.--- PAGE BREAK ---

We will also point out that the same idea of syncretism and ‘borrow-
ing,’ applied more specifically to the traditional scriptures, gives rise to 
the search for hypothetical ‘sources’ and the assumption of ‘interpola-
tions,’ which is, as we know, one of the greatest resources of ‘criticism’ 
in its destructive work, whose sole real goal is the negation of any ‘supra-
human’ inspiration. This is closely related to the anti-traditional inten-
tion that we indicated at the beginning; let us just note this in passing, 
since this point of view is not what we intend to develop at the moment. But, at the least, we must recall the incompatibility of any ‘humanist’ 
explanation with the traditional spirit, an incompatibility which is obvi-
ous, since not considering the ‘non-human’ element is to properly ignore 
what the very essence of tradition is, without which there is nothing that 
deserves to bear this name.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

402 
The Veil of Isisdering the ‘non-human’ element is to properly ignore 
what the very essence of tradition is, without which there is nothing that 
deserves to bear this name.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

402 
The Veil of Isis

On the other hand, it suffices, in order to refute the syncretistic con-
ception, to recall that all traditional doctrine necessarily has as its center 
and starting point the knowledge of metaphysical principles, and that all 
that it entails, in a more or less secondary capacity, is only the application 
of these principles to different domains; this amounts to saying that it is 
essentially synthetic, and, from what we have explained above, synthesis 
excludes all syncretism by its very nature.  
We can go further: if it is impossible for there to be syncretism in the 
traditional doctrines themselves, it is equally impossible for any of those 
who have truly understood these doctrines to resort to syncretism, those 
who have necessarily understood the vanity of such a process, as well as 
the vanity of all those processes which are peculiar to profane thought. 
All that is really inspired by traditional knowledge always proceeds 
‘from within’ and not ‘from without’; anyone who is aware of the essen-
tial unity of all traditions may, in order to expound and interpret the 
doctrine, appeal to means of expression coming from various traditional 
forms depending on the case, if he considers that there is some advantage 
in this, but there will never be anything that can be assimilated from near 
or far to any syncretism or the ‘comparative method’ of scholars. On the 
one hand, the central and principal unity illuminates and dominates eve-
rything; on the other hand, this unity being absent or, to put it better, 
hidden from the eyes of the profane ‘seeker,’ he can only fumble in the 
‘outer darkness,’ vainly thrashing about in the midst of a chaos that could 
only be brought into order by the initiatic Fiat Lux which, due to his lack 
of ‘qualification,’ will never be proffered for him.darkness,’ vainly thrashing about in the midst of a chaos that could 
only be brought into order by the initiatic Fiat Lux which, due to his lack 
of ‘qualification,’ will never be proffered for him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hrashing about in the midst of a chaos that could 
only be brought into order by the initiatic Fiat Lux which, due to his lack 
of ‘qualification,’ will never be proffered for him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Being and the Milieu 
L’être et le milieu, December 1935. 
With regards to the determination of castes, we have said that the indi-
vidual nature of a being results first from what it is in itself and second-
arily from the influences of the milieu in which it manifests itself; it is 
important to distinguish between these two elements and mark their re-
lations at the same time in a precise manner. For this purpose, we can 
use the geometric representation which we have expounded in The Sym-
bolism of the Cross, relating the first element to the vertical direction and 
the second element to the horizontal direction. Indeed, the vertical will 
then represent what connects all the states of manifestation of the same 
being, which is necessarily the expression of this very being, or, if you 
will, of its ‘personality,’ the direct projection by which it is reflected in 
all states, while the horizontal plane represents the domain of a certain 
sense of manifestation, considered here in the ‘macrocosmic’ sense; con-
sequently, the manifestation of the being in this state will be determined 
by the intersection of the vertical considered with this horizontal plane. 
That being so, it becomes obvious that the point of intersection is not 
arbitrary, but that it is itself determined by the verticality in question, 
inasmuch it differs from any other verticality, i.e., in sum, this being is 
what it is and not what any other being is also manifesting in the same 
state. In other words, it could be said that it is the being who, by its very 
nature, itself determines the conditions of its manifestation, being subject 
that these conditions can only be a specification of the general conditions 
of the contemplated state in any case, since its manifestation must nec-
essarily be a development of possibilities contained in that state, to the 
exclusion of those who belong to other states; this reservation is marked 
geometrically by the preliminary determination of the horizontal plane. 
The being will manifest itself by putting on, as it were, elements bor-
rowed from the environment; in the case of the individual human state, 
these elements will belong to the different modalities of this state, i.e., 
both to the corporeal order and to the subtle or ‘psychic’ order. This point 
is particularly important in order to avoid certain complications which 
are due only to erroneous or incomplete conceptions: indeed, if we trans-
late this in terms of ‘heredity,’ we can say that there is not only a physi-
ologic heredity, but also a psychic heredity, both of which are explaineds or incomplete conceptions: indeed, if we trans-
late this in terms of ‘heredity,’ we can say that there is not only a physi-
ologic heredity, but also a psychic heredity, both of which are explained

--- PAGE BREAK ---

404 
The Veil of Isistrans-
late this in terms of ‘heredity,’ we can say that there is not only a physi-
ologic heredity, but also a psychic heredity, both of which are explained

--- PAGE BREAK ---

404 
The Veil of Isis

in exactly the same way, i.e., by the presence of elements coming from 
the specific milieu in the constitution of the individual when the being’s 
birth took place. In the Occident, some people refuse to admit psychic 
inheritance because, knowing nothing beyond the domain to which they 
relate, they believe that this domain must be the one that belongs to the 
being itself, which represents what it is regardless of any influence from 
the milieu. Others, who will, on the contrary, admit heredity, believe that 
it can be concluded that the being, in all that it is, is entirely determined 
by the milieu, that it is nothing more than the milieu which makes it to 
be, because they cannot conceive of anything outside the corporeal and 
psychic domains. These are therefore two errors, somehow being op-
posed, but which have one and the same source: both reduce the entire 
being to its individual manifestation, and they equally ignore any trans-
cendent principle with respect to the being. What is at the heart of all 
these modern conceptions of the human being is always the idea of the 
Cartesian ‘body-soul’ duality, which, in fact, is purely and simply equiv-
alent to the duality of the physiological and the psychic, considered as 
irreducible and as comprehending all of the being in two terms, when in 
reality they represent only the superficial and the external aspects of the 
manifested being, that they belong to one and the same degree of exist-
ence which is the horizontal plane that we have envisaged, so that one is 
no less contingent than the other, and true being is beyond one as well 
as the other. 
To return to heredity, we must say that it does not fully express the 
influences of the milieu on the individual, but that it constitutes only the 
most immediately attachable part of it; in reality, these influences extend 
much further, and one might even say that they extend indefinitely in all 
directions. Indeed, the cosmic milieu, which is the domain of the state of 
manifestation under consideration, can only be conceived as an ensemble 
of which all the parts are linked together without any solution of conti-
nuity, because to conceive it otherwise would be to suppose it as a ‘void,’ 
whereas this, not being a possibility of manifestation, could not have any 
place. Consequently, there must necessarily be relations, i.e., at essence, 
reciprocal actions and reactions between all the individual beings who 
are manifested in this domain, either simultaneously or successively; 
from the nearest to the farthest, it is only a matter of difference of pro-
portions or degrees, so that heredity, whatever its relative importance in 
relation to all else, no longer appears as only a special case. 
In all cases, be it hereditary or other influences, what we said at the 
beginning is still true: the situation of the being in its milieu is ultimately 
determined by its own nature, the elements that it borrows from its im-itary or other influences, what we said at the 
beginning is still true: the situation of the being in its milieu is ultimately 
determined by its own nature, the elements that it borrows from its im-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
405d at the 
beginning is still true: the situation of the being in its milieu is ultimately 
determined by its own nature, the elements that it borrows from its im-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
405

mediate environment and also those it draws in some way from the in-
definite whole of its domain of manifestation must necessarily be in cor-
respondence with this nature, otherwise it could not effectively assimi-
late them so as to make as secondary modifications of itself. This is what 
the ‘affinity’ we have previously alluded to is: the being, one might say, 
only takes from the milieu that which is in conformity with the possibil-
ities it carries within it, which are those of no other being than that 
which, because of this conformity, must provide the contingent condi-
tions allowing these possibilities to develop or ‘actualize’ during its indi-
vidual manifestation. Moreover, it is evident that any relation between 
any two beings, to be real, must necessarily be the expression of some-
thing which belongs at once to the nature of both; thus, the influence 
that a being seems to undergo from outside and to receive from someone 
other than itself is never really of a possibility inherent in the very nature 
of the being itself, when viewed from a more profound point of view as 
a sort of translation in relation to the milieu. 
However, there is a sense in which one can say that the being really 
experiences the influence of the milieu in its manifestation; but it is only 
insofar as this influence is envisaged by its negative side, i.e. insofar as it 
properly constitutes a limitation for the being. This is an immediate con-
sequence of the conditioned nature of every state of manifestation: the 
being is subjected to certain conditions which have a limiting role, and 
which include firstly the general conditions defining the state under con-
sideration, and then the special conditions defining the particular mode 
of manifestation of this being in this state. Moreover, it is easy to under-
stand that, whatever the appearances, the limitation has no positive ex-
istence, that it is nothing other than a restriction excluding certain pos-
sibilities, or a ‘deprivation’ in relation to what it thus excludes, i.e. it is 
something purely negative in whatever way one wishes to express it. 
On the other hand, it must be understood that such limiting condi-
tions are essentially inherent in a certain state of manifestation, that they 
apply exclusively to what is included in that state, and that, conse-
quently, they cannot attach themselves in any way to the being itself and 
follow it to another state. The being will naturally also find, to manifest 
itself in this state, certain conditions having a similar character, but 
which will be different from those to which it was subjected in the state 
which we envisaged at first, and which will never be able to be described 
in terms that are appropriate only to the latter, such as those of human 
language, for example, which cannot express conditions of existence 
other than those of the corresponding state, since this language is founde appropriate only to the latter, such as those of human 
language, for example, which cannot express conditions of existence 
other than those of the corresponding state, since this language is found

--- PAGE BREAK ---

406 
The Veil of Isishose of human 
language, for example, which cannot express conditions of existence 
other than those of the corresponding state, since this language is found

--- PAGE BREAK ---

406 
The Veil of Isis

in all things determined and shaped by these very conditions. We insist 
upon this, because, if we admit without great difficulty that the elements 
drawn from the atmosphere to enter the constitution of the individuality 
must be restored to it when this individuality has completed its cycle of 
existence and passes to another state, as everyone can directly see, at 
least as far as corporeal elements are concerned, it seems less easy to 
admit that the being then entirely exits the conditions to which he was 
subjected in this individual state, although the two things are closely re-
lated. Without a doubt, this owes above all to the impossibility, not of 
conceiving, but of representing conditions of existence other than those 
of the corporeal, for which one cannot find any term of comparison in 
this state. 
An important application of what we have just indicated is that which 
relates to the fact that an individual being belongs to a certain species, 
such as the human species, for example: there is obviously in the very 
nature of this being something that determined his birth in this rather 
than in any other. It is therefore subject to the conditions which ex-
pressly define the very species, and which will be among the special con-
ditions of its mode of existence as an individual; these are, one could say, 
the two positive and negative aspects of the specific nature, positive be-
ing a manifestation of certain possibilities, negative being a limiting con-
dition of existence. Only, what must be understood is that it is only as an 
individual manifested in the state considered that the being actually be-
longs to the species in question, and that in any other state, it escapes 
him entirely and does not remain bound to him in anyway. In other 
words, the consideration of the species applies only in the horizontal 
sense, i.e. in the domain of a certain state of existence; it cannot intervene 
in the vertical sense, i.e. when the being passes to other states. Of course, 
what is true in this respect for the species is also true, for all the more 
reason, for race, for family, in short for all the more or less restricted 
portions of the individual domain in which the being is included as to its 
manifestation in the considered state. Naturally, the case of caste is no 
exception here; this comes, more visibly than in any other case, from the 
definition of caste as being the very expression of the individual nature 
and uniting with it as it were one, which indicates that it exists only so 
long as the being is envisaged within the limits of individuality, and that, 
if it necessarily exists as long as it is contained, it cannot survive by itself 
beyond these same limits, all that constitute its raison d’être being found 
exclusively within these limits and cannot be transported to another area 
of existence, where the individual nature in question no longer meets 
any possibility.titute its raison d’être being found 
exclusively within these limits and cannot be transported to another area 
of existence, where the individual nature in question no longer meets 
any possibility.

--- PAGE BREAK ---être being found 
exclusively within these limits and cannot be transported to another area 
of existence, where the individual nature in question no longer meets 
any possibility.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

René Guénon 
407 
To close this exposé, we will say a few words as to how, from the 
foregoing considerations, we may consider what is called ‘astral influ-
ences’; first of all, it should be pointed out that we must not exclusively 
understand, or even principally, the proper influences of the stars whose 
names serve to designate them, although these influences, like those of 
all things, probably also have their own reality, but these stars represent 
above all symbolically, which does not mean ‘ideally’ or figuratively, but 
on the contrary, by the virtue of actual correspondences founded on the 
very constitution of the ‘macrocosm,’ the synthesis of all the various cat-
egories of cosmic influences exercised on individuality. If we consider, as 
is most commonly done, that these influences dominate individuality, 
this is only the most external point of view; in a more profound order, 
the truth is that if the individuality is related to a definite set of influ-
ences, it is because this whole is the same which is in conformity with 
the nature of being manifested in this individuality. Thus, if ‘astral influ-
ences’ seem to determine what the individual is, it is only in appearance; 
at heart, they do not determine it, but they only express it. True determi-
nation does not come from without, but from the being itself, and the 
outward signs simply allow it to be discerned, giving it a sort of sensory 
expression, at least for those who will be able to interpret them correctly. 
In fact, this consideration certainly does not alter the results that can be 
obtained from the examination of ‘astral influences,’ but, from the doc-
trinal point of view which alone interests us here, it seems essential to 
us to understand the true role of these, i.e., in short, the real nature of the 
relations of the being with the milieu in which its individual manifesta-
tion is fulfilled, since what is expressed through these influences, in a 
form intelligibly coordinated, is the indefinite multitude of diverse ele-
ments which constitute this whole milieu.