Rt.8,Frederick,Ma。21701
12/15/74
Patchah
DearJerry.
Whdlle the probabilities of usefulness or connection"ay be slight, I think it
may
not a conplete waste of tine to call to your attention the murder of Miami lawyer
Harvey St.dau Jean.Today's Washington Post has an inadequate but sonewhat provo
catite story on it.
Because the story, datelined yesterday, does not say when St. Jean was killed,
I presune it was before yesterday.
St.Jean's clients are said to include narcotics people and Melvin Powers and
George LeMey. I do not kmow if his representation of Powers is current but if it were
it might be interesting.
Himi Beach,not Miami.And apparuntly a professional job.
Jim had just filed our rebuttal. whatever it is called. And he will now continue
also has other pressing matters on the Ray case besides others he has had to let wait,
includingeffortstocollect money dueme。
The book is not doing badly. Well considering our circumstances.We can't ad-
vertise or pay for promotions. The two wholesalers who have it have not put it out,
book wholesaler or any oae anywehera,straight trade terms, fully returnable.)
Aeu Ja4uTnd a4 fed o4 ponattoq w7, 45um Jo gOz Aadet 04 yanoue pros 0Awu I Mo
interest you.Did this in tho first two weeks.
I used two news contacts. The result was a large and good Washington Post story
and two large wire=service stories plus one by a soeringly kooky sort of undergroumd by-
stations.
none indtiated by ne.(Couldn't pay the ghone bill or I'd have done more!)Almoat
all the orders are fron this radio attention,aostly talk shovs with sone news beepers.
Iwas able to give ay airiress and tho cost ofthe book on thom ane.to readexcerpts
from the trangcrigte
I've also sold a non-exclusiva, one-tine use oi the Ford part for enough to yay
for aost ot' the: stanps to send a flyer to cll the several thousend cn our mailing list.
it will cost。 t always has。
are. These calls have cone from all over but mostly west of the Apyalachians. They include
the Canadian Broadcast radio network and individual stations as far away as "onolulu.
and New Mexico in the southwest. This diversity and the extent of these calls in num-
ber plus the total absence of any snide comnents in any newspaper signal, I think, a
change in attitude.Une California paper had more than 4O columm inches on the front
Sincerely.