TAX-EXEMPT • NON-PROFIT • STATE-CHARTERED 
To promoto public knowUdgs of rha Ufa & works of Helana P.

Biavatsky 
• 
POST OFFICE BOX 1543 
FRESNO, CALIFORNIA 93716 
Tol.

(209) 237-7789 
Mr Bernard Fensterwald, Jr,, 
FENSTERWALD and OHLHAUSEN, 
905 Sixteenth Street, N.W.

Washington, D, C.

20006.

OFFICE 
OF 
THE SECRETARY 
November 9, 1971 
Dear Mr Fensterwald: 
With apologies for the delay (as I am only now 
able to give to these points the complete review and attention they 
merit), I must acknowledge your welcomed letters of July 15th and 16th 
and September 10th.

I especially want to express my sincere thanks and 
gratitude for the $40 check which made possible my visit to Los Angeles 
in August, resulting in—as you shall see allmost complete coverage 
of investigative tasks then pending for me, as well as discovery of one 
or two ^omising new lines of inquiry.

I was, however, sorry to'-hear 
you had^eave early for Tennessee and were unable to travel north for 
a conference here (maybe another time when I would like to talk over 
with you some publicly unexploited aspects of the JFK case).

I am grateful for all the trouble you have gone to in running 
down the report of ”Kali murders” in Germany, though it is regrettable 
this ends in a dead-end, a hoax.

Naturally this exposure lessens the 
possibility of the related story out of France being genuine; but it 
ir conceivable the writer for the American magazine did not himself 
manufacture the tale of the German case, and therefore the other could 
be possibly authentic yet.

Moreover, it was the alleged Frcnch case 
that alone contained the alleged published statements concerning druos 
and hypnosis in the Oswald case and prediction of c similar M.O.

to 
be directed in the future against another Kennedy.

Question: Are you 
still trying to run down the ”Kali murder case” and (alleged) related 
publications in France?

Incidentally, one of your envelopes arrived here with some 
blue stampings on the back.Question: Are you 
still trying to run down the ”Kali murder case” and (alleged) related 
publications in France? Incidentally, one of your envelopes arrived here with some 
blue stampings on the back. My^.brother tells me (he works at the Post 
Office) that, so far as he knows, they don’t put any such marks on 
mail. If your office doesn’t, maybe this is a clue that some unknown 
authority is_ monitoring your mail, outgoing as well as incoming. The marked portion is returned herewith for your examination. Your letter of July 16th asked about ’’The Process.” At that 
time I knew no more about it than I had read in some L.A. TIMES articles 
in connection with the Manson case. Since then, of course, there has 
been what I consider a whitewash article on The'Process published in 
TIME Magazine (contrast it with their steadfastly denigrating review 
of Theosophy in July 1968, wherein they inserted at least one certainly 
libelous accusation against Mme Biavatsky, not seen before). This brings 
to mind the fact that the day I left for Los Angeles LOOK Magazine arrived 
with a million-dollars worth of free publicity for that idiot exhibition- 
ist, ’’Satanist” Anton LeVey (which could do nothing but help to discredit 
Occultists and Parapsychologists in general). The Press is certainly ire- 
sponsible when they get hold of a sensation they themselves can work upon. Since July, hovvever, a lot of significant information about 
The Process has dropped into my lap. While in Los Angeles I contacted

--- PAGE BREAK ---t- 
UUl 1 nt?

laiUXXY w.i.a.v.n *    
and’Manson^"r^6U'ibie’’re 1 ation to it (he tolc’me that a coming issue of 
Process magazine, an expensive format, was shortly to feature an 
*^^70 , article specially written for it by Manson\ I suppose you saw Sanders 
article in the current or F5;mrTRE_Mac^a7.1 nc .

with ^ about .L_paqes on 
the Process..

(A contributor to The Blavatrky Fou^a+'ion, livipg_ip 
Toronto, Canada, has sent me a clipping from the local TORONTC STAR, re- 
ceived here just today, carrying a denial of "£a+Ji£u:> leader of 
the Toronto chapter of a new religious group known as The Process Church 
of the Final Judgement” who "repudiates” the "charges" published by 
Sanders.

Malachi, incidentally, is ,?pparently the Mo.

2 man in the whole 
outfit, and the fact he has been sent to till the soil in Toronto for 
the London headquarters may be because of two things; Toronto is, and 
has been for many years, a center of inter'T.t in Occultism end is the 
most active Theosophical center in Canada; and, as I learned this week 
in PARADE Magazine, it is also the center where some 30,000 dissident 
American draft-evaders and army deserters live, so that it may be expected 
that here The Process can recruit both Theosophical drop-outs and potentiaJ.

political trouble-makers.

This Toronto newspaper article further states 
that, "While the group wears emblems of Satan...Malachi said there is no 
practice of black magic or other rituals associated with Satan cults." 
Which denial appears to be buncom, on the face of it.

"Attorneys for 
the Process have filed a $1,500,000 libel suit against Sanders and his 
publisher in the federal district court in Chicago....Esquire magazune 
has been asked for a retraction on its story...." ).

My visitor had a briefcase full of Process literature; ana 
in the little time I had i went through it looking for items of inter'-st 
to my research, copying out the more relevant, copies of which I here 
inclose."Attorneys for 
the Process have filed a $1,500,000 libel suit against Sanders and his 
publisher in the federal district court in Chicago....Esquire magazune 
has been asked for a retraction on its story...." ).

My visitor had a briefcase full of Process literature; ana 
in the little time I had i went through it looking for items of inter'-st 
to my research, copying out the more relevant, copies of which I here 
inclose.

Note that this cult claims to be in touch with "supernatural 
• beings" and to be the vehicle for "messages from the Gods," while its 
declared purpose and that required of the follower Is to "play the game 
of the Gods." In practice, this means that all except the leaders of 
the Process (those who alone "receive" at firsthand or themselves 
contrive the "Gods' orders") must blindly act out the ^rd^.s, the 
divine mandate, they will be receiving down from the leadership which 
acts as the "njouthpiece" for "Jehovah, Satan, and Lucifer"!

At the same 
time, note (in the longest of the enclosed articles) how they have openly 
and brazenly proclaimed the "will of the Gods" and their dedicated pro- 
gram to destroy democracy and replace it with an^rch^ And_dic 
At the same time, in other Process literature, my friend in Canada h-i'-.

sent just lately, they declare the troubles of mankind originate from 
man's failure to accept the "so-called evil" within man, i.e., to P<<ra- 
phrase both Manly P.

Hall and Charles Manson, man must rightly be active 
both as God and Satan, both the destroyer and creator.

In view of this, 
I don't see how attorneys defending against the Process libel suit will 
have any difficulty proving from its own words that the group has a 
vicious, degenerate philosophy and code of ethics.

From this it follows, 
as you say July 16, "they are capable of anything apparently." 
Coming ..

and I hoped.--- PAGE BREAK ---

From this it follows, 
as you say July 16, "they are capable of anything apparently." 
Coming .. and I hoped. Arthur Lyons, author of The_ Second 
I thought to be a very sober work, 
in the southern California "occult 
come up with something on Manlv P. on these two, but is going to look 
after my return home, however, a close associate of 
eludes me (l had him jot down his address on a slip 
Satajiism in America, v/hich 
with his wide contacts 
underground" h-> might be able to 
Hall and Sirhan. He had nothing 
into that furt.hnr for me. A few days 
his whose name now 
of paper and that 
too is out of place!) came up here and we spent the afternoon and 
evening discussing various concurrent aspects of mutual 
an investigator for one of the attorneys for one of the female defendants 
in the Manson case. He knnw.c; J.ri Sanders, author of the new book just

--- PAGE BREAK ---These persons apparently are adept at infiltration.

My Canad- 
ian friend wrote me out of a clear blue sky, excited by the feet that 
during or shortly after a North American Theosophical Conference held 
this year at Toronto, he was present at a meeting of the Canadian head- 
nuarters lodge of the Theosophical Society (related to the one in 
Wheaton, Illinois, with world headquarters at Adyar India) when the 
speaker was introduced as a guest official from The Process, present 
with black robe and Satanic paraphernalia 1 At the close, relates my 
informant, the Theosophical host opined that, ; "Members of The ‘'^rocess 
and Theosophists believe in the same things, though we express our 
mutual belief in different ways" Knowing something of The^Process, my 
friend was naturally shocked, and is now quietly working to disenchant 
the ignorant Theosophists of the lodge who were so easily taken in by 
their glib guest.

(Many years ago this same Toronto lodge was the target 
of infiltration by another charlatan, the international spy, Lincoln- 
Trebitsch, whom you have doubtless heard of.

He got to holding "classes" 
on their premises, while passing under an assumed name, representing 
himself as a "Buddhist Master" from Tibet.) This serves to show how 
ffasi ly this particular Theosophical Society (only one but by far the 
most numerous in membership of several groups) can be infiltrated, and 
the brains of its members subverted by artists of the Manly P Rail 
caliber!" The Process obviously has good financing and its publications 
are lavishly printed.

One he has sent me begins the story of a "typical" 
Processean convert, who relates that, formerly, he had been "irt Theosophy" 
(so obviously they are endeavoring to proselyte Theosophists).He got to holding "classes" 
on their premises, while passing under an assumed name, representing 
himself as a "Buddhist Master" from Tibet.) This serves to show how 
ffasi ly this particular Theosophical Society (only one but by far the 
most numerous in membership of several groups) can be infiltrated, and 
the brains of its members subverted by artists of the Manly P Rail 
caliber!" The Process obviously has good financing and its publications 
are lavishly printed.

One he has sent me begins the story of a "typical" 
Processean convert, who relates that, formerly, he had been "irt Theosophy" 
(so obviously they are endeavoring to proselyte Theosophists).

The lodge 
and Theosophical Society they thus have penetrated in Canada has, of all, 
strayed furthest from the original teachings of Mme Blavatsky (tho some 
movement in it today is "back to Blavatsky"); it has an official policy 
which refuses to define "Theosophy," and an irresponsibly tolerant plat- 
form which purports to welcome "all religions, philosophies and beliefs" 
into one "Universal Brotherhood." So, over the years, so much rubbish 
has been sucked in by this philosophical vacuum that much if not most 
of the stuff found in its lectures, perjodicals and books is the very 
antithesis of HPB's teachings.

Though the President of the Society at 
Adyar published my Waterman book in 1963 (he has sole control of the 
press there), they have since refused to print for the book a jacket 
showing Press Opinion, etc.; and at Ti»heaton the President (American) 
tells me their "By-Laws" (which I have seen but find nothing relevant 
thereto) "prohibit making financial contributions to The blavatsky 
Foundation" (while The Blavatsky Foundation and my name has never been 
mentioned in any of their literature in /America!).

So, vou see, hereV 
all of another good reason why The Process and its nefarious work is 
a target for me!

\ r.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So, vou see, hereV 
all of another good reason why The Process and its nefarious work is 
a target for me! \ r. 1 
Sanders relates in F.«^nilTRF HirLmy vi tori that The Prnces.s i 
was active in Los Angeles until June 1968 when they disappeared from the. ^ 
scene. Ih6 understanding is that they cleared out because the agents from ^ 
London had their passports expire (or revoked). Coupled with the declared 
political aim-to destroy democracy thru anarchy, however, this sudden 
"disappearing act" dovetails with any supposition that would explain a 
motivation behind Sirhan’s actions. Moreover, The Process would have the 
best of reasons for clearing the ground for itself (at Los Angeles, t'f 
center of Occult activity in the Western World) t]Lrpy4j"5 suspicig.n 
itself onto Mme Blavatsky and her fol] ewers, fpr the. A?S-^ssina.tj^ri 
the "Manual for Revoluticn" canard (Vs well as out. an^hf;r. e.t.titcr, AMORC, by exploiting "Sirhan as a Rosicruci an) , becuus^. for on 
thing, Mme Blavatsky condemned "god worship" in a!l i ts form >, and In-.r - 
fore her teachings stand as a philosophical bul.''.r': egiin't the vi.hol'’ 
Process scheme. Therefore, I have another QUESTILH • what can you .tell 
me about indications that Sirhan may have had contact with The Process? In this connection, another idea has bo'^n raised in my mind.

--- PAGE BREAK ---f 
X 
i 
[ 
.1 
Susan Atkins, the Manson "witch” in her "confession," alleged that the 
PoUnski home was chosen as the target not because "Charlie had any^ing 
aaainst the Polanskis, but because it was to be a warning^^ to MelC:’i^r 
(Doris Day’s son) who formerly had lived there and who was "letting^^ 
Charlie dJwn" in the latter's ambition to get his 
so.

may not the same intent have operated in whacn the LoBiancao 
buUheLdWoJ.s_tJie_str^frp_m_J^ If Manson was 
working both for himself and for the Procesji Cone goal to become the 
country's leading "folk singer" with "hidden messages 
which could then convey the Proces.s_&hilo.sopjiy_to__al.l_of 
was he DuttTnq a chill on Hall who could be under pressure from The 
Process^to become their "front man" in southern California?

This Manson 
case investigator tells me there have been a f 
^occult libraries” in that area; and I nov.

loam that Hall 
recently added a big new addition to his Philosophical Research Library 
(probably the most extensive occult library in the \vorld), with his no ice 
thereon dropping a hint of its impregn^le ^ojisj^ucti^.

^ 
I last wrote Hall, askin.g_whe.the.r .heJcnevL^f^nx — 
might have be^n.mu^er^, he never answered from that 
over, I?

Sirhan was In hands of the Process, he be /isiting .

.

- 
headquarters at their behest; and if to H'H1--uhereb\ .il=o 
compelling Yorty, Hall’s chela., to guash ell pursui u of conspiracy, L-^u 
the names of Hall and himself be publicly scrui;.nir-'l ar, suspe^to---, lo.

Process would have served a mxn.be.:r of puiposes by 'the on-r plot • ly 
further their plot to destroy democracy ('^p^ tomi^t-o LO toe J.b.

df^ntial elections) and further anarchy., by killing RFK; to coyr 
eliminating the C'Ccult 
o r ?

a fj1 L'l 1 
arii Theos'ophists, v-hlch 
(5) 
’.ich 
Xn=ir CJTclCN.0 OlIU C I l _ VF r 1.

.

.

r ,      
framing Hall and, thereby, implicating Yorty,'; 
opposition (Mme Blavatsky and h?r teachings, i...--- PAGE BREAK ---

. r ,      
framing Hall and, thereby, implicating Yorty,'; 
opposition (Mme Blavatsky and h?r teachings, i... obstacle; as well as the organlt«<i Rosicrucians ..., .F__r-.-- v' \ 
are the No. I and No. 2 Occult groups in numoer of American membei a,' 
by: (a) the "Manual for Revolution" canard; ^b) exoloitetion of Siihon 
^^^^^"*you^wish to contact this researcher on The Process, I have 
just found^his address: Larry J. Larsen, 
c/o Paul Fitzgerald, 
672 So. Lafayette Park Place, 
LOS ANGELES Ph. 21S-380-341I. — 
Now for a report on my findings in Los Angeles. (1) AMERICAN UNITED. Not now listed in any telephone directory. I visited the address (you said you were intending to also, on 
previous trip there what did you see?); it is now a 
narking lot. Meanwhile, Steinbacher has become editor of THE EDUCA- 
TOR, his name to appear in Who's.JVhg_in_th^ he claims 
drawing down $l,000-a-lecturc; and has a new boo< due in Jan. la/'^. (2) RESEARCHED, PASADENA LIBRARY. NothLng on Rosicrucians there 
(I even went into the card index at the Branch library near Sirhan^ 
home) Could not find Tom Blessing (the attendant at the service station 
where Sirhan gassed and worked) nor Lynn_Bl_|,s_s.ijng names 
city directories of the area. The Pasadena City.Directory from 1964-68 ^ 
does not show Sirhan B. Sirhan to have been a non-resident (in EgYPt, 
Syria, or elsewhere is the question); he is shown as student in - - 
Sirhan family all the while; but the unreliabAiU/. of the directory xs 
show^by its listing the father "(mechanicT" as resident also clear on ^ 
to 1968! (Incidentally, I drove by the Sirhan home to get a si^ero c-oio 
slide shot; and it sticks out in the neighborhood ’ 
the yard was full of old cars, junkers, and a couple of tne brother^ 
were pounding on them raising one hell of a racket. ,)

--- PAGE BREAK ----'4 
n‘* 
•sS 
r 
33 
by 
f4) ROBERT KAISER.

Read his book thru just before I left for L.A., 
he arranged to meet me in conference at his office J was accompanied 
Victor Endersby, who met me in L.A.).

Following findings are no o 
Aorthy.

amazing, but it anpears very,_d^:.finite, from the book 
and ny conversations with R.K., that the dc*l.nc<- stmt-gy i-n fne ouv.cr, 
trial was PROVIDED BY JOHN STEIN3ACHEH.

The defence la/n/er-docvOt t-.'orn 
decided on the ’’diminished responsibility" plea, na'ilng tnis upon -.le 
Idea that Sirhan unconsciously hypnotized him'-elf in his /I.ICRC canile- 
and-mirror" meditation practice and thereby ina<lvertantly released pent _ 
uo subconscious drives which controlled and '’programmed" mm to .<iU /.FK.

Tii-:^ team got this idea of auto-hypnosis from Robert Kaiser (and wer ^ 
quick to adopt it as an alternative to ’’programniny'' thru post-hypnet.., 
suggestion from outside by a cpnsp.iraA'^.T-g’J’Diamond discover ad 
that Sirhan showed all signs of having been previously conditioned .0 
hypnosis of some kind); and Kaiser got the idea of 
the 4th para, of page 14 of the 1968 RFK booklet oy John oteinoac.ier-- 
Gteinbacher, by press-time in mid-June I960, having been tne f.irj^ to 
publiclv suggest Sirhan practiced ’’auto hypnosis"!

B.

Kaiser told us that the police examining Sirhan on his 
arrest saw his eyes were dilated ,ajTd_^id_n^^re.sp,o.nd .to IjuQbt.

He- does 
not know (and I have not checked to see) whether hypnosis trance does 
this sometimes.

In any case, he says the record snowed the gniy test 
run on his blood was ’’for syphilis detection" tho he expressed too 
private belief that a drug test may also have been run and positive 
results suppressed.

My reading of the record indicates to me the strong 
probability that the ’’girl in the polka dot dress’’, who Kaiser says, 
was the one, it is believed, who gave him the coffee, put a drug in it 
(see Sirhan* s reaction under hypnotic regression).

^ v rt 
c.My reading of the record indicates to me the strong 
probability that the ’’girl in the polka dot dress’’, who Kaiser says, 
was the one, it is believed, who gave him the coffee, put a drug in it 
(see Sirhan* s reaction under hypnotic regression).

^ v rt 
c.

I examined the 50-odd AMORC Rosicrucian ’’Master Monograph 
lessons which Sirhan purportedly received as mern'oer of AMORC for g^r 
a year, beginning in 1966 (contradicting the AMORC Secretary s c^njir^^d 
news conference statement that Sirhan joined "a few months" before Jun^ 
1968 and received only the first-month instructions (which would not.

include the "candles-and-mirror" meditation technique iostructionsj.

These monographs look new and unroAd NOT A SINGLE ANNOTATION OR UND^ 
LINI'NG ANYIVHERE ON ANY PAGE OF THEM.

In contrast, see RK’s description 
of Sirhan’s habit of anno_tAtAng^and_jind.erl.L.ni.n^ 
IS a questionnaire which appears to have accompam<-d tne ^RST lesson 
(I would think the form should be returned by the /iMORC student for 
qradinq, and if so, it was not returned but kept by Sirt-ian;; is 
annotated and underlined per his cus.tpm.

Tners is iio accompanying en- 
velopes to the lessons; no letters addressed to .-mrhan .rom AMORC 
no other questionnaires or lesson forms filled out; no cnrresponaf-n.e 
or postmarked envelopes between Sirhan and San ALL beax-.

nut.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tners is iio accompanying en- 
velopes to the lessons; no letters addressed to .-mrhan .rom AMORC 
no other questionnaires or lesson forms filled out; no cnrresponaf-n.e 
or postmarked envelopes between Sirhan and San ALL beax-. nut. my deduction that these 52 or 53 lessons were PLAiIli..D on cirhan ^0 
it appear he had learned the "candle-anJ-mirror meu> tition techni'iJe 
from AMORC, Had practiced it for years ana Imd therePy auto-hypnoiized 
and prograjiuned hims.elj:- When challenged with this idea, Kaiser said he 
had Uceived the^lessons (including the lesson with the meditation .--?ch- 
J;^q„rinstJuctl«n, which li now part of the trial axhlbits avidanco) fro., 
the hands of Sirhan* s brother; and the latter h^.d ^old h.im of Si_han 
monthly getting also the Rosi.cru£,Un Dig.^t '"a9az>ne-^-but I pointed 
out to him that anyone can subscribe to t.io magazine ^he showed a 1.. 66 
copy), and also that the magazines he had also had no addressee name on 
them and there was no postmarked envelopes to contain t.aem addressed to 
Sirhan! Finally, after arguing that AMORC must hr'"i lied at the press 
conference in 
ly, after arguing that AMUKO mu?-, n,txeu au 
June 1968 about'Sirhan’s one-month membership span 'to 
diminish''its relationship to him in the public 
that, if they would do this despite the threat and c-rtai. /

--- PAGE BREAK ---upcoming trial where they knew all the true facts would become public 
knowledge, they would certainly later cooperate with Los Angeles law 
authorities to merely keep silent when the latter wanted to show Sirh''>n 
had joined in 1966), Kaiser lastly seemed to recall that he had seen 
an ”FBI report” stating Sirhan had joined in 1966 and he appeared to 
recall a "photostat of Sirhan's membership application dated 1966.” It 
would be remarkable if Kaiser could recall this notation "i96£” amid the 
millions of words and hundreds or thousands of documents in police and 
FBI files he examined unless he attached importance to the date at 
the time (and, if he had done so, he surely would have made a CQQy or 
note of the entry, which he does not have at all).

On the other, if 
AMORC (which has more than one vulnerable skeleton in its closet, for 
government authorities to rattle) is deemed capable of lying deliberately 
to the press in June 1968, it could as well covertly supply the FBI with 
a doctored application form, at behest of Los Angeles author/tities.

D.

Kaiser informed me that Sirhan's "right-wing extremist" 
connections alluded to in his book (but not mentioned by name) were: 
a Rev.

Leo Hill; an "Hungarian Freedom Fighter" with a name that sounded 
to me like "Apponyai"; and the one who wrote the letter to Warren was 
Rathke.

E.

Kaiser confirmed that his final chapter and the inserted 
change refering to Sirhan's visits to Hall's headquarters were made 
after learning from Christian about my research re Hall and my revela- 
tion that Hall is a notorious hypnotist, together with Endersby's no tiro 
that Hall is Mayor Yorty's "teacher." Kaiser confirmed also that Sirhan 
told him he had visited Hall's HQ a number of times prior to June 5 1968.

When pressed about these visits, Kaiser said Sirhan refused to say more.

G.When pressed about these visits, Kaiser said Sirhan refused to say more.

G.

Kaiser said he couldn't say whether Sirhan had a brother 
arrested as an Israeli spy nor whether Sirhan had returned to the mid- 
East (he simply had no evidence for*either claim).

H.

He said he knew of nothing about proving or disproving 
from study of indentations on the notebook pages whether any of the 
pages had been rearranged in sequence or any taken out from the book 
in which Sirhan wrote "RFK must die!" (We can only guess whether there 
may have been a page naming Yorty and Hall.) 
I.

Kaiser gave me copies of the Charach suit brief and the 
petition of Barbara Blehr to the Civil Service Commission (l intend to 
write to Charach via his attorney and send him a list of names which 
I am compiling and a copy of which will go to you.

Kaiser believes 
Charach is "off base" and he described the film Charach has produced, 
which I suppose you know aboutj and which incorporates Thane Cesar's 
voice without his permission, while making him out the real assassin.

We wondered about a libel suit by Cesar on this.).

J.

Kaiser says Christian has not begun production on any 
film and is "still writing." If Christian solo out to the LAPD without 
Turner's knowledge, his usefulness is about at an end, after the breaking 
of the "two-gun theory" in the case!

K.

Kaiser has no transcript of the trial and says one has to 
go in perso^.

locate the page wanted and then pay (l think it is) 75c 
for each paiJs’ copy at the Clerk's office.

QUESTIOM: I wanted copies of 
the following (but know of no way to get them): 
T^NSCRIPT.

SIRHAN TRIAL: March 4 (A.M..)—Sirhan testifies on 
his occult '^experiments" and on Zionism.

March 5 (P.M.)—Sirhan testifies 
on his Rosicrucian studies.

March 7 Patricia Stratham testifies on 
conversations with Sirhan re Rosicrucianism, etc.

(5) BARBARA BLEHR.--- PAGE BREAK ---

March 7 Patricia Stratham testifies on 
conversations with Sirhan re Rosicrucianism, etc. (5) BARBARA BLEHR. Received back the Return Receipt on the package 
of material sent to her with letter asking for conference if she wer^ 
interested. Never got a reply. QUESTION: Is she interested in anything 
beyond the aspects of her own ballistics claims in this case? (l see 
where the LAPD expert has sued her for $8,000,000.)

--- PAGE BREAK ---7 
The latest, as you probably know, is that the expert and the LA 
DA office takes refuge in the "confession'' of the former that he "by 
error" mis-labeled the envelope which (he claims) contains bullets 
test-fired from the Sirhan gun with the serial number of another gun 
test-fired solely for audio tests.

This means that the problem canno- 
be resolbed unless another verified test is made of the Sirhan gun 
(but Younger has this at Sacramento, so no_.t9.stQ .

One ,subtexfuge^ 
be that Hn'absence of microphotographs of the rifling or by |.ubs.titu- 
tion of these photographs), the actual bullets taken from the flesh of 
the victims could be substituted for other bullets actually shot now 
(or later) from the Sirhan gunTif the victim-bullets di_d come from a 
second gun, now destroyed).

So the field for speculation is still j^d^ 
open (what a damnable botch all round!)• 
(6) ANAHEIM BULLETIN: I obtained a couple of enlargements of the 
AB 1:30 AM "EXTRA" which Editor Campbell claimed was the firs.t extra 
on the shooting anywhere in U.S.

The only available microfilm copy for 
the public is in the Anaheim City Library.

They sent out to have the 
copies made and they are very poor.

Am including one as a souvenir mors 
than anything (hardly legible with a magnifying glass).

Mine is a bit 
better and I copy for you the relevant, important parts (you might write 
for a copy to the Head Librarian, William J.

Griffith, 500 W.

Broadway, 
Anaheim, Ca 92805 but you will have to demand something besides a 
microfilm print—out, or you will get nothing better than this)I 
LOS ANGELES (UPl) Sen.

Robert F.

Kennedy was shot and wounded 
early today shortly after he claimed victory in the California primary 
election, police reported.

Police said the susoect had been taken into custody.

The shooting took place butside the embassy room cf the Ambas- 
sador hotel....

lellipses denote omission of unimportant paragraphs]....--- PAGE BREAK ---

The shooting took place butside the embassy room cf the Ambas- 
sador hotel.... lellipses denote omission of unimportant paragraphs].... Don Shulman, an employee of television station knxt, said 
Kennedy was walking to the kitchen when he was shot three times by a 
gunman who stepped out of a crowd. Shulman, who witnessed the shooting, said the gunman was 
shot by Kennedy's bodyguards. He was later taken into custody. A 
Kennedy aide said the senator was shot in the chest. Gabor Kadar, who said he was waiting at the rear exit to 
the room to shake hands with the senator, heard four of Jsic] five 
shots and saw Kennedy and a woman fall to the floor. "Senator Kennedy was holding the right side of his chest and 
there was blood on his head," Kadar said. Kadar said he saw Kennedy's wife, Ethel, kneeling beside the 
senator as he lay on the floor of the hotel kitchen. Kadar described the suspect as being-about 25 years old and 
weighing about 135 pounds. He was of light build and had dark, bus'- ' 
hair, Kadar said. . j 
The suspect was wearing a zipper jacket, blue jeans and 
blue tennis shoes  • > 
Note: (a) Shulman here doesn't say v.hat Chnyreh's brief says 
Shulman told the news media at the time. ^) Kaiser's "official" list 
of person's in the room does not show ShuV^*’^s present. (c) Kadar 
changed his position altogether in later reports to police and court. This would olace him standing with Sirhan at exit (where he could have 
gotten all the detailed description shown (otherwise lost on spectators 
in the aftermath shock).

--- PAGE BREAK ---it 1^0^ Ancmf£<^ 
3*727 / 
KABC TAPES 
(7) I contacted station KABC, and learned they have broadcast 
tapes wanted, but had not time to conclude the matter with them of net- 
ting copies of the de Zirkoff broadcast on K/^BC-TV re the ^Manual for 
Revolution” nor the Ray Briem Shov*^ of June 5 on which the hypnotist 
William J.

Bryan appeared and suggested Sirhan had acted in the kill- 
attempt under hypnosis (see Steinbacher, p, 14)?^ Apparently Bryan said 
nothing about auto-hypnosis, but this we must find out for certain....

to eliminate any doubt that Steinbacher was the first to suggest jaute- 
hypnosis.

Incidentally, a recent issue of Steinbacher*s EDUCATOR shows 
Ray Briem (like Bob Dornan) is an active oronroter j3f Steinbaicher literature 
Christian alleged that the hypnotist Bryan war.

under indictment for r." >ing 
clients under hypnosis, is a notorious right-wing radical, and has scaled 
down in size and taken to wearing contact lenses (after wnighing about 
400 and using spectacles in June 1968, like Manly Hall.

Christianas sus- 
picion was that Hall was being framed, Brya’n acting the port of Hall with 
Sirhan.

This would dovetail now with the lately-revealed Bryan-Steln- 
bacher association).

(8) XAVIER VON KOSS.

I persuaded the telephone company to look 
up the 1967 and 1968 Los Angeles directories, both white page and yellow 
page.

They reported there was no listing of any Xavier Von Koss^until 
the 1968 directory that appeared in^November of that year (and -then in 
yellow pages only).

THEREFORE, James Earl Ray in Jan.

1968 did NOT 
learn of von Koss in the phone book (if you could find him saying he 
picked the address out of the phone book, you'd have something reallv^.^/^»^ 
significant).

This edition's'^entries were closed in May 1968' 
(9) DUARTE.

Have ascertained the Russian circus that was stink- 
bombed at Anaheim, and for which Duarte was '“^rrested as suspect, took 
place in Dedember 1967.This edition's'^entries were closed in May 1968' 
(9) DUARTE.

Have ascertained the Russian circus that was stink- 
bombed at Anaheim, and for which Duarte was '“^rrested as suspect, took 
place in Dedember 1967.

I am going to search files of the /P and LA 
TIMES (l can get here) on this.

Will let you know.

(10) Talked with a Mr Bland who, after traveling to Washington to 
join the Viet Nam war protest meeting at the Pentagon, had his activity 
written up in the LA TIMES.

He then got a call from the Anaheim police 
inquii^about his "letter asking for police protection” for his "group” 
v;ho "intended to picket the anti-Conimunist pickets at the Russian circus 
when it appears in Anaheim." Bland said ho had written no such letter 
and had no such group nor intention to picket anyone triere.

The letter 
with his name on it proved to Se a forgery, he said; and upon being 
submitted to handwriting experts by the authorities, he was informed 
that it had been determined that the forgery was traced to Jim Townsend, 
now publisher of THE EDUCATOR edited by Steinbacher, and that it had” 
been traced through comparison with certain anonymous obscene abusive 
letters addressed to the Anaheim authorities and also traced to Tov/nsend.

The Postal Inspectors put the case in hands of the local U S Federal 
attorney's office (he being a right-winger) and-nothing ever came of it.

Bland being unable to date to get back even the forgery.

All this dove- 
tails with another forged press dispatch mentioned in connection with 
the Steinbacher-Townsend clique during their "war on sex education" in 
the Anaheim schools (mentioned in Oh.

Sex EducatTOn.

by Mary Breasted, 
Praeger Publishers.) Bland added that when the stink-bombing later took 
place, the right-v/ingers blamed it on hi"l- 
I am going to pursue this as far as possible with Bland.

(11) ROBERT LICHER, SIRHAN POSTOAN.--- PAGE BREAK ---

by Mary Breasted, 
Praeger Publishers.) Bland added that when the stink-bombing later took 
place, the right-v/ingers blamed it on hi"l- 
I am going to pursue this as far as possible with Bland. (11) ROBERT LICHER, SIRHAN POSTOAN. I talked to him by telephone, 
hoping to obtain a refutation that would upset the Houghton twist that 
Sirhan did not receive American neo-Nazi mail, only overseas antl-U.S. Arab propaganda. It was obvious that Licher was fearful to say anything.

--- PAGE BREAK ---(Att: Hartnett at—)".

Information Research, 98L 5.

Western Ave., Los Ang^?le 
• is one outfit that could undertak3 to ascertain if 
Von Koss was actually in business Jan.

1968.

Min, charge, $lQ/hr.

.

_ 
After some persuasion he would discus?

the matter at all, and then h^e 
hesitantly confirmed the Houghton account.

So this is a dead-end unless 
we can get the original Licher-Putnam interview on KTTV or KTLA (which- 
ever) of the night of June 5, 1968.

(12) WALT CROWE.

Interviewed Growers father, who told me that the 
undercover source who informed on the Crowe-Sirhan meeting was Bill del 
Valle.

who*, the elder Crowe claimed, was a Federal informant who ^^rnaoe 
^12,000 as a government spy’’ over a period of three years or so and then, 
after the RFK shooting, ’’moved to Washington, where te noAV-tioIds a good 
thsQnian Institute..” DelValle, he says, was a member 
of the John Birch Society.

Crowe’s family .lives just a few short blocks 
from the Sirhan house; and it strikes me that his meeting with Sirhan 
was a put-up lob by possibly some of the Steinbacher crew (Crowe and 
Steinbacher both working out of the LA Welfare office at the time); and 
I intend to write Crowe to show him this possibility and the prospect 
of lifting the ”shadow” off him which, as his father says, has led the 
public to suspect that ’’Walter may have said something that triggered 
Sirhan off.” 
(13) MANLY P.

HALL.

Discovered his magazines are very difficult to 
find in bookstores.

Purchased 40 copies however and have received another 
10 by donation.

These show he was inXalifornia during May (and 'prob- 
ably June) 1968.

Also, see enclosed photo with Yorty.

He now has not 
promoted hypnotism in his magazine for many years, but his Vice-President 
(and apparent successor), Drake, is introduced as a Ph.D.Also, see enclosed photo with Yorty.

He now has not 
promoted hypnotism in his magazine for many years, but his Vice-President 
(and apparent successor), Drake, is introduced as a Ph.D.

in Psychology, 
an ”expert in hypnotherapy” who recently has spent some time at the 
University of Calcutta (apparently as ’’cover” for his initiation into 
and instruction by the Kali Tantrik cult centered at Dacca in East Bengal, 
mentioned by Hall in The GuruT.

The 1944 promotion of the Kali cult in 
this book appears to have been no fluke, because for the past 10 years 
or so., as 1 now learn from his publications of later date that I arn 
acquiring at .what will be a cost of about $150, but will be worth it 
as furnishing a thorough documented study of his writings Hall has 
pushed and upheld the teachings and occult pre-eminence of the Shingon 
sect of Japan.

This cult is described in the Encyclopedia Americana as: 
A ’’system” in which there is ”frequently reflected too much of the degen- 
erate type of Indian Tantric Buddhism which makes room in religion for 
anything man desires.

Very little of the moral seriousness of original 
Buddhism remains and Shingon ( true word) becomes the ’magic word’ which 
combines a fantastic idealism with the grossest forms of materialism.” 
(Contrast this with the condemnation of Kali Trantricism quoted from 
HPB in my earlier, long study of Hall’s work).

(14) KHJ-TV.

I spent many hours at KHJ, where the management very 
obligingly provided all tapes asked-for and engineers to play them back.

The most important discoveries were: 
A.

The full-day tape for June 6 was played, and although there 
were numerous ”news break-ins” taken off the NBC network, the broadcast 
mentioning the ”Manual for Revolution” was not broadcast by KHJ.

B.

Dornan spoke of a ”two-hpur conference” with Steinbacher 
on June 8.--- PAGE BREAK ---

B. Dornan spoke of a ”two-hpur conference” with Steinbacher 
on June 8. We played the full-day tape of June 8 5nd although Dornan 
was heard a few times, he did not put Steinbacher on the air; so their 
conference was ’’behind the scenes.” 
C. The June 6 tape showed that Pitchess announced Sirhan’s 
request for HPB’s SECRET DOCTRINE at a news conferenco that afternoon. This fact, coupled with information now obtained that Sander Va.noucer , 
was at the LA International Airport and boarding the plane for N.Y. with 
the Kennedy family, ys, the possibility he could have 
even pre-recorded ; leged by Polly Warfield in her

--- PAGE BREAK ---io 
GARDENA VALLEY NEWS report of June 9) dlscussinq the »'Manu?l for Revo- 
lution" and Sirhan's request, for the NBC Huntley-Brinh.ley news unit 
that evening!

This was supposed to have been broadcast over KNBC, and 
I Learned at KHJ that KNBC is a nejtwork-owned station which, therefore, 
explains WHY you got no where with them on this tape-search request, 
the network having already been hit by The Blavatsky Foundation's com- 
plaint before the FCC.

.

.

j.

4.

I am going to try and locate Vanoucer, and trv to interest 
him or Chet Huntley in letting us know if Vanoucer appeared on their 
unit showing that evening.

If not, the Warfield report is a>hoa_x.

I think you can see it is becomingly increasingly clear that if we can 
for certain pin down the original perpetrator of the "Manual for Revo- 
lution" hoax, it will put us one big step nearer the heart of any 
conspiracy behind Sirhan.

Did Warfield (with her de ^cirkotf contact 
and he with his Hall contact, and his secondhand contact with Stein- 
bacher) HAVE ANYTHING TO DO WITH THIS ORIGINAL PERPETRATION?

This is 
not forgetting that everything otherwise points to Steinbacher with 
his admission of passing out the (forged) UPI "dispatch", his M.O., and 
the related Anaheim forgeries and phony dispatches mentioned by Bland 
and Breasted.

But Warfield is a mystery to me!

D.

After going as far as possible by mail (where KHJ sent 
me tapes of several promising time periods which turned up nothing), 
as you know, my prime purpose of going down was to search out aXi.D.

After going as far as possible by mail (where KHJ sent 
me tapes of several promising time periods which turned up nothing), 
as you know, my prime purpose of going down was to search out aXi.

time intervals on the Tempo II show (hosted by Bob Dornan who, station 
p0j"5Qf*jngl told me, was an ardent Roman Catholic and therefore a ^diehard 
critic of Blavatsky) which might even remotely (when not shown in the 
printed "program logs" to be otherwise occupied with totally unrelated 
subject matter) contain the discussion in which (on June 19) Dornan 
stated he had "held up the giant chart shoving the interlocking con- 
spiracies" (Theosophy, Rosicrucianism, Masonry, etc.) that he adde.- 
h=d been brought to him people call’no +hemselves Frci Rightists" 
(followers of American United and Steinbacher).

We went through all tapes from Jure 6 to June 18 checking 
every possible time interval on the Tempo TT and JPPi- 
th’s occas.ion.

But, with the chief Engineer Pederson v.orking the tape 
machine, we did come upon the June 13th Tempo II time slot on.

the tape- 
for that cay AND FOLtND IT HAD BEEN ERASED!

Pederson was amazed, ne 
said, "no one is supposed to have access to these tapes except the 
enoineering department.

This is some coincidence, and I don't like 
"coincidences' 1" (I had him initial or sign the log for that program, 
showing it was erased.) He simply could offer no explanation.

It cer- 
tainly looks as though Dornan, before he left, may have slipped some 
jupixor ©n9in66i* 3 bill to GTSS© this shov* which would v©ry prob3bl% 
identify for us the names of these "Free Rightists" as well as show up 
Dornan in some libelous and wild statement he was afraid might get to 
the FCC.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This is some coincidence, and I don't like 
"coincidences' 1" (I had him initial or sign the log for that program, 
showing it was erased.) He simply could offer no explanation. It cer- 
tainly looks as though Dornan, before he left, may have slipped some 
jupixor ©n9in66i* 3 bill to GTSS© this shov* which would v©ry prob3bl% 
identify for us the names of these "Free Rightists" as well as show up 
Dornan in some libelous and wild statement he was afraid might get to 
the FCC. (Dornan was fired by Baxter Ward when the latter took over the 
news programming Ward, incidentally, having been the only Los Angeles 
news analyst that refuted on the air the "Manual for Revolution" story 
when it broke; he was then working for another station, end quit in the 
interval to run for mayor against Yorty.). \ . If this was the day of "the giant chart" (June 13) it is 
another "coincidence" that Truman Capote launched his attack on HPB 
on the NBC "Tonight" Show that same evening! . . j 
Although this important link in the Steinbacher chain eluded 
us, we do now have (as a result of searching for it) Dornan's recorded 
statement that Steinbacher had come to him with the Blavatsky dossier 
on June 8; and, thanks to the trip south, much other information wan-tec 
has been rounded up!

--- PAGE BREAK ---an's recorded 
statement that Steinbacher had come to him with the Blavatsky dossier 
on June 8; and, thanks to the trip south, much other information wan-tec 
has been rounded up!

--- PAGE BREAK ---

QUESTION: Have you obtained any furtV.er information on Jerome 
Johnson, the attacker of Joseph Columbo? Or or. *’ER'\T'’, the Black 
Revolutionary Attack Team (v/hich, remainiriQ silent, epnears to have 
been a one-shot perform.once offered by conspir-ntors as a red herring 
T would especially like to learn of any Johnr.on contret with radiccl 
right groups; and to hear whether he had come to New York from Los 
Angeles itself. As I can show by docunentatior, American United and 
the associated "neo-fascist” Liberty Lobby of V'iillis Certo (resident 
of Los Angeles) have organized right-wing groups among tlie Negros. 
Trusting all your own endeavors are prosnering in the cause 
of truth and the pursuit thereof, 
P.S. I am inclosing our NEWSLETTER—3 and s later Circular (with 
pertinent portions marked), which are for your own use only. 
Again, my thanks and Best V.ishes