mmmm, 
TO: JIM GARRISON, District Attorney 
FROM: JAMES L. ALCOCK, Assistant District Attorney 
RE: .FRED A.._SEVrt:LL, INTERVIEW WITH 
‘MAY ' 2, T^'6f^at”4 :15 P.M. 
I 
! 
It is now 4:15 P.M. in my office, the office of 
James Alcock, Assistant District Attorney, and the date is May 2, 
1967. I am speaking to Mr. FRED A. SE\^LL, whose home address is 
6520 Ithaca Street, Metairie, Louisiana, home telephone 887-3156. 
Mr. SEWELL is presently Fleet Manager for Stevens chervrolet 
Company, 840 Carondelet Street in the City of New Orleans. 
JA: Mr. SEWELL, by whom were you employed in 1961? The 
Summer of 1961? 
FS: Bolton Ford Truck Center. 
JA; Where was t: at located? 
FS: 1083 N. Claiborne. 
JA: Did you have a man working for you at that time by the 
name of OSCAR W. DESLATTE? 
FS: OSCAR DESLATTE was my assistant - Assistant Manager. 
JA: What was your position at that time? 
FS: Truck Manager. 
JA: Can you recall Mr. DESLATTE ever showing you, or asking 
you about the sale of 10 trucks to some freedom Cuban 
organization? 
FS: Yes, he come in my office - well our desks were together- 
but I was in another room with glass about 10 feet av/ay 
and he come in and he said, look this may be for a good 
cause as kind of contributing to. Cuba. They’ve had up- 
risings and all dov;n there, and they want 10 vans like 
these that Ford is building nov;. I said, well if it*s 
a good cause, let's i:>ut $50.00 over cost on each one of 
them and OSCAR says, that's okay. I'll fix it up. So he 
went in and he made up a bid. 
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing nov;. I said, well if it*s 
a good cause, let's i:>ut $50.00 over cost on each one of 
them and OSCAR says, that's okay. I'll fix it up. So he 
went in and he made up a bid. 
i

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. SEWELL, let me ask you before you go any further, did 
you get a look at the proposal that he had? Did you read 
it? 
Oh yes, I had to okay it for him. 
Did you notice any names on it? 
Yes, he had one name one time, and if I remember, it was 
a Cuban name as far as I can remember that. And then 
this thin man with his hair a little long*, who looked like 
he might need a meal, a little skinny, said you better 
put my name down there because I'm the man with the money. 
He was going to handle the money. 
^ Did this man say that in your presence? 
Yes. . . 
What did this man look like? 
Well he looked - he was about probably 5* 6 or 7", 
probably weighed at that time about 140 lbs.Tl45, and he 
wasn't dressed the best. He wasn't sloppy, he was neat, 
clean but his hair was long. 
Now let me ask you this Mr. SEWELL, was he accompanied 
by anybody else at this time? 
Yes. The man with the Cuban accent and looked like a 
Cuban. 
can you describe this man? 
Heavy set, wavey hair, kind of olive complexioned, very 
technical and well-educated. More.educated than the other 
man. 
What do you mean by "technical"? 
Well, he asked me interesting facts about these vans that 
I didn't even know myself. It shows that he was well 
read and knew something about mechanics and that he come 
/over there well versed to find out what he was buying, or 
bidding on. 
Do you recall the name that he gave? 
No, I can't remember now. 
Do you feel that that name was written down on the bid? 
It was written on the bid,,I know. 
Were both of the names writtorPdown on the bid? 
To my memory, yes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---an't remember now. 
Do you feel that that name was written down on the bid? 
It was written on the bid,,I know. 
Were both of the names writtorPdown on the bid? 
To my memory, yes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Now, what was the name of the other man, the thin man? 
Did you ever see his name written on the bid? 
I think that OSCAR DESLATTE wrote that on there, LEE 
OSV^ALD, but he didn't use the HARVEY, just LEE OWSALD if 
I remember right. 
I 
LEE OSWALD? 
Yes, it's been six years or course. He represented himself 
as LEE OSV7ALD. He's the man that spoke up and said, "I'm 
the man handling the money. You ought to have my name 
too." 
Did you actually hear this man identify himself as LEE 
OSWALD? 
Right. That's what he said. 
Did the other man‘identify himself to you too? 
No. OSCAR had his name on the bid. He didn't mention his 
name. He didn't say much a^ter that. Most of his was 
asking questions about the product he was trying to buy. 
How long were they in your office? Or were they in your 
office? 
Not in my office, but OSCAR and I had a double desk, like 
you would sit there and I would sit here. But I wasn't 
at ray desk all the time, I was in and out working because 
I had customers, and at the .time I was handling service 
on trucks too, writing the tickets and okaying the jobs, 
and ordering the material. Kind of running a one-man 
operation down there. 
How long was he in your presence? 
I. would f iy that the men were in there that I could see 
them maybe around an hour. 
That long? 
Qlose to that. It's hard to tell that kind of time when 
you're working. 
Did you ever see these men again after that, occasion? 
Did you ever ask Mr. DESLATTE (Mr. Garrison entered the 
office at this time) 
I wonder if you could repeat what you have already told 
me. It's already on the tape but it won't harm to repeat 
it to Mr. Garrison. Who the men represented themselves to 
be, etc. . 
The first thing, Mr. Garrison, v;hen Bolton went in the 
Ford business and get out of the Chevrolet, I went with 
them as Truck Manager for Bolton Ford, and a fev; weeks 
-3- 
3^/ 
r