~>rntirti5 rtcrttT fubfeq omtpitfcna tetfctouxrii

t&-n?q£dtQ?ndi vottda rtm^ctfltat^fiqbaurojptJ

tE teteterfihd bed n rj) eocp nctruolucftr (puotu tfrws

.Ca.m.T ^ /'..'./i -r -.■Tin #v\AVw-<


tnfltgmi nr
cofaenndS
Outtna urn
nom$ met
m^ntofbn

licet

Maitamo
T^erto^ftt
fnrtq'prcrt
dWjt/$ deb

rupefcrttOf

pitei etfig

t^itfnift c

tcdtoUm

xnpbm 9 -C\


THE

FATHERS

OF THE

CHURCH


MEDIAEVAL

CONTINUATION


THOMAS AQUINAS
THE ACADEMIC SERMONS


Translated by Mark-Robin Hoogland, C.P.


IdtttitW tllaj*iu ccrcmib

que iietr (imttt ignotftVpo
tutor uetuas* tvfoivatur
dccto fitttutttiStTtpiQfa -
ndul'fitrjpna fa a avium


uTftit&tak

lutttliginr


uru

tiom


fFQpehie

al^an-jp*
trios decti^

ip efpfmtib

rtuitto mart

imasogtta

cfldnoftctn

tntedfabred*

i mnetaria*

a>crtmia

u fttpnu tf
g.Tjdcftriah
n^jutoendti


erra uiumw inpiriSCta
nv« .1 \p • uldcgnita tt v; epau
bu$ maundnedebtanf oc


prta cm fa - m an i teftr fnii c
la^amrdffenan • pdfpena


g i* &rc$xc£ ti orfcT w \ eqQ'awtetn^

qnco^tigmr [va luer can&ncgtcimn twitfluar-
navdcrhinS cctcbratt)* fa) aid e& n u tiegoaj

fta\tt& fligtnmT bu - imudiao uVyc tubirul <tp


plo waicirnumo v urno*

onu el octrees qm vfraiup
rujtmiduntia^pmim *
ucem-^clt tnertn uVaucto ’
titans ip^teitqtttstitf_
eJcrtoabetsaliqmdoRW


pellanit^ffaipnsacB! pio
banbi jue^lvtta wtetir le


gttima ttpwrati abfetem^
u&mTuJi limunu fcefhar*
(LhnmTomtw pirmifTtsta
(tbi-Tiaar yntyabbufap


THE FATHERS
OF THE CHURCH

MEDIAEVAL CONTINUATION
VOLUME 11


THE FATHERS
OF THE CHURCH


MEDIAEVAL CONTINUATION


EDITORIAL BOARD

Gregory F. LaNave
The Catholic University of America Press
Editorial Director


Peter Casarella
DePaul University


Steven Marrone
Tufts University


John Cavadini
The University of Notre Dame


Barbara Newman
Northeastern University


Frank A. C. Mantello
The Catholic University of America


Jan Ziolkowski
Harvard University


David J. McGonagle
Director

The Catholic University of America Press


Carole Monica C. Burnett
Staff Editor


THOMAS AQUINAS

THE ACADEMIC SERMONS


Translated by

MARK-ROBIN HOOGLAND, C.P.


THE CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF AMERICA PRESS
Washington, D.C.


Copyright © 2010

THE CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF AMERICA PRESS
All rights reserved

Printed in the United States of America


The paper used in this publication meets the minimum
requirements of the American National Standards for
Information Science — Permanence of Paper for Printed
Library Materials, ansi Z39.48 - 1984.

00


LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA

Thomas, Aquinas, Saint, i225?-i274.

[Sermons. Selections. English]

The academic sermons / Thomas Aquinas ; translated by
Mark-Robin Hoogland.
p. cm. — (The Fathers of the Church,
mediaeval continuation ; v. 11)

Includes bibliographical references and indexes.
isbn 978-0-8132-1728-4 (cloth : alk. paper) 1. Church year
sermons. 2. Catholic Church — Sermons. 3. Sermons,
Latin — Translations into English. 4. Church year
sermons — Early works to 1800. I. Hoogland, Mark-Robin.
II. Title. III. Series.
bxi75i. 3.T49 1 3 2010
252. 02 — dc22
2009036243


To all who study God’s Word carefully,
meditate on it attentively,
and proclaim the Good News
in word and deed
with a sincere heart


CONTENTS


Preface ix

Abbreviations xi

Select Bibliography xiii

Introduction 3

The “Unknown” Thomas 3

Time and Place 7

The Composition 8

Some Characteristics 10

Main Themes 13

The Translation of the Texts 18


THE ACADEMIC SERMONS

sermon 01: Veniet desideratus 23

sermon 02: Lauda et letare 34

sermon 03: Abjiciamus opera 44

sermon 04: Osannafilio David 46

sermon 05: Ecce rex turn 6 2

sermon 06: Celum et terra transibunt 7g

sermon 07: Ecce ego mitto 85

sermon 08: Puer Jesus 87

sermon 09 : Exiit qtd seminat 108

sermon 10: Petite et accipietis 129

sermon 11: Emitte spiritum 138

sermon 12 : Seraphim stabant 159

sermon 13: Homo quidam fecit cenam magnam 171

sermon 14 : Attendite a falsis 195

sermon 15: Homo quidam erat dives 214

sermon 16: Invent David 233

sermon 17 : Lux orta 242

sermon 18: Germinet terra 259


vii


CONTENTS


viii


sermon 19 : Beati qui habitant

281

sermon 20 : Beata gens

295

sermon 21 : Beatusvir

3 J 3

Appendix: “Behind the Names”

329

INDICES

General Index

339

Index of Holy Scripture

345


PREFACE


One day, as I was preparing my lectures on St. Thomas Aqui-
nas (1224/5-1274) as a theologian for today for the Summer
Institute at the Catholic Theological Union of Chicago, I came
across a reference to one of his sermons. It was quite a shock
to realize that I had been studying the life and the works of
this member of the Order of Preachers for years, but had nev-
er read or seen or even heard of a sermon of his — apart from
the series on the Our Father, the Hail Mary, and the Ten Com-
mandments. I found the sermon Homo quidam fecit cenam mag-
nam (Sermon 13 in this collection), read it, and became totally
fascinated with it. Hence, I translated the Collatio in sero (part
3) into English and read it together with my students. It was ab-
solutely delightful to see the enthusiasm of the students; three
hours were not enough to reflect on the text. This was the be-
ginning of a search for all the sermons and the most reliable
versions of the texts, in order to make their content available to
a wider audience.

Professor Louis Bataillon, O.P., has been studying Thomas’s
academic sermons for years. He leads the project group of the
Commissio Leonina, which is preparing the first critical and
complete edition of the Latin texts. He has been most helpful:
he provided me with the texts that I did not yet have, gave
permission to publish the translations, and was always open to
comments and willing to assist me with questions concerning
the background of the sermons. For this I am very grateful to
him.

Furthermore, I would also like to thank Dr. Antoon Johan
Vermeulen for his helpful comments concerning the Latin.

This book has been compiled for my friends, Brethren,
family, colleagues, students, and all who are interested in the


IX


X


PREFACE


spirituality and the theology of St. Thomas Aquinas and the
meaning of it for today. I hope this publication will contribute
to a deeper understanding and appreciation of him as well as
a greater enthusiasm to study his writings, and, not in the last
place, that at least some of the words he communicated to his
audience may inspire us, so that we too may be strengthened in
leading a life that is characterized by faith, hope, and love.

DR. MARK-ROBIN HOOGLAND, C.P.

Rome (Italy) / Haastrecht (Zuid-Holland,
the Netherlands)

Sunday the yd of June 2007, the

canonization ofFr. Charles Houben, C.P.


Professor Louis Bataillon, O.P., died in the peace of Christ in Paris, on
the iyth of February 2009.


ABBREVIATIONS


GENERAL ABBREVIATIONS

SCG Summa contra Gentiles

SN (or In Sen.) Commentary on Peter Lombard’s Sententiae
ST Summa Theologiae

Vg Vulgate

BIBLICAL ABBREVIATIONS

The biblical references in this book are to the present-day numeration.
References are made to the Vulgate text (by adding “Vg”) in cases when the
Vulgate text differs much from the critical source text.


Old Testament


Genesis

Gn

Ezra

Ezr

Exodus

Ex

Nehemiah

Neh

Leviticus

Lv

Tobit

Tb

Numbers

Nm

Judith

Jdt

Deuteronomy

Dt

Esther

Est

Joshua

Jos

i Maccabees

i Me

Judges

Jgs

2 Maccabees

2 Me

Ruth

Ru

Job

Jb

1 Samuel

i Sm

Psalm (s)

Ps(s)

2 Samuel

2 Sm

Proverbs

Prv

1 Kings

i Kgs

Ecclesiastes

Eccl

2 Kings

2 Kgs

Song of Songs

Song

l Chronicles

l Chr

Wisdom

Wis

2 Chronicles

2 Chr

Sirach

Sir


xi


Xll


ABBREVIATIONS


Isaiah

Is

Jeremiah

Jer

Lamentations

Lam

Baruch

Bar

Ezekiel

Ezek

Daniel

Dn

Hosea

Hos

Joel

J1

Amos

Am


Obadiah

Ob

Jonah

Jon

Micah

Mi

Nahum

Na

Habakkuk

Hab

Zephaniah

Zep

Haggai

Hg

Zechariah

Zee

Malachi

Mai


New Testament


Matthew

Mt

Mark

Mk

Luke

Lk

John

J n

Acts of the Apostles

Acts

Romans

Rom

1 Corinthians

t Cor

2 Corinthians

2 Cor

Galatians

Gal

Ephesians

Eph

Philippians

Phil

Colossians

Col

1 Thessalonians

t Thes

2 Thessalonians

2 Thes


i Timothy

i Tm

2 Timothy

2 Tm

Titus

Ti

Philemon

Phlm

Hebrews

Heb

James

Jas

l Peter

t Pt

2 Peter

2 Pt

l John

1 J n

2 John

2 Jn

3 John

3 J n

Jude

Jude

Revelation

Rv


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY


Bataillon, L.-J. “Les crises de l’universite de Paris d’apres les sermons
universitaires.” Miscellanea Mediaevalia 10 (1976): 155-69.

. “L’emploi de la langue philosophique dans les sermons du treiz-

ieme siecle.” Miscellanea Mediaevalia 13/2 (1981): 983-91.

. “Le sermon inedit de Saint Thomas Homo quidam fecit cenam

magnam. Introduction et edition.” Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et
Theologiques 67 (1983): 353-68.

. “Les sermons attribues a Saint Thomas. Questions d’authenticite.”

Miscellanea Mediaevalia ig (ig88): 325-41.

. “Beatitudes et types de saintete.” Revue Mabillon n.s. 7 (igg6):

79 - 10 4 -

. “Sermon pour les Rogations, Petite et accipietis. Preface.” Unpub-
lished.

Fatula, M. A. “Contemplata aliis tradere: Spirituality and Thomas Aquinas,
the Preacher.” Spirituality Today 43.1 (iggi): 19-35.

Kappeli, Th. “Una raccolta di prediche attribuite a S. Tommaso d’Aquino.”
Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum 13 (1943): 59-94.

Kwasniewski, P. A. “A tale of two wonderworkers: St. Nicolas of Myra in
the writings and life of St. Thomas Aquinas.” Angelicum 82 (2005):
! 9 - 53 -

Leclercq, J. “Un sermon inedit de Saint Thomas sur la royaute du Christ.”
Revue Thomiste 46 (1946): 152-66.

Torrell, J.-P. “La pratique pastorale d’un theologien du XHIe siecle, Tho-
mas d’Aquin predicateur.” Revue Thomiste 82 (1982): 213-45.

. “Le semeur est sorti pour semer: L'image du Christ pecheur chez

frere Thomas d’Aquin.” La vie spirituelle 147 (1993): 657-70.

. Saint Thomas Aquinas, Volume 1: The Person and His Work. Trans-
lated by Robert Royal. Washington, DC: The Catholic University of
America Press, 1996. Especially pp. 69-74, 358 ~ 59 -

. Saint Thomas Aquinas, Volume 2: Spiritual Master. Translated by

Robert Royal. Washington, DC: The Catholic University of America
Press, 2003.

Tugwell, S., ed. Albert & Thomas: Selected Writings. Translated, edited,
and introduced by Simon Tugwell. Preface by Leonard E. Boyle. New
York: Paulist Press, 1988.


xiii


INTRODUCTION


INTRODUCTION


THE “UNKNOWN” THOMAS

The philosophical and theological works of St. Thomas
Aquinas are held in universal esteem, and there is also an in-
creasing attention to his commentaries on Scripture and the
role of Scripture in his theological works. Over the years, how-
ever, Thomas’s sermons have been widely neglected. The Latin
texts of some of Thomas’s occasional academic sermons are not
even published and so not available yet . 1

It is remarkable that in the past hardly any attention has been
given to these occasional academic sermons . 2 After all, Thomas
was a Dominican, a member of the Ordo Praedicatorum, the Or-
der of Preachers. Preaching was and is their core business, so
to speak. And although for magistri, professors at the universi-
ties like Thomas, the spreading of God’s good news was also
done by teaching and by giving the good example in everyday
life , 3 preaching as such remained an important aspect of their

1. The Sermons 01 Veniet desideratus, 02 Lauda et letare, 04 Osanna filio Dauid
(complete version), 06 Celum et terra in manuscript “P” (Paris), 1 1 Emitte Spiri-
tum, 12 Seraphim stabant, and 16 Inueni Dauid are not yet published.

2. In the 19th century some sermons were published by P. A. Uccelli (Ser-
mons 08, 14, 17, and 18) in 1869, byj. B. Raulx (Sermons 03, 06, 07, 08, 10 [at-
tributed to Thomas], 14, 15, 17, 20, and 21) in 1881, and by B. Haureau (two
sermons attributed to Thomas: Sermon 10 and Omnia parata sunt, “All things are
ready” [Mt 22:4]) in 1892. Note that none of the sermons in the collection Ser-
mones dominicales et Sermones festivi (schemes or summaries of sermons, translated
into English by John M. Ashley in London in 1873 an d reissued in Washington
in 1996) attributed to Thomas is his. In 1943 Th. Kappeli published his versions
of Sermons 04, 09, and 19. Three years later J. Leclercq published Sermon 05.
L. J. Bataillon published a part of Sermon 13 in 1974. He has been working on
the critical Latin edition of all authentic occasional academic sermons by Tho-
mas for the Commissio Leonina.

3. Cf. Thomas’s golden rule, as it were, in Sermon 09 Exiit qui seminat: “It must


3


4


INTRODUCTION


lives. For, not only was preaching part of Thomas’s life as a Do-
minican friar, but it was also one of his three tasks as a Mag-
ister in Sacra Pagina. The task of a Magister in Sacra Pagina was
described as legere, disputare, and predicare. Legere (“reading”)
means reading and explaining the Scriptures in class. It was
done consecutively, verse by verse. His commentaries, for in-
stance, on Job, on the Psalms, and on Paul’s letter to the Chris-
tians of Rome, are a result of this, as are the reportationes (writ-
ten by a secretary as he was teaching) on the Gospels according
to Matthew and John. Disputare (“discussing”) is a dialectical
form of teaching, not on the basis of a text but on a certain top-
ic. The magister examined arguments in order to come to the
solution of a certain problem. The Quaestiones disputatae De Ver-
itate ( On the Truth) and De Potentia ( On Power) are examples of
the fruit of this type of teaching. Furthermore, twice a year,
during Advent and Lent, discussions were organized at the uni-
versity during which anyone present (other magistri, students,
interested people) could pose a question on any topic. The
Quaestiones quodlibetales ( On Whatever You Want: Various Subjects)
find their origin in these events. The third task of a magister was
predicare (“preaching”). This third task was taken as seriously as
the other two. In order to be appointed as a Bachelor, a theolo-
gian first had to deliver two sermons (that is, two S ermones or a
Sermo and a Collatio in sen; see below), as a test. Yet, interestingly
enough, the work that made Thomas famous, the Summa Theolo-
giae (ST), a work in the style of the quaestiones disputatae, was not
part of his duty as a magister; he wrote it in his spare time.

Why, then, were Thomas’s sermons (almost) forgotten for
such a long time? Because they are regarded as “only” a pas-
toral application of the theology he taught? At least one of the
reasons seems to be that Thomas never bundled them himself;
he never composed a collection of his occasional academic ser-
mons. This fact also renders it more complicated to establish
the authenticity of texts that are attributed to him . * * 4 Moreover,

not be so that a preacher preaches to others what he is not doing himself.”

According to his biographers Thomas put into practice what he preached.

4. In this book we follow L. J. Bataillon, O.P., Les sermons attribues a Saint Tho-
mas: questions d’authenticite, in: Miscellanea Mediaevalia 19 (ig88): 325—41. He
finds 19 authentic sermons, which are also listed inJ.-P. Torrell, O.P., Saint Thomas


INTRODUCTION


5


these sermons do not form a complete whole like the sermons
on the Our Father, the Hail Mary, the Creed, and the Ten
Commandments. In the thirteenth century, a time when the-
ologians sought to collect, order, and systematize knowledge,
wisdom, and insights (which was done in a summa), the occa-
sional academic sermons may, therefore, have been regarded as
less interesting, even by Thomas himself. There is, insofar as we
know, only one collection of Thomas’s occasional academic ser-
mons, a collection of eleven sermons attributed to him. In some
cases their authenticity is probable, but not absolutely certain . 5

♦♦♦

The lack of interest in his occasional academic sermons in
the past is at the same time favorable for us in a way. For by rea-
son of this there are not as many versions of the text as there
are, for instance, of the sermons on the Our Father and the
Ten Commandments. As Thomas was preaching, one of his sec-
retaries (such as Reginald of Piperno or Peter of Andria, for in-
stance) took notes. These were copied, and so the text was dis-
seminated. There neither is nor was a version in Thomas’s own
handwriting, nor was a version edited by him. Moreover, copy-
ists sometimes “improved” (that is, clarified, changed, made
additions to) the text, so that different versions may be quite
divergent. Since there was not much interest in the occasional
academic sermons, they were not copied as much. Hence there

Aquinas , Volume I: The Person and His Work, trans. R. Royal (Washington, DC: The
Catholic University of America Press, 1996), 358-59. Later L .J. Bataillon, O.P.,
discovered Inueni Dauid (Sermon 16). There is no doubt that it is Thomas’s,
as also other scholars, such as P A. Kwasniewski, have confirmed. Also Petite et
accipietis is included (as Sermon 10), although it is in all probability not Thomas’s.
It has long been attributed to Thomas, but I find L. J. Bataillon’s argumentation
convincing that it is very unlikely that it is from his hand, on the ground of textual
data (e.g., one of the two manuscripts does not carry Thomas’s name at all) and
the content (which does not quite match what Thomas says in the ST on prayer) ,
and also in view of the style and the atmosphere that it breathes, which are
quite different from those of the other occasional sermons. Bataillon decided to
include it in the collection because two manuscripts have rubrics ascribing them
to Thomas.

5. These manuscripts are known as Salamanca and Sevilla. They are found
in the edition of Thomas’s Opera Omnia (volume VI) produced by Robert Busa,
S.J., and on the internet: www.corpusthomisticum.org/it and www.unav.es/
filosofla/alarcon/amicis/ctcorpus.


6


INTRODUCTION


are not as many versions of them: never more than four. Some-
times there is even only one manuscript, whereas there are
around eighty of the serial sermons and even as many as one
hundred and fifty manuscripts of the sermons on the Creed.
Still, if there are only two manuscripts, they may diverge quite a
bit, as is the case with Sermon 06 Celum et terra.

There are more aspects which make these occasional aca-
demic sermons interesting: they give us a better insight into the
content and style of Thomas’s preaching than do the serial ser-
mons. After all, Thomas preached on the Our Father, the Hail
Mary, and the Ten Commandments in the vernacular {in vul-
gari, Italian), and the secretaries translated them into Latin. The
Latin text is the only form in which these sermons are handed
down to us. Now, translation inevitably means a loss as well as
interpretation. The occasional sermons, however, were given in
Latin. When the translated Latin texts of the sermons are com-
pared to ones that were given in Latin, we see some differences;
for example, in the latter we meet a Thomas who is stylistically
looser and livelier. Although he spoke his native tongue in the
serial sermons, we find more colloquial language in the occa-
sional Latin sermons: some sentences are grammatically chal-
lenged. On the other hand, the style of the texts of the trans-
lated sermons is more formal and streamlined; there we do not
find formulations like “I say” (that is, “I interpret this as,” which
appears, for example, several times in Sermon 13 Homo quidam
fecit ) or “Because of the shortness of the time we say just some-
thing about . . .” (Sermon 20 Beata gens, at the beginning of the
Collatio in sero). It is also eye-catching that in the occasional ser-
mons we find examples from everyday life that are concrete,
short, and to the point, but not in the serial sermons. Yet William
of Tocco, Thomas’s first biographer, speaks of Thomas’s rapture
as he preached in illo suo vulgari in Rome, moving his audience
to tears as he preached on the Passion of Christ and made the
people take part in the joy of the Resurrection. 6 In light of this
it seems likely that the more formal style in the translated seri-

6. J.-P. Torrell, O.P., refers to this in his article “La pratique pastorale d’un
theologien du XHIe siecle Thomas d’Aquin predicateur, ” in Revue Thomiste 82
(1982): 217.


INTRODUCTION


7


al sermons is due to the translation into Latin (and possibly the
adaptation of the text) by a secretary. The same applies to the
absence of examples; the secretary might have left them out for
the sake of the clarity of the line of reasoning. But in the end we
cannot be sure. Furthermore, at times we see a more passionate
Thomas in the occasional sermons, such as Sermons 06 Celum
et terra and 14 Attendite a falsis, where he addresses his audience
with “My dearest brethren” ([Fratres\ karissimi ), and the same is
true of Sermon 08 Puer Iesus, where he tries to persuade his au-
dience by making an appeal not only to the intellect but also to
the emotions in order to get his message across and to strength-
en the listeners in a virtuous life with God.

TIME AND PLACE

Since Thomas did not list, collect, or order his occasional ac-
ademic sermons, it is often very complicated, if not impossible,
to establish when and where he gave them and even whether
Thomas actually is the author. 7 The occasion of the sermon is
never a problem, since it is always mentioned. The year, howev-
er, is never mentioned. When the exact date is certain or prob-
able, it is mentioned in the notes.

In the course of the academic year, magistri and bachelors
took turns preaching on the Sundays and feast days, some of
which were observed only by the theological faculty. When this
was the case the sermon was probably given at the house of the
Dominicans or Franciscans. 8

In Paris an occasional sermon usually consisted of three
parts: Prothema, Sermo, and Collatio in sero. The Prothema and
the Sermo were given in the morning, at Mass, after the Gos-
pel reading. The Collatio in sero was given in the late afternoon,
during the vespers. If a sermon does not have a Collatio in sero
(Sermon 04 Osanna filio Dauid and Sermon 16 Inueni Dauid), it
was probably given by another preacher.


7. See note 4.

8. This is according to the statutes of the university of 1335, but it may well
have been the practice already before that year and when Thomas was in Paris
(1252-1256 and 1268-1272); cf. the heading of Sermon 06 Celum et terra.


INTRODUCTION


Most of the occasional sermons were given in Paris, coram
universitate. It is very likely that a good number of them were
given at St. James (Saint Jacques), the house of the Dominicans.
We know that Sermon 03 Abjiciamus opera was given at Bologna
and that Sermon 07 Ecce ego mitto was given at Milan, maybe one
week later. But it is very unlikely that it was in December of the
year 1268, as we long thought on the basis of P. Mandonnet’s re-
construction of Thomas’s journey from Rome to Paris. 9

At any rate, therefore, for a good understanding of the occa-
sional sermons — what is Thomas saying and why — it is impor-
tant to realize that the audience addressed consisted mostly of
other friars (Thomas’s Dominican brethren and Franciscans),
colleagues, and clerical students.


THE COMPOSITION

Eleven of the twenty 10 sermons are made up of three parts: a
Prothema, a Sermo and a Collatio in sero. Two sermons have a Pro-
thema and a Sermo, and four merely a Sermo. These four may well
have been delivered in Italy. Three other sermons (03, 06, and
07) are known to us only in abridged versions; these are pre-
served in a collection of abridged sermons, nearly all by Bon-
aventure — a collection that was meant, it seems, as a source of
ideas for Franciscan preachers. It is quite obvious that Sermon
06 Celum et terra is the summary of a sermon in three parts.
Also, Sermon 03 Abjiciamus opera is preserved as a summary. It
could well have been a sermon in three parts, too. 11 Of Sermon


9. In the Editio Leonina part XLV (i, pp. 286*-287*) R. A. Gauthier argues
that R Mandonnet’s reconstruction of Thomas’s journey from Rome to Paris
over land in the winter of 1268-1269 cannot be correct. In the company of
Nicolas Brunaccio, Thomas traveled to Paris earlier, most probably in August
or September of 1268. Furthermore, it is most likely that the major part of the
journey was by boat. Cf. Simon Tugwell, ed., Albert & Thomas, Selected Writings
(New York: Paulist Press, 1988), 225, 317 (note 249).

10. In what follows we leave Sermon 10 aside, in view of what is said in note 4.

1 1 . This seems plausible, for the first part of the text is in the form of a Pro-
thema. Furthermore, since there is no Sermo that consists of two parts (all but
one, the Sermo of Sermon 1 7, consist of three or four parts) , and since the sec-
ond part of the text concerns the first part of Rom 13.12, it is more likely that


INTRODUCTION


9


07 Ecce ego only a fragment is preserved, on the basis of which
we cannot draw conclusions. 12

The Prothema is the introduction of the sermon. It begins
with the Scripture verse that is the subject of the sermon. Sub-
sequently Thomas makes one or a few preliminary remarks.
This is usually not the introduction of the theme of the ser-
mon (although it is, for example, in Sermon 08), but rather
the framework in which the sermon is given. Thomas under-
lines, for instance, how important the Holy Spirit is if we want
to speak wisely (Sermon 11, on Pentecost) or that we need spir-
itual strength in order to live without deception (Sermon 14,
on how to distinguish the true sheep from wolves in disguise).
The Prothema usually ends in a prayer for divine help and inspi-
ration: “that I may say something useful about ‘the subject’ to
the honor of God,” or something similar. Only in Sermons 06,
08, 18, and 20 is the full prayer written down by the secretary;
in the other instances he contented himself after quoting a few
words with “et cetera.”

The Sermo and the Collatio in sero are two parts of the sermon
in which the verse from Scripture is dissected and explained.
The Collatio in sero is the continuation of the Sermo . 13 Mostly it
focuses on the second half of the verse, highlighting one or a
few other aspects of the same theme. The Collatio in sero is gen-
erally somewhat shorter than the Sermo.

At the beginning of the Sermo Thomas tells his audience
which steps he is going to take. Usually he also does so in the
Collatio in sero. At the beginning of the Collatio in sero he briefly
refers to what he has said in the morning. Most of the time he
follows precisely the plan announced, although an exception is
found, for example, in Sermon 20 (see note 56 there).

The sermon (or sometimes the Sermo and the Collatio in sero

this part is a summary of the Sermo. Then the third part of the text, which con-
cerns the second part of Rom 13.12, would be a summary of the Collatio in sero.

12. The first part of the text is probably the beginning of the Sermo; Thomas
presents the three steps that he is going to take. Since the second part of the
text speaks of angels, it may be an excerpt from Thomas’s second step.

13. The term collatio is also used in other senses. In Thomas’s Collationes in
decern preceptis ( Sermons on the Ten Commandments ), for instance, it designates a
sermon in a series, not necessarily given in the late afternoon or early evening.


10


INTRODUCTION


individually) is usually divided into three or four parts, in ac-
cordance with the classical rhetorical rules. It is in that sense a
very convenient arrangement. The first point Thomas makes is
generally much more elaborate than the second point — some-
times the first point even takes the whole Sermo — and the sec-
ond point is more elaborate than the third, and the third than
the fourth. Each part is subdivided in most cases into three or
four parts, and often a subdivision is broken down again. Be-
cause of this the structure of the text may not always be clear at
first sight. 14 Therefore I have numbered the paragraphs in ac-
cordance with the structure as Thomas himself has indicated it.

SOME CHARACTERISTICS

Most of the sermons are based on a verse from the Gospels,
especially the Gospel according to Matthew, or the Psalms.

Within the sermons the number of Scripture references
stands out. Furthermore, besides the many quotations there are
quite a few references to Scripture in Thomas’s sermons that
are not made explicit. In the text I refer to these by recogniz-
ing them in the notes or by “[cf. a certain text].” Thomas is not,
however, simply quoting and referring to Scripture at random
in order to gain authority and to get his point across. For Tho-
mas, Scripture is the highest authority, and it is the directive
for his line of reasoning. A clear example is found in the Sermo
of Sermon 21 for the Feast of St. Martin, where the three steps
he takes are based on what we read in Rom 8.30. Thus Thomas
is explaining the Scriptures with the Scriptures, something he
does also in his theological works.

Relatively many quotations are from the Psalms. This is no
surprise since Thomas prayed them every day together with his
brethren in the Liturgy of the Hours, except for the time when
he had dispensation from communal prayer so that he could
be more devoted to his theological work. He probably, however,
still prayed them by himself. So he was very familiar with the
Psalms. The same applies to the many quotations from Job, the


14. The Sermo of Sermon 13 is in this respect the most complicated text.


INTRODUCTION


11


Prophet Isaiah (often referred to as “the Prophet”), the Gospel
according to Matthew, and the Letters of Paid (generally called
“the Apostle”): these are the books on which he lectured at the
university. 15 Also Proverbs, Qohelet (Ecclesiastes), the Book of
Wisdom, and Sirach are cited and referred to frequently; since
these books contain many concrete, practical directions for a
good, virtuous life, they suit sermons well.

For us the Christological reading of the Old Testament in
Thomas’s works is notable. In his time it was a common inter-
pretation, regarded as part of the sensus litteralis . 16 The Christo-
logical interpretation of Old Testament texts is already found
in the New Testament: words and sayings are read as (also)
Christ’s and referring to Christ: for example, Old Testament
texts are applied to Christ’s coming (as in Mt 2.6), life (as in
Lk 4.18), and Passion (as in 1 Pt 2.24). Such exegesis was com-
mon among the Church Fathers and in the later tradition. The
basis for reading the Old Testament in this way is the belief that
the Old Testament is fulfilled in Christ, as we read in Jn ig.28
and Lk 24.25-27.

At times the references to Scripture are not explicit and the
quotations not precise, and many are not complete — in some
sermons more than others, probably because there were differ-
ent secretaries and copyists. Averse may be referred to just by
a few words followed by “etc.” Even more, the pivotal word(s) or
term(s) may not be in the text quoted. In that case the transla-
tion of the whole verse is found in the text, but the words omit-
ted in the Latin text appear in parentheses.

The texts themselves seem to indicate that Thomas had the
use of a concordance: he cites many less familiar Scripture
texts, and, furthermore, several times he quotes Scripture texts


15. Thomas lectured on the Psalms only at the very end of his life, in 1272-
1273. His commentary is unfinished: it covers Psalms 1 to 55.16 (Vg 54.16).

16. Thomas stands in the tradition that holds that the Scripture texts con-
tain and reveal not only the truth about created things, but even the mystery of
God. Therefore, a word, sentence, or narrative can have more than one mean-
ing. Four levels are distinguished: the literal or historical sense, the allegorical
sense, the moral sense, and the anagogic sense. See also ST I 1,10. This deter-
mines Thomas’s approach, for instance, in Sermon 16 Inueni Dauid.


12


INTRODUCTION


consecutively that have one word in common. 17 Concordances
became more and more available in the 13th century. 18

Other quotations in the text are mainly from Church Fa-
thers, especially Augustine. Also Aristotle, “the Philosopher,” is
cited as an authority a few times. It is interesting to see how he
is systematically ignored in one of the manuscripts of Sermon
06 Celum et terra (see the notes there). Apparently a secretary or
copyist did not consider it appropriate to present a pagan phi-
losopher (as an authority) in a Christian sermon, or, the other
way round, someone has added Aristotle’s sayings when copy-
ing the text. Yet another source from which Thomas drew was
the liturgy, for instance, several times in Sermon 21 when, in
regard to the life of St. Martin, he refers several times to the
Dominican reading of that Feast.

It cannot come as a surprise that Thomas used his own theo-
logical works as he was preaching. In the footnotes I connect
the sermons with texts from the Summa Theologiae (ST) or, if a
certain theme in a sermon is not (or not clearly or extensively)
reflected upon, from other theological works. These sermons
are a typical example of the way in which the friars transmit-
ted to others what they had been contemplating, in conformi-
ty with the Dominicans’ device: contemplari et contemplata aliis
tradere, that is, to contemplate and to pass what has been con-
templated, the results of this contemplation, on to others.


17. E.g., miles, “soldier,” in Sermon 12 (in paragraph 2.2.3) an d miser,
“wretched,” in Sermon 13 ( Collatio in sero paragraph 3.2).

18. The Dominicans compiled the first concordances. Hugo of Saint-Cher,
assisted by 500 fellow Dominicans as it is reported, was the very first who com-
pleted one, in 1230: the concordance of Saint Jacques. Data on a given word
were references only to the biblical book and chapter (according to the ar-
rangement made a few years before, by Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Can-
terbury) . Hugo divided the chapters into seven equal parts and indicated them
with the letters A through G, in order to make the references more precise (only
in 1 545 were the verses numbered, as we know them, by Robert Estienne) . In
a few instances we find these letters in Thomas’s texts. In the years 1250-1252
English Dominicans published an improved version: it contained not only refer-
ences to the biblical locus, but it gave the whole sentence in which the word oc-
curred, which was much more useful to the preachers and theologians.


INTRODUCTION


13


Now, it is significant to see that Thomas uses hardly any the-
ological terms in his academic sermons. He could have done
so, since the main part of his audience would have understood
it. Yet Thomas’s language in these sermons is strikingly plain
and simple; he did not want to show off, it seems, as some of his
contemporaries did. He may well have taken St. Paul’s words to
heart, that Christ sent him “to preach the Gospel, and not with
the wisdom of human eloquence, so that the cross of Christ
might not be emptied of its meaning” (1 Cor 1.17). Neither do
we find any theatrical elements like jokes and elaborate anec-
dotes in his sermons. If he puns, he does it in a subtle way, as in
Sermon 17, on the Feast of Mary’s birth, concerning the words
virgo (virgin) and virga (twig).

Not many people will overlook that in one of the sermons,
Sermon 16 Inueni Dauid, Thomas speaks of women as natu-
rally weak; a strong woman is a rare find. He is not very origi-
nal when he says this; this explanation of Prv 31.10 (“A strong
woman, who will find her?”) echoes the way of thinking of that
time. 19 Before drawing quick and easy conclusions it is good to
see that, although he is a child of his time, in his further writ-
ings he is more distinguished than in this remark. Likewise,
in the Sermo of Sermon 18 Germinet terra, Thomas juxtaposes
the feeble, corrupted woman and the virtuous, strong woman
through whom salvation came into the world, the Blessed Vir-
gin Mary.


MAIN THEMES

Thomas’s uncomplicated language in the occasional aca-
demic sermons suits the content. For these sermons are primar-
ily practical, aimed at the edification of his audience. Beside
the contemplation of God’s love for us and our love for God
as a response to it, there is a strong emphasis on active love of
the neighbor, relatively more than in his theological works. He

19. In the text it is clear that Thomas touches common ground when he says
this; he just uses it as an example to make something clear about what we com-
monly understand by the verb “to find.”


14


INTRODUCTION


clearly states that, for a Christian, knowledge and putting that
knowledge into practice belong together: a believer, and espe-
cially a preacher, must live in accordance with what he or she
knows (Sermon og Exiit qui seminat). This does not mean that
the sermons are full of examples from everyday life; Thomas
rather speaks of this love of others in the broader view of the
neighbor’s and his audience’s well-being, spiritual and material.

In these sermons there is more emphasis on the spiritual, for
eventually happiness is not found in anything earthly; the body
is temporary, as are earthly glory, honor, and riches, too, where-
as the soul does not die. Yet also the material aspect of human
life is clearly brought to the listeners’ attention. It is good to see
this against the background of the growing poverty in the fairly
new cities of the 13th century. In earlier, more rural times there
had always been something to eat, so to speak. Primarily poverty
had to do with not being able to do what you wanted to do. But
in the new urban societies poverty was characterized more by a
lack of money, food, and shelter, while there were many more
rich people than ever before (because of a prospering trade).
This situation of social injustice colors Thomas’s preaching.

Not only are people to share what they have, but also what
they know. Only in Sermon 08 Puer Jesus ( Collatio in sero) does
Thomas explicitly depict what the attitude of a scholar should
be, but in fact Thomas himself makes a display of this atti-
tude in all his works: it is an obligation that we share with oth-
ers what we have learned. Even more, sharing wisdom, insights,
and knowledge is the way for us to acquire these.

Thomas’s language suits the content of his sermons, and
many of his themes are clearly geared to his audience. In quite
a few sermons the religious life is a theme, as in Sermon 04 Os-
anna filio Dauid and Sermon og Exiit qui seminat: he brings up
questions like “Does it make sense to take vows? What is the
surplus value of it?” and “Should young people be led into reli-
gious life?” Why he does this is obvious against the background
of the tensions between the regular and the secular magistri
and bachelors at the University of Paris, which had already be-
gun in the 20s of the 13th century and only deteriorated in the


INTRODUCTION


15


course of time, culminating in a most serious crisis in 1270-
1271. Here we come to know Thomas as a zealous defender of
the religious life: the religious life is most meaningful and valu-
able and it must be promoted, so that they who are called to it
also choose to live it.

The same applies to the assessment of the relation between
faith and philosophy, that is, the relation between what is a (su-
pernatural) gift from God and (natural) human wisdom and
knowledge. Debates between philosophers and theologians are
reflected in the sermons where Thomas harps upon the prima-
cy of faith over any human insight. Sermon 14 Attendite a falsis
is illustrative in this respect, where he says that because of her
faith an old (uneducated) woman knows and understands more
than any of the great non-believing philosophers.

Thomas is an ardent preacher when it comes to defending
the faith and religious life, but at the same time he is not rig-
orous. Thomas is reluctant to use violence towards sinners and
even towards heretics; since the latter are a great danger for the
unity of the Church and the salvation of the people, they must
be converted: first by convincing them by means of words and
signs, and only eventually by giving them a hard time ( Collatio
in sero of Sermon 13 Homo quidam fecit).

This attitude of his, which we also find in his theological
works, is the expression of the virtuous life that he promotes.
In all sermons Thomas urges his audience to lead a virtuous
life. Three aspects stand out: first, the love of God and, in con-
nection with this, the love of the neighbor; second, the great at-
tention to the cardinal virtues, 20 the virtues that order our lives
in such a way that we can live together in harmony and peace;
third, virtues that he brings to the fore as important in reli-
gious life (after all, his audience consists mostly of religious):
obedience, humility, prayer, 21 and fidelity to vows.

In twelve of the twenty sermons Thomas explicitly brings to


20. Prudence, justice, strength, and temperance, and the virtues connected
with these; cf. the many references in the notes to ST II— II 47-170.

2 1 . Thomas gives instructions on how and for whom we should pray, with ex-
plicit and implicit references to Matthew 6 and Luke 1 1 and 18.


16


INTRODUCTION


our attention that we are created in the image of God, 22 the tri-
une God (Sermon 12, on Trinity Sunday), but that in us this
image is obscured to a greater or lesser extent through sin (Ser-
mon 05). If we look at Christ, we see what is meant by being and
living as the image of God. Hence, Christians are to follow (a)
God (Sermon 13); (b) Christ, in everything (Sermon 08), even
in his Passion (as Thomas fervently advocates at the end of Ser-
mon 05); and (c) the renewal of the Holy Spirit (Sermon 11, on
Pentecost). Such is the perfection of a Christian life. The holy
ones go or have gone before us on the way (Sermon 20). Follow-
ing the crowds (Sermon 08), the advice of sinners (Sermon 21),
and your own thoughts (Sermon 14) and desires (Sermon og),
is at odds with such a virtuous way of life; God became like us
so that we would become like him. 23

An interesting consequence of this view is found in the Sermo
of Sermon 15 ( Homo quidam erat dives). Soiling a crucifix, an im-
age of Christ in wood, is blasphemous; how much more, then, if
someone damages a fellow human being, which is the image of
God in the flesh, a much more excellent image?

Three more themes arrest the attention because these are
not discussed in other works by Thomas as they are here: the
Holy Spirit, the Church, and Mary. Indeed, many of the points
made in these sermons are found throughout the Summa The-
ologiae and in other theological works, but in these occasion-
al sermons Thomas presents a more integral view of these
themes. In the Summa Theologiae the Holy Spirit is contemplat-
ed in the context of the Trinity, the sending of the Son and the
Holy Spirit, the moral life, the Incarnation, the miracles that
Christ worked, the Passion, and the sacraments, whereas in Ser-
mon 11, given on Pentecost, these and other aspects are pre-
sented in one very fine meditation on the mystery of the send-
ing of the Holy Spirit to us and what this means for our lives as
Christians. In particular the Collatio in sero of this sermon is a
beautiful reflection of Thomas’s spirituality.

22. Sermons 04, 05, 08, og, 1 1 to 17, and 20.

23. Cf. Athanasius, De incarnation# 54.


INTRODUCTION


17


In Thomas’s theological works we do not find an exposi-
tion on the Church. 24 Yet in Sermons 13 and tg we come across
some noteworthy insights. In Sermon tg, given on the Feast of
All Saints, Thomas depicts one community of God and believ-
ers on earth and in heaven: the community of the ones who
are in community with Christ. Characteristic of this commu-
nity is that the members share the same end — happiness — but
also that they help one another to attain it; thus the saints who
have reached that happiness (they are comprehensores) help us
who are on the way ( viatores ) to attain it. Thus the Community
of Faith is characterized by solidarity. In the Collatio in sero of
Sermon 13 on Lk 14.16, “Someone gave a great dinner and in-
vited many,” Thomas speaks of the question of who is invited.
The text shows that according to Thomas the Church is an in-
clusive community; for instance, referring to Ambrose, Thomas
endorses that sinners must not be cut out, but rather must be
invited in. Therefore the servant in the Gospel who was sent,
and thus Thomas’s audience, must go to great lengths to gather
everybody in. Educating the ignorant is an obvious method for
a Dominican.

In the Summa Theologiae we read very little about the Bless-
ed Virgin Mary outside the context of the Incarnation. In some
occasional academic sermons and, in particular, in Sermon 17
Lux orta and in the Sermo of Sermon 18 Germinet terra, both giv-
en on the Feast of the Birth of the Blessed Virgin Mary, we get
an insight into Thomas’s devotion to Mary. 25 As in the Summa
Theologiae she is the one through whom our salvation became
flesh and blood in the world. Furthermore, she is the one to
call upon in distress (Sermon 15), a great example of medita-
tion (Sermon 08), and the paragon of virtue in general (Ser-
mons 17 and 18). Thomas presents her as so perfect that she
becomes almost super-human. Here Thomas breathes the com-
mon culture and spirituality of his time.


24. Sermons 12 and 13 of the series on the Creed concerning “I believe in
one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church” are obviously dedicated to this theme.

25. The prayer O beatissima et dulcissima virgo Maria, ascribed to Thomas, is
not his.


18


INTRODUCTION


THE TRANSLATION OF THE TEXTS

The present volume contains a translation of the twenty oc-
casional academic sermons that are deemed authentic by Louis-
Jacques Bataillon, O.P. (see note 4, above), as well as the sermon
Petite et accipietis, which was long considered Thomas’s.

The considerable length of the sermons, their divisions and
subdivisions, and the number of quotations from Scripture and
the Church Fathers may be trying to the reader. In order to
make the texts more accessible and to clarify the line of reason-
ing, the divisions and subdivisions of the texts are numbered,
following Thomas’s own indications. The translations in this
volume have retained the format of the scriptural references as
they appear in each of the Latin texts; these formats vary from
text to text in regard to whether the references are bracketed
or are simply embedded as an intrinsic part of the sermon.

As was said above, in the notes the reader finds in particular
references to Thomas’s theological works, especially the Sum-
ma Theologiae (ST) and the Summa Contra Gentiles (SCG). These
show that his theology is the foundation of his sermons. In ad-
dition, the references may invite the reader to explore further
the themes of interest in Thomas’s theological works.

The textual versions used for this book are listed below. The
texts whose titles appear in italics are not yet available in the
critical edition of the Commissio Leonina, but will be pub-
lished by the commission in the near future; for the time being,
they are available only through the first translation of these in
this book. An earlier, available version of the unavailable Latin
textual versions is referred to in notes 25 through 31. “Busa” re-
fers to volume VI of Thomas Aquinas’s Opera Omnia, edited by
Roberto Busa, S.J. (Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt, 1980).

01 Veniet desideratus: text by L. J. Bataillon (provisional
Leonine text)

02 Lauda et letare: text by L. J. Bataillon (provisional Leonine
text)

03 Abjiciamus opera: textLutetia Parisiorum 1879, also in
Busa, page 38a


INTRODUCTION


19


04 Osanna filio Dauid: complete text by L. J. Bataillon
(provisional Leonine text) 26

05 Ecce rex tuus: text by J. Leclercq, published in Revue
Thomiste (1946), also in Busa, page 45a

06 Celum et terra transibunt: texts (manuscripts Milano and
Paris) by L. J. Bataillon (provisional Leonine text) 27

07 Ecce ego mitto: text Lutetia Parisiorum 1879, a ls° in Busa,
page 42a

08 Puer Jesus: text Cod. Lat. 15034 Bibl. Nat. Parisiorum,
also in Busa, page 33a

og Exiit qui seminat: text by Th. Kappeli in Archivum Fratrum
Praedicatorum (1943), also in Busa, page 42b

10 Petite et accipietis: text by L. J. Bataillon (provisional
Leonine text) 28

11 Emitte Spiritum: text by L. J. Bataillon (provisional
Leonine text)

12 Seraphim stabant: text by L. J. Bataillon (provisional
Leonine text)

13 Homo quidam fecit cenam magnam: text by L. J. Bataillon,
published in Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et Theologiques
(i9 8 3)

14 Attendite a falsis: text by L. J. Bataillon (provisional
Leonine text) 29

15 Homo quidam erat dives: text by L. J. Bataillon (provisional
Leonine text) 30

16 Inueni Dauid: text by L. J. Bataillon (provisional Leonine
text)

17 Lux orta: text Parma 1869, also in Busa, page 36b

18 Germinet terra: text by L.J. Bataillon (provisional Leonine
text) 31

26. Text published in part by Th. Kappeli in Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum
13 (1943), also in Busa, page 42a.

27. Text Lutetia Parisiorum 1879 (°f the manuscript Milano) in Busa, page
37 c-

28. Text Lutetia Parisiorum, 1879, Busa, page 582a.

29. Text Parma, 1869, in Busa, page 35a.

30. Text Lutetia Parisiorum, 1879, i n Busa, page 38a.

3 1 . Text by P. A. Uccelli published in I Gigli a Maria 12(1 874) , also in Busa,
page 38a.


20


INTRODUCTION


ig Beati qui habitant: text by L. J. Bataillon (provisional
Leonine text) 32

20 Beata gens: text Lutetia Parisiornm, 1879, a l so > n Busa,
page 39c

21 Beatus vir: text Lutetia Parisiorum, 1879, a lso 111 Busa,
page 41a

Since in only a few sermons do we know the exact year in
which Thomas gave them, it is impossible to arrange them in a
chronological order. Therefore, they are put in a liturgical or-
der: 33 first, the sermons of the Sundays in the order of the litur-
gical calendar (01-15), and then, in the same way, the sermons
on the feast days (16-21).


32. Text by Th. Kappeli in Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum 13 (1943), also in
Busa, page 44a.

33. Following the proposition of L. J. Bataillon, O.P. It is the order in which
the Latin texts will be published by the Commissio Leonina.


THOMAS AQUINAS

THE ACADEMIC SERMONS


SERMON 01

VENIET DESIDERATUS

Sermon on the First Sunday of Advent


Haggai 2.7: He who is desired by all the nations together will come,
and he will fill this house with glory.

Sermo

■ ailT isas Augustine says to Optatus: “Nobody is freed from
J the damnation that came through Adam but through
all faith in Jesus Christ.” This is sufficiently proven by the
Apostle in Hebrews 11 [verse 6], where he shows that no one
has ever been able to please God without faith. From this it fol-
lows that at all times after a lapse faith has been a necessity for
recovery, for there is no other medicine for the weakness of
original or actual sin. * 1 And therefore all the saints always, from
the beginning of the world, longed for and desired the coming
of the Savior. 2

And this is shown well and plainly in the saying mentioned
in which the Prophet shows three things, in this order: (1) first,
he shows God’s Son himself who is coming down from the heav-
ens: “he will come”; (2) second, he shows the one who merciful-
ly fulfills the desires of the Fathers [Patriarchs]: “who is desired
by all the nations together”; (3) third, he shows the one who
freely bestows his pleasing benefit [upon us]: “and he will fill

1. Cf. ST I— II 109,7, 1 13,4, and 1 14,7, where Thomas underlines that this is
not a matter of merit; faith is a gracious gift from God.

2. Hence Thomas employs a Christological reading of the Old Testament:
Moses, the prophets, and the Psalmist speak already of the Christ, and he speaks
through them.


23


24


THOMAS AQUINAS


this house with glory.” In the first part the lowliness of the com-
ing one or of the coming is shown in view of the way; in the sec-
ond the necessity of the coming in view of the human race; in
the third the utility of the coming in view of the gift offered.
The first brings to the fore that we should prepare a warm wel-
come for him; the second, that we should focus our desire on
him; the third, that we should receive the benefit offered.

(1) So, first, he shows that the Son of God comes down hum-
bly from the heavens when he says: “He will come.” I interpret
“He will come” as: insofar as it is absolutely necessary for us.
Well, the coming of the Savior was necessary, for three reasons:
first, because the world was imperfect in many ways; second, be-
cause man was cast down from his rightful honor in a foul way;
and third, because God was offended by man in a wondrous
way. Therefore, he came (1.1) in order to grant to the whole
world the highest grade of dignity, (1.2) in order to lead man
back to his proper human state, and (1.3) in order to take away
the offense of man against God. 3

(1.1) Now the grade of perfection in the world fell short in
three respects: (1.1.2) one way of generation is more sublime
than the others; (1.1.1) one grade of union is more wonderful 4
than the others; and (1.1.3) one wa }' of perfection is more excel-
lent than the others. Yet, when Christ came into this world, he
accomplished a new union, he took on a new generation, and
he brought along a new perfection.

(1.1.1) So in the world one grade of union was lacking, the
one more wonderful than the others. For in our world there
are four kinds of union: the first is the union of something cor-
ruptible with something corruptible, as in natural things. The

3. Thomas’s order reflects the focus of his approach: the salvation of hu-
mankind. The same we see in the Summa Theologiae, especially in how he ap-
proaches the Incarnation (ST III 1,1-6, from the very beginning; cf. 1,1 sc) and
the Passion (ST III 46,1-4); see also his introduction to the TertiaPars.

4. Thomas uses the same word here as for the offense against God: mirabi-
lis. There it has the connotation of “mysterious” (for how can a temporal be-
ing hurt the Eternal One? ST I g,i esp. ad 3), whereas here the meaning tends
more towards “perfect,” “excellent,” and therefore “evoking awe.”


SERMON 01


25


second is the union of something corruptible with something
incorruptible, as in human beings. 5 6 The third is the union of
something incorruptible with something incorruptible, as in
spiritual things: a union of essentia and potential The fourth,
however, was lacking: the union of something temporal with
something eternal. Well, this union was made when “the Word
became flesh and dwelt among us,” as it says in Jn 1.14; “when
he emptied himself (and took on the form of a slave; made in
the likeness of human beings he was, through his way of life,
found a man),” as Phil 2.7 reads; that is “when the king of Is-
rael disguised himself,” as it is said in 1 Kgs 22.30; and Is 43.19
reads: “Behold, I make all things new.” 7

(1.1.2) Also, the one way of generation was lacking that is
more wonderful than the others. For there are four kinds of
generation in the broad sense of the word: 8 the first is from the
Father without a mother, the generation that occurs eternally. 9
The second is without a father and without a mother, in the be-
ginning, as with the first parents. 10 The third is from a father
and a mother, the generation that occurs all around us. The
fourth did not exist before, namely, the generation from a moth-
er without a father in time. Well, this generation was made when
the Virgin conceived, when, as we read in Isaiah 10, “the stone
is hewn from the mountain without hands,” which, according

5. In people the corruptible body and the incorruptible soul are united: ST
I 75,4 and 6.

6. As in angels for instance: ST I 50.

7. Actually Thomas is quoting Rv 21.5: ecce novafacio omnia ; Is 43.19 reads:
ecce egofacio nova (“Behold, I make new things”).

8. Thomas’s order is as we come across the different generations in salvation
history, which is preceded, so to speak, by the eternal forthcomings.

9. ST I 27,2, where he explains Ps 2.7: ‘You are my son; this day I have be-
gotten you.”

10. In Genesis Adam and Eve have no human parents, no father and moth-
er in time. They come forth from the triune God — not only from the Father;
the name Creator is appropriated to the Father (ST I 32,1 and 39,7-8)). Since
Adam and Eve came forth from God, who created them (ST I 44 and also 65,4),
he is their father, yet in an analogical way; he is their father. God’s fatherhood
for people is similar but not quite the same as the fatherhood of human beings
(ST I 13,5), or rather the other way round: the human fatherhood is similar to
God’s: Eph 3.15; cf. ST I 13,6, 33,2,4, 45,5,1.


26


THOMAS AQUINAS


to Daniel to “became a great mountain and it filled the whole
earth.” 11 The stone hewn from the mountain [without hands] is
Christ, born from the Virgin without a human action. Indeed,
then “the Lord made a new thing upon the earth: (the woman
will encompass the man),” asjeremiah 21 [Jer 31.22] puts it.

(1.1.3) Also lacking was the one grade of perfection that is
more excellent than the others, although anything that is con-
nected with its end is perfect. 12 Hence, a creature is most per-
fect when it is united with its Creator. 13 Well, with a triple con-
nection a creature is conjoined with its Creator: the first is a
union in respect of strength, by reason of a dependency that
is in all things. Hence “all things would fall into nothingness,
unless they were kept by the hand of the Almighty,” according
to Gregory. 14 The second is in respect of the [human] species:
through the grace that is in just people, since according to Di-
onysius love (amor) is a unifying force. 15 The third union con-
cerns the thing itself, by essence. This did not exist before, but
it came into being when the human nature was taken on by the
Son of God in unity of supposit or person. 16 In taking on the
human nature in a certain way the whole world was taken on,
because, according to Gregory, “in a way every creature is a hu-
man being.” 17

1 1 . The first part is a quotation from Dn 2.45, the second part from Dn 2.35.

12. ST I 6,3, and the other way round in III 44,3,3.

13. ST 6,2,2; cf. texts like Heb 2.10 and 1 Cor 8.6.

14. Cf. ST I 8,1, and in Scripture: Wis 1 1.25.

15. Specialist it is special or concerns a species, namely, the human species.
Through God’s gracious gift of love we are united with him. Cf. Jn 14.23 and
15.9-10; cf. ST I 20,1,3 and Thomas’s commentary on Dionysius’s On the Divine
Names ( De divinis nominibus ), c.4.

16. It is unio realis; it concerns the very essence of the res, of the thing itself.
So although there were two natures in Christ, the divine and the human, he was
one individual, one rational individual. For Thomas’s exposition on the unity of
Christ: ST III 2.

17. Thomas’s terms in 1.1.3 are: virtualis (concerning virtus, “strength”), spe-
cials (“special” or “concerning a species,” i.e., the human species) and realis
(“belonging to the res,” the thing itself) . Through the Incarnation the whole of
creation became more valuable, since the Eternal One had entered it in a new
way; cf. Wis 19.6, Rom 8.19-22. See also texts on God as causa exemplaris, esp.
ST I 44,3.


SERMON 01


27


(1.2) Second, he came to gather the scattered and to lead
them back to the proper state of man or to the practice of the
one religion [cf. Jn 4.20-23, Eph 1.10]. For the people were
(1.2.1) subjected to different kings, (1.2.2) adopted different
laws, and (1.2.3) were corrupted by different errors. We read in
Judges 11: “In those days there was no king in Israel” [Jgs 17.6]
and in Hosea 10: “Many days the children of Israel sat down,
without a king or a ruler (as well as without sacrifice or altar, as
without priestly garb or house gods).” 18

(1.2.1) And therefore Christ came, in order to be the one
reigning king of the whole world himself, whose dominion
would be universal, whose empire universal, and whose reign
eternal. And this is shown clearly in his birth, because then
he manifested himself as the king of the people when kings
adored him [Mt 2.11]; as the king of the angels playing on
their stringed instruments as they rejoiced [Lk 2.13-14]; as
king of the [Jews] awaiting him because the shepherds listened
[Lk 2.15-16]; as king of the heavenly bodies because the stars
knew him [Ps 148.3]. Thus it is said in Zee g.g: “Behold, your
king comes unto you (the just one and the savior himself).” This
king has conjoined the scattered and made them one when he
called Jews and gentiles to the faith. Ezek 37.22 reads: “There
will be one reigning king for all and there will be two nations
no more”; and in the same chapter: “They will be my people
and I will be their God, and my servant David will be king over
them and shepherd of all” [Ezek 37.23-24].

(1.2.2) Furthermore, he came so that there would be one
law moving the people of the whole world forward. For the Law
of Moses was specifically given to some since it did not oblige
all people; its promises concerned the flesh since it promised
things of the flesh; it was penal in its provisions since it inflict-
ed punishments [cf. Rom 4.15]: “A tooth for a tooth, an eye for
an eye,” 19 et cetera. Therefore, because there was an imper-

18. It is in fact Hos 3.4. In 1.2 Thomas follows the order of this verse.

19. Thomas has changed the order of these two sayings, which are found in
Ex 21.24, Lv 24.20, Dt 19.21. They are taken up byjesus in Mt 5.38. Thomas
discusses these texts in ST I— II 105,2,10 (on the application of the precepts of
the Old Testament), II— II 61,4 and 65,1 (on justice)


28


THOMAS AQUINAS


feet law, another legislator had to come whose task would be to
give a general law for all, as we read in the last chapter of Mark
[16.15]: “(Go into the whole world,) preach the Gospel to every
creature,” et cetera.

Moreover, a spiritual law is written in the hearts [of the peo-
ple], as it says in Jeremiah 13: “I will put my law within them
and I will write it in their hearts” [Jer 31.33].

Even more, the law of love (amor) which speaks of heavenly
things: “Do penance; the Kingdom of heaven has drawn near,”
as Mt 3.2 reads, and Is 33.22: “The Lord, our king, the Lord,
our lawgiver.” And the Psalmist says: “Establish, O Lord, a legis-
lator over them, so that they may know (that they are mere hu-
man beings)” [Ps 9.21].

(1.2.3) Furthermore, he came so that there would be one
judge administering justice, who would have full authority, so
that he could exercise every judgment. 20 He was such a judge,
since “the Father has given every judgment to the Son,” Jn 5.27.
Who would be so profound that he could know all things? In-
deed, this one is, whence Jer 29.23 reads: “I am the judge and
the witness, (says the Lord).” Who would be so powerful that
no one could resist him? Jas 4.12 says: “There is one legislator
and judge, who can spare and set free.” For in that judgment all
hidden things will be made manifest, according to 1 Corinthi-
ans 3: “Do not judge before time.” 21 Also, all things will be scru-
tinized. In the last chapter 22 of Ecclesiastes it reads: “God will
lead to judgment all the things that happen,” et cetera. Moreo-
ver, all things will be requited, as we read in Mt 25.46: “These
will enter into punishment, yet the just into eternal life.” 1 Sm
8.20 says: “Our king will judge us and will go before us and will
fight our wars for us.”

(1.3) Third, he came to take away the offense and establish
peace between us and God. Since man had trespassed, he of-

20. ST III 56,1,3 and 58.

21.1 Cor 4.5. It seems quite probable that Thomas quoted the whole verse,
which continues: “until the Lord comes, who will bring to light the things hid-
den in the dark, and he will manifest the plans of the hearts, and then there will
be praise for everyone from God.”

22. It is in fact the chapter before last: Eccl 1 1.9.


SERMON 01


29


fended God and had to die. 23 Thus a certain case, so to speak,
was set in motion from the beginning of the world for the com-
ing of the Lord. For truth required that man would die, be-
cause 24 it is written in Nrn 15.30: “A soul that sins through pride
will be cut off from his people.” But mercy required that man
would be set free. The Psalmist says: “Will God reject in eter-
nity, (so that he would not remember) that he was more favo-
rable until now, or will he until the end (abandon his grace)?”
[Ps 77.8 — g] Justice, however, requires in the end that he be con-
demned, because Genesis 1 reads: “On whatever day you will
eat from it, you will die” [Gn 2. 17]. 25 And Deuteronomy 18: “A
person who will be so proud as to disobey an order of the wise
one will die by decree of the judge.” 26 But peace requires that
a settlement be arranged and the disposition be changed. The
Psalmist says: “Will you be angry with us in eternity (or do you
extend your wrath from generation to generation)?” [Ps 85.6]
And therefore Isaiah asked: “Send out the lamb, Lord, the rul-
er of the earth.” [Is 16.1 (Vg)] And Moses: “I beseech you, Lord,
send the one whom you will send” [Ex 4.13]. But since God is
good and merciful [cf. 2 Me 1.24], he could “not deny himself”
[2 Tm 2.13], but he answers through Jeremiah in Jer 31.20: “My
inner parts are stirred up because of him; I will show him great
mercy.” And Hos 11.8: “My heart is turned within me; my pen-
ance has turned likewise.”

Thus the Lord has sent someone to settle: not a human be-
ing, not an angel, but God’s Son, who satisfied through mer-
cy so that it did not fall short of justice in anything. And so it
happened that there was in the same [man] justice to the full
and infinite mercy, 27 and so “mercy and truth have met one an-
other; (justice and peace have kissed one another)” [Ps 85.11].

23. Rom 5.2; cf. ST I— II 94,5,2, III 14,1, 52,5.

24. “Every truth is from God” (ST I 16,5), and “His word is truth” (Jn 17.17).
So the Law which YHWH gave to Moses is truth.

25. Cf. ST III 50,1.

26. It is Dt 17.12, but Thomas left out a few words; the whole verse reads: “A
person who will be so proud as to disobey an order of the priest who serves the
Lord your God in that time, and the decree of the judge, that person will die.”

27. As it is in God: ST I 21,1-2 and 21,3-4.


30


THOMAS AQUINAS


It was justice to the full in this respect, that he punished very
harshly, 28 but infinite mercy because he bore the punishment
in himself, as we read in Is 53.4: “Truly, our infirmities he took
away himself and our pains he bore himself.”

Thus he came to make peace between humankind and
God [cf. Epli 2.15-16]. And for this he is the appropriate arbi-
ter, since “he is himself our peace which makes both one,” as
we read in Eph 2.14. He came to battle against the devil, like
a strong soldier, as it says in Jos 5.14: “(I am) the leader of the
army of the Lord.” He came to take away the contamination of
sin, like a doctor. Mt 8.7 reads: “I will come and cure him.” He
came to be in our company, like a friend; it says in Baruch 5:
“From the holy one my joy comes.” 29

Thus he received our way of life, he who had given his first. 30
He paid our debts who had not contracted any [cf. Ps 69.5; cf.
Sir 4.8]. He redeemed the lost one whom he had created before
[cf. Col 1.16]. Prv 13.12 says: “The wood of life is the desire that
comes.” 31

(2) Second, the prophet shows that he is the one who ful-
fills the desire of the fathers in a merciful way, as he says: “who
is desired by all the nations together.” For man was (2.1) weak
through an incurable wound, (2.2) oppressed by an unbearable
tyrant, and (2.3) thirsty with an unquenchable thirst. And just as
the weak desired the remedy of salvation, the oppressed desired
a pleasing dominion, and the thirsty the basin of a fountain. In
this way the human race desired the coming of the Savior.

(2.1) For man was weak through an incurable wound, since
it had corrupted the whole human nature. 32 Is 1.6: “From the
foot-sole till the top of his head there is no health in him.” Jer-

28. See how Thomas explains in which respects Christ’s Passion was the
greatest suffering, in ST III 46,6.

29. Bar 4.22. This verse continues: “over the mercy that will come to you
from our eternal salvation.” In SCG IV 54 Thomas mentions God’s friendship
with us as a motive for the Incarnation. Also: ST III 1,5,1.

30. 1 Cor 8.6, Col 1.15-16, 3.4, 2 Tm 1.9, 1 Jn 3.16, 5.1 1-12.

3 1 . Or: “the desired one that comes”; the desire is going to be fulfilled; cf.
Hg 2.7.

32. ST III 1,2, esp. ad 2.


SERMON 01


31


emiah 3 reads: “Why is my pain made everlasting and why does
my hopeless wound refuse to be cured?” [Jer 15.18] And there-
fore he had a strong desire for the remedy of salvation. Is 53.2
reads: “We have seen him,” and it continues: “we have desired
him, a despised man, the last of men, a sorrowful man who
knew weakness.”

(2.2) Furthermore, he was oppressed by an unbearable
tyrant, 33 for just like an unjust person he was handed over to
enemies. We read in Hos 8.3: “Israel has thrown away the good;
the enemy pursues him.” And in Is 14.3: “When you will be
freed from hard slavery in which you served before.” And there-
fore they desired a pleasing dominion, as we read in Song 5.15:
“His face is like Lebanon and his neck is sweet and the whole of
him is desirable.” And in the last chapter of Micah [7.17]: “They
will desire your Lord and fear you.”

(2.3) Furthermore, he was thirsty with an unquenchable
thirst, because he had withered by reason of the lack of sacra-
mental grace. Job reads: “Can rushes live without moisture, or
can grass grow without water?” [Jb 8.11] This signifies the peo-
ple who had no water in the desert. And therefore they desired
the basin of a fountain, as the Psalmist says: “Like the deer that
longs (for fountains of water, so my soul thirsts for you, O God)”
[Ps 42.2].

So, they desired him; deep sighs show this. The Psalmist says:
“Lord, bend down the heavens and come down” [Ps 144.5].
Is 64 says: “O may you rend your heavens and come down”
[Is 63. ig], and he also says in chapter 28: “My soul desired you
in the night” [Is 26. g]. Moreover, they asked for him, which the
frequency of the prayers shows; the Psalmist says: “Evoke your
power and come” [Ps 80.3]. They also awaited him, which the
striking signs of the divine revelation show. Is 26.8 reads: “On
the path of your judgments we have awaited you; the memory
of you is in the desire of our soul,” and he also says: “I will ex-
pect God my Savior” [Mi 7.7]. Even more, they loved ( amo ) him,
which the excellence of their praise shows, in Micah 2: “And
you, Bethlehem, land of Judah, (you are certainly not the least


33. ST III 1,1 sc.


32


THOMAS AQUINAS


among the rulers of Judah, for from you a leader will come
forth who will reign over my people Israel).” 34

(3) Third, the prophet shows [to us] the one who in a won-
drous way bestows gracious gifts [upon us]: “He will fill this
house with glory.”

(3.1) The unique house is the Virgin Mary, which the provi-
dence of the Father has built, as we read in Proverbs 8: “Wis-
dom has built a house for herself.” 35 The wisdom of the Son
dwells in it; Kings 7 says: “I dwell in a house of cedar” [1 Chr
17.1]. The grace of the Holy Spirit has prepared it, as we read in
1 Chr 29.1: “This great work is not built as a dwelling-place for
man, but for God.”

(3.2) The special house is the Church Militant. Christ has
built this house from living stones [cf. 1 Pt 2.5]. It is said in 2
Chr 2.4: “The house that I wish to build is large.” He has con-
secrated it with the gifts of grace. 36 Isaiah 64 reads: “My house
will be called a house of prayer.” 37 It says in Zee 12.10: “I will
pour out over the house of David a spirit of grace”; he has es-
tablished it at his own expense; we read in Zee 4.9: “The hands
of Zerubbabel have established this house.” 38

(3.3) The general house is the heavenly homeland. As for
love 39 ( caritas ), this house is the greatest, as we read in Baruch 4:

34. Thomas cites Mt 2.6 here, which is based on Mi 5. 1.

35. It is Prv 9.1. Thomas explains this verse in ST III 32,1,3.

36. Here Thomas refers to the gifts of the Holy Spirit (ST I— II 109-1 14; II— II
45,5, 171 intr., 172,2,2), as will be clear further on in the text, under “ad 3.2.”

37. Thomas seems to quote from Mt 21.13 where the last words of the verse
are missing: cunctis populis, “for all the peoples together” (or he may be quoting
from Mk 11.17 where it says: omnis gentibus) . Cf. Is 56.7.

38. This verse continues: “and his hands will finish it; then you will know
that the Lord of hosts has sent me to you.”

39. In his writings Thomas uses four terms from Scripture which we usu-
ally translate as “love.” He interprets them as follows: (1) Amor: the collective
term. (2) Dilectio: love as the result of a well-considered choice; it is etymologi-
cally connected with eligere and electio: “choosing carefully.” The object of dilec-
tio is consciously willed. God’s love, therefore, is always dilectio. (3) Caritas: love
for someone or something of great value; it is etymologically connected with
carus: “precious,” “dear” (cf. Italian earn; French cher). In Scripture and in the
Christian tradition this term is used for perfect love (cf. 1 Cor 12.31-13.13), in


SERMON 01


33


“O Israel, how great is the house of God” [Bar 3.24]. As for
preciousness, it is the most noble, since “glory and riches are
in his house,” it says in the Psalm [Ps 112.3]. As f° r eternity,
it is the strongest; 2 Cor 5.1 reads: “For we know that when of
this dwelling-place our earthly house is demolished, we have a
building from God, a house not made by hand but eternal in
heaven.”

(ad 3.1) He filled the first house with the glory of divinity
in the Incarnation, as we read in Hg 2.9: “Great is the glory of
this newest house, more than of the first”; and Ezek 10.3 reads:
“The house is filled with a cloud 40 and the atrium is filled with
splendor through the glory of the Lord.”

(ad 3.2) The second house was full of joy in the mission of the
Holy Spirit, because of the grace of languages [Acts 2.4], gra-
cious gifts [Gal 5.22], and works of miracles [Acts 2.43]. Is 33.5:
“He has filled Zion with justice and right judgment.”

(ad 3-3)The third house was full of the grace of happiness in
the Ascension. For then the splendor of brightness appeared by
reason of the shining of Christ’s body, the praise of the divine
goodness by reason of the clear manifestation of this work, and
the taste of an intimate alliance by reason of the double joyful-
ness. We read in 2 Chr 6.4: “He has fulfilled (in deed what he
had said to David, my father).” In 1 Kgs 8.11 it says: “He filled
the house of the Lord with the glory of the Lord.” Ezek 43.5
reads: “The house was full of the glory of the Lord.” And Zecha-
riah g: “Glory has entered the temple of the Lord” [Ezek 43.4].


particular, love between two Christians as well as love of and for God. (4) Amici-
tia: mutual love, friendship (see also Thomas’s commentary on Dionysius’s On
the Divine Names, c.4 lectio g, and ST I — II 26,3).

40. In Ex 16.10 and elsewhere, the cloud refers to God’s hidden presence;
cf. SCG III 49 (where Thomas cites Ex 20.21) and 50 (where he cites Sir 24.7
[Vg] = Sir 24.4).


SERMON 02

LAUDA ET LETARE

Another Sermon on Advent


Zechariah 2.14: “Sing praise and be glad, daughter of Zion,
for behold,

I come and I will dwell in your midst, ” says the Lord.

Sermo

t is as St. Bernard says: “While I often think of the
burning desire of the fathers who expected Christ’s
coining, I feel shame in myself.” For someone who
considers the sighs of those who were imploring, the desires of
those who were expectant, and the joy of those who announced
the coming of the Savior, can well become aware of his own
tepidity in respect of the benefit already received that proceeds
from his coming [cf. Rv 1.7, 3.16]. Isaiah implored this coming
with a frequent sigh, in Is 16.1 [Vg]: “Send out the lamb, Lord,
(the ruler of the world),” and elsewhere: “O may you rend
your heavens (and come down)” [Is 63.19]. Jeremiah expected
him with great desire: “The Lord will make something new
upon the earth: (a woman will encompass a man)” [Jer 31.22].
Zechariah preached with tremendous joy, as is clear from the
saying mentioned at the beginning.

Here the Prophet does three things: (1) First, he shows the
affection of the holy fathers who preceded the coming of the
Savior, continually persisting in their praises of him, where he
says: “Sing praise and be glad, daughter of Zion.” (2) Second,
the Son of God himself coming down from the heavens: “Be-
hold, I come.” (3) Third, him humbly appearing in human
flesh: “And I will dwell in your midst.”


34


SERMON 02


35


(1) So, first the joyfulness of the coming is presented, which
is shown by a double and perfect gladness [cf. Jn 15.11]. Note,
in view of this, that three things are required for a perfect glad-
ness. (1.1) First, that the mind is elevated to a divine benefit;
this is mentioned where it says: “Daughter of Zion.” (1.2) Sec-
ond, that the affection is enlarged by spiritual joy, which is
mentioned where it says: “Be glad.” (1.3) Third, that the tongue
is excited to the favorable gift of the divine praise, where it says:
“Sing praise.” For if you carefully consider the divine benefits,
then you will be a daughter of Zion; if you sing of the divine
announcements in exultation, and praise them in thanksgiv-
ing with delight, your joy will be perfect; 1 if spiritual gladness is
born from this consideration, you will rejoice, daughter of Zion.
And this is what the Prophet taught, saying: “Sing praise and be
glad, daughter of Zion.”

(1.1) So, first, for perfect gladness it is required that the
mind be elevated to a divine benefit, which is mentioned when
it is said: “Daughter of Zion.” Zion, after all, is interpreted as
“watchtower” [cf. Is 21.8], and, understood in a spiritual way,
she always signifies the soul of someone who is contemplat-
ing [cf. Ps 130.6]. For a man <. . .> 2 came in order to announce
the coming of his Lord by means of preaching, as we read in
Is 52.7: “How beautiful (upon the mountains) the feet of the
ones who announce and preach peace;” and then: “of the one
who says to Zion: ‘(The Lord) your God will reign.’” For such
a person deserves to hear the divine preaching who does not
want but to become conversant “from Christ and with Christ” 3
[cf. 1 Jn 1.3]. Therefore the Lord says in Mt 21.5 and Zee g.g:
“Say to the daughter of Zion,” that is, to the soul that tends
towards contemplating the benefits of God through medi-
tation: “Your king is coming for you.” I interpret this as: Tell
that person who desires to hear the joy of his coming because

1 . Because the object of our joy is something perfect and present: Thomas’s
Commentary on John 15.1 1 (c.15 lectio 2 n.5) and ST II— II 28,3.

2 . In the original Latin text a word is missing.

3. De Christo et cum Christo: the inverted commas are in the Latin text, but
where this quotation is from is not exactly clear; it could be that Thomas refers
to the last words of the Eucharistic prayer: per ipso, cum ipso et in ipso: “through
him, with him, and in him.”


36


THOMAS AQUINAS


of the consolation it brings. 4 Isaiah says: “Rejoice and be glad,”
[Lam 4.21] “Zion, because your Savior will come” [Isaiah 62.11]
from “the midst of the nations” [Ezek 5.5]. For, according to
what St. Bernard says: “The divine consolation is enlarged, but
it is not given to those who admit someone else’s consolation.” 5

Such are the daughters of Zion, and therefore the sight of
his coming through contemplation is announced and prom-
ised to them. Zechariali g.g says: “Exult greatly, daughter of
Zion.” And Song 3.11 reads: “Go out, daughters of Zion, and
see (King Solomon; look upon the crown with which his moth-
er has crowned him).” “Go out,” from the rags of vices [cf. Eph
4.21-31], and be “daughters of Zion,” through contemplation
of the things that are above, 6 and thus you will be able to see
“King Solomon,” meaning the Lord of the angels [cf. Heb 1.5],
in “the crown with which his mother has crowned him,” that is,
according to a gloss, in the humanity [cf. Ps 8.6] assumed from
Judah’s posterity [Heb 7.14, 8.8].

(1.2) Second, for perfect gladness it is required that

(1.2.1) the affection be enlarged by a spiritual joy, which is
mentioned where it says: “Be glad.” Well, justly a faithful soul
ought to exult, indeed the whole human nature ought to over-
flow with a richness of spiritual joys, as it sees itself united 7 with
the divine partner. For she who was once “a wilderness and im-
passable” [Ps 63.2, Is 35.1] because of the aridity in regard to
the heavenly grace, is now made flourishing and sprouting, be-
cause she is assumed by the Son of God in the unity of sup-
posit. 8 Is 35.1 reads: “The wilderness and the impassable will
be glad, and the desert will exult and flourish like a lily, pro-
duce abundantly, and exult full of gladness and singing praise.”

4. Knowing about his coming makes us rejoice; cf. ST II— II 9,4 (cf. Jb 15.11
and 2 Thes 2.16-17).

5. The consolation of this world is not compatible with the consolation from
the Lord, e.g., Lk 6.24; cf. ST I— II 69,2.

6. Cf. Gal 4.26, Col 3.1, Heb 12.22.

7. Thomas uses the word copulatum, referring to the union of two spouses.
This image is continued in what follows.

8. Cf. 2 Cor 2.17, 12.19. “She” is the human nature. With the expression
“unity of supposit” Thomas refers to what Christians understand by Incarnation:
that Christ is one “supposit,” one person, yet in two natures: ST III 2,2-3.


SERMON 02


37


And he proceeds: “The glory of Lebanon is given to her” [Is
35.2]. And elsewhere it is said, in Is 2: “You will not be called
‘the abandoned’ any more” [Is 62.4].

(1.2.2) Furthermore, at the same time she experiences that
she is placed in the community of the holy ones. 9 For the soul
that was counted once upon a time among the company of the
ones from hell [cf. 2 Pt 2.4], is now reckoned among the com-
pany of the angels [Eph 2.19]. Thus it says in the last chapter of
Hab [3.18]: “Yet I will rejoice in God and I will exult (in God
myjesus).” 10 Now the people enter Zion singing praise, as it was
foretold in Is 35.10: “Everlasting gladness upon their heads.” 11
And the Psalmist says: “I am glad because of these things that
are said to me: (‘we will enter the house of the Lord’)” [Ps
122.1].

(1.2.3) Furthermore, at the same time she experiences the
strength of the heavenly help. Once there was a sadness in
the whole human nature because of a lack of grace, because
the door was closed [cf. Acts 14.27], because of the oppression
of the ancient captivity [cf. Acts 10.38, Lk 4.18]. But now the di-
vine grace is poured out, since “all are filled with the Holy Spir-
it,” as we read in Acts 2.4 and 4.31. The heavenly door is
opened, as it is said in Rv 4.1: “I have seen the gate opened in
heaven.” The power of the devil is repelled, as it is said in Jn
12.31: “The ruler of this world is thrown out.” And Rv 12.10:
“(Now the salvation, the strength, and the reign of our God has
come and the authority of his Christ, because) the accuser of
our brothers is cast out (who accused them before our God day
and night),” and further on [verse 12]: “Rejoice, heavens and
you who dwell in them.” This was foreseen, as we read in Isaiah
9.3: “They will rejoice before you as those who rejoice in har-
vest time, (as those who exult when they divide the booty).”


9. Being made part of the collegium sanctorum is a description of sanctificatio,
an effect of the sending, the gift of the Holy Spirit to us: ST I 43,3; cf. I 27.

1 o. The Vulgate text reads Iesu meo, which could also be translated as “who
saves me”; cf. Mt 1.21.

1 1 . The whole verse reads: “And the ones redeemed by the Lord will be con-
verted and will come to Zion with praise and everlasting gladness upon their
head; they will obtain joy and gladness, and pain and sighing will flee.”


38


THOMAS AQUINAS


(1.3) Third, for perfect gladness our tongue must be excited
to the proclamation of the divine praise, which is mentioned
where it says: “Sing praise.” For, if there is a graceful knowledge
of God in our intellect and an intimate exultation in our affec-
tion, the consequence is that it cannot be otherwise than that
there is a song of praise in our mind. 12 Therefore, he says: “Sing
praise.” For a faithful soul is satisfied. Because of this she gives
praises to her Redeemer in return, for, as it is said in Philippi-
ans 3: “The peace of God, which surpasses all understanding,
will guard our heart and our intellect” [Phil 4.7]. Therefore it
says in Sirach 43. 29: “Exult when you bless God as much as you
can, because he is greater than every praise.”

(1.3.1) Yes, we ought to praise the power of the One who
battles for us [Is 63.1], who has led us out, away from dangers
[2 Me 1.11, 2 Cor 1.10]. Quite a big danger is serving the devil
and sin, for this is the slavery of Pharaoh. “But now we,” because
“freed from sin, we have yet become slaves for God” [Rom 6.22],
“sing to the Lord: ‘Gloriously (he is magnified, for the horse
and his rider, he cast them down in the sea)’” [Ex 15.1]. And it
follows: “My strength and my praise are the Lord” [verse 2]. In
the last chapter of Sirach [51.11]: “My soul will praise the Lord
till death,” [verse 12:] “because you sustain those who await you
and you deliver them from the hands” of those who oppress.

(1.3.2) Lurthermore, [we ought to praise] the justice of the
Redeemer, since “by dying he destroyed our death.” 13 Lor it was
proper to justice that death would be paid for death. But that it
was paid by Christ, was proper to mercy, for he paid “what he
had not robbed” [Ps 69.5] 14 — and this together with justice is to
the highest extent praiseworthy. In Proverbs it says: It is proper
to justice “that the praise of God will stand straight” [Sir 15.10
(Vg)]. And Is 61.11 says: “The Lord will make justice and praise
arise for all the nations.”

12. ST I— II 101,2.

13. These words, derived from 2 Tm 1.10, are used in the Eucharist as an ac-
clamation after the consecration.

14. It is a central verse in the interpretation of Christ’s death on the cross as
satisfaction (Anselm, Thomas) and justice (Thomas): ST III 46,4, 47,2,1, and
48,2. What Thomas understands by justice: ST II— II 57-122.


SERMON 02


39


(1.3.3) Furthermore, the benevolence of the Savior, because
he has led us back to eternal life; just as the Apostle says in Col
1.11-13: “With joy” we ought to “give thanks to God the Father”
“who wrested us away from the power of darkness and brought
us over into the” beloved ( dilectus ) “kingdom of his Son.” Hence
it is said in Isaiah 43: “Praise the Lord, you heavens, because he
has worked mercy” [Is 44.23].

(2) Second, in the saying above, it is stated that the coming is
at hand, which is shown by the short distance where it says: “Be-
hold, I come.”

(2.1) I interpret “I come” as a coming in a visible way, in the
form of humanity, whereby a novelty unheard-of is shown: he
says, “Behold.” 15

(2.1.1) By speaking in this way he excites our tepidity, that we
may go to meet him [cf. Mt 25.6, Eph 4.13], as we read in Isaiah
36: “Behold our God; we awaited him, and he will save us” [Is
25. 9]. Zee g.g: “Behold, your king comes.” 16

(2.1.2) Furthermore, he demonstrates the newness of it, that
we may be attentive and stand in awe. And thus the spouse
speaks in Song 2.8: “Behold, he comes, leaping on the moun-
tains.” And in Isaiah it says: “Behold, I make all things new, and
now he appears.” 17

(2.1.3) Furthermore, he makes known that it is at hand, so
that we may organize a place where he is welcome to stay. In
Mai 3.1 it says: “Behold, he will come to his holy temple.” And
we read in Daniel 2: “Behold, the Son of man will come on the
clouds of heaven” [Dn 7.13].

So, by saying: “Behold,” the Son of God made himself known
as visible in the form of humanity. 18

(2.2) In a personal way he also comes in the substance of di-

1 5. The word ecce, “behold,” implies that there is something to see. For the
invisible mission of the Son see ST I 43,5.

16. In fact Thomas quotes Mt 21.5 orjn 12.15 here; the verb in Zee 9.9 is in
the future tense: ‘Your king will come.”

1 7. The first part of the quotation is in fact from Rv 2 1 .5; Is 43. 1 g reads: “Be-
hold, I make new things and now they [plural] appear.”

18. Phil 2.7; cf. ST III 2,5, 5,1.


40


THOMAS AQUINAS


vinity, in which an infinite sublimity is shown. And this is men-
tioned where it says, “I.” 19

For this is the person who has spoken through the mouth of
all the prophets. 20 Isaiah says: “I who have spoken: ‘behold, I
am here’” [Is 52.6]. What he speaks is the redemption of all sin-
ners, as we read in Isaiah 36: “I speak justice” [Is 63.1]. 21 What
he speaks is the judgment at the end of all times, according to
the Psalmist: “When the time will have come, I will administer
justice” [Ps 75.3]. Moreover: “His tongue will speak justice” [cf.
Ps 35.28].

And justly so,

(2.2.1) for he has eternal being and thus precedes all things,
as it is said in Ex 3.14: “I am who am.” After all, he comes forth
from God consubstantially and thus eternally, as we read in Jn
8.42: “I have come forth from the Father and I have come.” 22

(2.2.2) Furthermore, he has an immense power, 23 and thus
he has brought forth all things. It says in Isaiah: “I am God and
there is no other who formed the light and created the dark-
ness, (who made peace and created evil; I, the Lord, made all
these)” [Is 45.7]. For, since the Son is God, the origin from the
origin, he has with him the same being and power. 24

(2.2.3) Furthermore, he has a perfect knowledge, and thus
he governs all things. 25 Sir 24.3: “I have come forth from the
mouth of the Most High [Sir 24.5 (Vg)]: the firstborn, before


19. The personal pronoun “I” refers to Christ’s divinity also in the “I am” say-
ings in the Gospel according to John, e.g., 6.35-51, 10.11, and 14.6. See also
Thomas’s Commentary on the Gospel according to John, c.i lectio 1 (where he
cites Ex 3.14).

20. Cf. ST II— II 178,1,1.

2 1 . This quotation makes sense in view of what follows: “and I am a battler
for them in order to save.”

22. This verse is explained by Thomas in ST I 27,1.

23. Thomas uses the infinitive posse (“can,” “be able to,” from which potentia,
“power,” is derived): Thomas refers to the properties of the Son of God using
verbs (being, being powerful, and knowing, etc.); this usage underlines that the
One coming is active and dynamic.

24. ST III 13,2,1 and Thomas’s commentary on Mt 28.18 (“All power is giv-
en unto me”).

25. Cf. ST I 108,6.


SERMON 02


41


every creature.” Since he is himself “light from light,” 26 just as
the Father has infinite power, so also the Son. Jn 8.12 reads: “I
am the light of the world.”

(2.3) Still, “although I am so sublime and of such great dig-
nity, ‘behold, I come’ as a friend, bringing what is useful for

”27

you.

“I come,” as if he says: “I do not send an angel, not a spirit,
not a deputy, but I myself come in person,” in which the greatest
love ( maxima caritas ) is shown [cf. Jn 3.16]. I interpret “I come”
as meaning “invited by the holy fathers.” For it is he whom all
the holy people had invited from the beginning of the world,
although their person was brought forth by the spouse. 28 It says
in Song of Songs 2: “My beloved ( dilectus ) will come into his
place.” 29 And in the last chapter of Revelation [22.20]: “Come,
Lord Jesus.” And likewise Isaiah, Jeremiah, and the rest of the
prophets have spoken.

Furthermore, “I come” is a movement and a push of piety
that touch the inner parts; Luke 2 reads: “Through the heart-
felt mercy of our God in which (the daybreak from on high has
visited us)” [Lk 1.78]. Elsewhere he had shown his power and
wisdom; here he showed his mercy, as Bernard says. 30

(2.3.1) Furthermore, he underwent our weaknesses with
us. 31 Mt 8.7 reads: “I will come and cure him,” and in Lk ig.10:


26. Thomas says lux de luce et Iwnen de lumine, using two words for light: lux
and lumen; the first in view of the Scripture text that he is going to quote, which
reads lux, and the second in view of the Creed, in which Christians profess that
Christ is “Light from Light”: Lumen de Lumine.

27. This is what Thomas calls the amicitia utilis, in ST II— II 23,5.

28. Thomas points to the mystery that the One to whose coming the fathers
were looking forward was in fact before them; they were brought forth by him.

29. It is in fact Song 5.1. Thomas reads ortum instead of hortum: “He will en-
ter his garden.”

30. What this mercy contains is explained in the next steps: it is not just com-
passio, a “suffering with” or “undergoing with,” but it includes curing, saving, re-
storing honor, reuniting us with God’s love, and giving us light again.

31. The word used is compassus; misericordia includes a movement towards
the neighbor in order to alleviate his/her suffering, as in the subsequent quo-
tation from Mt 8.7. The term misericordia, therefore, is closer to our word
“compassion” — as in “I am moved with compassion” — than the term compassio.


42


THOMAS AQUINAS


“The Son of man has come to seek and to save what had per-
ished.” And it says in John 12: The Son of man has come “into
the world not to judge the world but in order to save the world
through him” [Jn 3.17]. 32 For, since we were stripped of all hon-
or, therefore he has come as a leader with an infinite dignity. In
Jos 5.14 it is said: “I am the ruler of the army of the Lord, and
now I come.”

(2.3.2) Furthermore, since we were separated from the di-
vine love ( divinus amor), therefore he has come, as the peace
of a love ( caritas ) never heard of [1 Cor 2.9]. As we read in Eph-
esians 5: “He himself is our peace, who has made both one”
[Eph 2.14] and: “coming he brought the good news of peace
unto you who were far off” [Eph 2.17]. And it was not only the
love ( caritas ) of the coming Son, but also of the Father who sent
him, as we read in Jn 5.43: “I have come in the name of my Fa-
ther.”

(2.3.3) Furthermore, since we were deprived of light or splen-
dor [cf. Is 59.9], he came as light of an infinite clarity; Jn 12.46:
“I am the light that has come into the world.”

(3) Third, in the saying above, the humility of his coming is
shown, where it says: “And I will dwell in your midst,” as if he is
saying: “I will be your companion on the pilgrimage.” 33

(3.1) Therefore he says: “I will dwell.” Well, he dwelt with us
in three ways:

(3.1.1) with all people, in a general way, through the sub-
stance of the flesh, as we read in Jn 1.14: “The Word became
flesh and has dwelt among us.” And Bar 3.38: “Since then he
was seen on earth and lived with the people.”

(3.1.2) Furthermore, with the holy people, in a special way,
through infused grace, 34 as we read in 2 Cor 5.16: “I will dwell
among them and I will be their God.”

(3.1.3) Furthermore, with the good people, in a familiar way

32. For the motive of the Incarnation: ST III 1 , esp. 2-3.

33. Our life is a pilgrimage on the way (via) to the City of God, i.e., the heav-
enly fatherland or homeland (patria); we are in via, not yet in patria (as the
saints are) .

34. As in Jn 14.23, etc.; cf. ST I 43,5-6.


SERMON 02


43


[cf. Jgs 19.4], by being present before their eyes, as the Psalm-
ist says: “Forever they will exult and you will dwell among them”
[Ps 5.12]. Bernard says: “For this he came (into the world), that
he might dwell among the people and in them, and that he
might enlighten the darkness for people, lighten their labor,
and ward off dangers.”

(3.2) Furthermore, he was like the middle person in recon-
ciliation [1 Tm 2.5, Fleb 9.15]: “in your midst,” 35 as it is said in
Luke 22: “I am in their midst.” 36

(3.2.1) Now, he was in our midst in order to reconcile God
and man [cf. Rom 5.10, 2 Cor 5-ig, Eph 2.16]. John 2 reads: “In
the midst of you he has stood whom you do not know” [Jn 1.26].
And it says in Deuteronomy: “I was the middle person and the
intermediary between you and God” [Dt 5.5].

(3.2.2) Furthermore, in order to bring along the fullness of
joy, 37 as it is said in John 20.19: “Jesus stood in the midst of his
disciples and said: ‘Peace be with you,’” and it continues: “The
disciples rejoiced” [verse 20]. And we read in Is 12.6: “Exult and
sing praise, inhabitants of Zion, because great in your midst is
the Holy One of Israel.”

(3.3) Furthermore, he was with us as the Lord in distribut-
ing favorable gifts: “says the Lord.” And it is clear from here.

Continue as you want. 38

35. In medio tui: this phrase in Zee 2.10 occurs 29 more times in Scripture
and in this salvific way in Dt 7.2 1, Ps 1 16.19, I s !2.6, Zep 3.15, 17.

36. Ego autem in medio eorum sum. It is not really clear to which verse Tho-
mas is referring here; if it is from the Gospel according to Luke, it is probably
Lk 24.36: ‘Yet (autem) while they were saying these things, Jesus stood in their
midst (in medio eorum) and said to them: ‘Peace be with you. It is I (ego sum) ; fear
not.”’ In view of what follows, however, it seems more likely that Thomas refers
here to Mt 18.20: “For where two or three are gathered in my name, I am in
their midst” (sum in medio eorum).

37. Cf. ST II-II 28,3.

38. Et patet de hoc. Procede ut uis.


SERMON 03
ABJICIAMUS OPERA

Sermon on the First Sunday of Advent 1


Romans 13.12: Let us throw off the works of the darkness
and put on the arms of the light.


SUMMARY


et us throw off the works of the darkness and put on
the arms of the light” [Rom 13.12]. The Apostle, teach-
er of the Christians and leader in faith and truth, for-
mulates this in this time of the gracious coming of our Lord
with these words, or in these words, for two reasons: in order to
stir up (1) a liberating abhorrence of all worldly stains and vic-
es as well as (2) an honorable love (amor) or pursuit of heavenly
virtues. The first thing he does when he says: “Let us throw off
the works of the darkness”; the second, when he adds: “and let
us put on the arms of the light.”


(1) Concerning the first thing, note that the works and the
vices of the world are called “dark,” and that therefore they
must be thrown off. (1.1) For there is in them an obvious lack of
the wisdom that is needed in order to arrive at the truth which
we are to know. Jn 1.5 reads: “The light shines in the darkness
and the darkness did not recognize 2 it.” (1.2) Furthermore, in
darkness there is an obvious lack of foresight, which is need-


1. Thomas gave this homily on December 2, 1268, at Bologna, according to
L. J. Bataillon, O.P.

2. Or “comprehend.”


44


SERMON 03


45


ed for preventing evil. Wis 17.3 reads: “They are scattered by a
dark veil of forgetfulness.” 3

♦♦♦

(2) Concerning the second point, note that the works of the
Gospel and the spiritual gifts of the Holy Spirit are for us the
arms against the world, the flesh, and the devil, and that they
make us stand firm in the light. (2.1) Because through the ef-
fect of enlightening grace, which is like a light, they cause us
to recognize the divine secret. 4 In 2 Cor 4.6 it says: “Yet God,
who has said that light will shine from the darkness, (has shone
his light in our hearts in order to bring to light the knowledge
of the glory of God which is on the face of Jesus Christ).” (2.2)
Because by the effect of reconciling grace, which is like a light,
these [spiritual gifts] make peace when we wage war among our-
selves [cf. Gal 5.22-23]. Prv 6.23 says: “The commandment is a
lamp and the law a light,” et cetera. (2.3) Because through the
effect of the grace of honesty, which is like a light, they make
us beautiful, 5 and, in us, the whole universe. Jn 5.35 reads: “He
was a burning and light-giving lamp.”


3. Forgetfulness opposes prudence: in ST II— II 47,16, Thomas speaks of prae-
videntia ; in ST II— II 49,6, of providentia.

4. Thomas describes the movement of conversio: turning away from what dis-
tracts us from the ultimate end and turning towards God and what is God’s, that
is, turning to Jesus Christ. By citing 2 Cor 4.6 Thomas indicates that the initia-
tive is with God; cf. ST II— II 45,5, where Thomas refers to 1 Cor 12.11.

5. Cf. ST II-II 145,2.


SERMON 04
OSANNA FILIO DAVID

Another Sermon on Advent 1


Matthew 21.9: Hosanna to the Son of David.

Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.

part 1 : Prothema

osanna to the Son of David. Blessed is he who comes
in the name of the Lord” [Mt 21.9]. These words are
spoken by the crowds praising Christ. These crowds
clung to Christ. And so, please God, let us ask the Lord at the
beginning to make us cling to him, so that we may understand
his teaching.


part 2: Sermo

“Hosanna” [Mt 21.9], et cetera. In these words we can con-
sider three things to the praise of our Savior: (1) first, the task
of our Savior; (2) second, the privilege of his origin; and (3)
third, the highest point of his power.

(1) First, I say that the task of our Savior is mentioned where
it says: “Hosanna.” The proper task of the Savior is that he is
a savior; indeed, for this he came into the world, “to seek and
save what was lost” [Lk 19.10]. Is 45.15 reads: “Truly, you are
a hidden God, God of Israel, Savior.” And it is therefore that
his name signifies salvation. Hence we read in Mt 1.21: “His
name shall be called Jesus, for he will save (his people from

1. This sermon was given on the first Sunday of Advent, December 1, 1269.


46


SERMON 04


47


their sins).” 2 And this task of savior is mentioned because it says:
“Hosanna,” which is compounded from the corrupted and the
pure. For “hosanna” is the same as “hosyanna,” which means:
“Save, I beseech.” For they would have implored salvation from
him in vain unless they had believed in him as savior. 3

Well, note that the human race was in need of salvation for
three reasons: (1.1) first, because of the perversity of sin; (1.2)
second, because of the oppression by enemies; and (1.3) third,
because of the rejection of the glory of the world.

(1.1) First, I say: the human race was in need of salvation be-
cause of the perversity of sin. For when people who are ill are
cured from their illness, they are called “saved.” Therefore, the
Lord says: “Your faith has saved you” [Mt g.22]. Sin is a spiritual
illness; 4 thus sinners are in need of salvation. The Psalmist says:
“Salvation is far away from sinners” [Ps ng.155]. For example,
someone is sick to death; the doctor will say that the person
who is ill is far from salvation. 5 Anyone who is in the state of
mortal sin 6 is sick to death, and sinners cannot reach salvation
by themselves. 7 Therefore, salvation, that is, Jesus Christ [cf. Ex
15.2], has drawn near to them — he who became like us in all
things [cf. Heb 2.17] “emptied himself, taking on the form of a
slave, was made in the likeness of the people, and through his
condition was found a man” [Phil 2.6-7], who accepted the hu-
man nature, and underwent suffering. 8 The Apostle is teaching


2. This verse is also cited in ST III intr.; salvation history is the framework in
which Thomas speaks of Christ, the sacraments, and the last things. See also ST
hi 37,2.

3. Thus linguistically “Hosanna” is a corruption, whereas the person who ut-
ters this corruption is pure.

4. Cf. ST II— II 15; III 44,1. In ST III 1,3-4 Thomas speaks in the context of
Incarnation and sin in terms of remedium , medicine. Elsewhere, he even calls sin
the death of the soul, in ST I— II 102,5,4.

5. The Latin text reads: longe a salute; in Latin and also in, for instance, Span-
ish ( salud) and Italian (salute), “salvation” and “health” are the same or etymo-
logically connected.

6. ST 1-1172,5, 88.

7. ST I— II 68,2, 79,4; II— II 2,3 and 2,7-8; III 46,1,1.

8. Undergoing something ( passio ) distinguishes the human nature from
the divine nature; cf. ST III 46,12. Jesus Christ’s passio tells us that he was truly


48


THOMAS AQUINAS


that we are to rejoice because of this, saying: “Rejoice in the
Lord always. I say it again: Rejoice, for the Lord is near” [Phil
4.4], namely, in our nature and in our heart. And this is meant
where it says in the Gospel: “When Jesus had drawn near” [Mt

21 - 91 -

See to whom Jesus is drawing near, three kinds of people:

(1.1.1) to those who make peace with him, (1.1.2) to those who
are devoted to God, and (1.1.3) to those who are kind {plus) to
their neighbors.

(1.1.1) First, I say that he draws near to those who make peace
with him. For God is the One who brings about peace [1 Cor
14.33]; an h where else should peace dwell than in peace? The
Apostle writes to the Corinthians: “Flave peace, and the God
of peace and love ( dilectio ) will be with you” [2 Cor 13.11]. How
should we have peace with God? By not acting against his pre-
cepts. 9 And with yourself? By not doing anything against your
conscience. 10 And with your neighbor? By not insulting him and
by serving justice; “a work of justice” equals “about peace” [Is
32.17; cf. Bar 5. 4]. * 11 So serve peace, and you will obtain salva-
tion. Thus we read in Is 60.1: “Stand up, be radiant,” Jerusalem,
the city that is interpreted as the “vision of peace” [cf. Ps 122.6-
8]. The Prophet continues: “Salvation will take possession of
(your walls, and praise) your gates” [Is 60.18]. If you are in Jeru-
salem, you will have salvation. And this is indicated in the words:
“Jesus drew near to Jerusalem” [Mt 21.1].

(1.1.2) Second, Jesus, that is to say, salvation, has drawn near
to those who are devoted to God [cf. Jas 4.8]. It is a fact that “the
Lord is in his holy temple” [Ps 11.5]. The mind that is dedicat-
ed to the divine worship is a temple of God. So when our mind
is dedicated to God, God dwells in it [cf. 1 Cor 3.16] and gives
salvation to it. As the Psalmist says: “God is near to all who call
upon him (in truth. He fulfills the desire of all who fear him.


human (ST III 46,5-7). The suffering he underwent was salutary for us: ST III
46,1 and 3; 49,1-5.

9. Obedience is a virtue, coming forth from love: ST II— II 104,3-4.

10. ST II— II 75,1,3. Thomas’s general view of our conscience is found in ST
I 79,13 and I-II 19,5-6.

11. E.g., ST I-II 69,3, 73,4,1, 100,2, and II— II 29,3,3.


SERMON 04


49


He also hears their cry) and he saves them” [Ps 145.18-ig]. And
this is pointed out because it says: “He had come to Bethphage”
[Mt 21.1], which is interpreted as “jaw” or “house of the cheek”;
it signifies the divine praise that comes forth from the devotion
of the heart.

(1.1.3) Third, Jesus, that is, salvation, draws near to those
who are merciful. For birds gather with birds that are alike
[cf. Sir 27.9] - Now, God is merciful, since “his acts of mercy are
above all his works” [Ps 145.9]. 12 And when he sees someone
like him, namely, someone merciful, he goes to him. So if you
see someone who is in need, have at the least a kind affection
towards him [cf. Lk 10.33]. Thus we read in the Gospel: “Be
merciful (just as your Father is merciful)” [Lk 6.36]. 13 And the
Apostle says: “He saves us according to his mercy” [Ti 3.5]. And
this is signified because he went “to the Mount of Olives” [Mt
21.1], for an olive signifies mercy [cf. Ps 52.10].

Hence the human race is in need of salvation because of the
perversity of sin.

(1.2) Second, it is in need of salvation because of the op-
pression by enemies. It is a law in the world and with God that
“someone is a slave of someone or something else by whom he
has been overpowered” [2 Pt 2.19; cf. Jn 8.34]. The world was
overpowered by the devil through sin, and the devil scourged
his slave cruelly. So the world was in need of salvation, insofar
as it seemed hardly possible that it could be saved. For we read
in Is 49.24: “Will booty be taken from the strong one, and will
what has been seized by the powerful be saved?” Indeed, some-
one who has been taken prisoner will be taken away by a strong
man, namely, when the stronger man overpowers him; he will
disarm him [cf. Mk 3.27] and “what has been seized by the
powerful 14 will be saved.” And therefore Christ wanted to be

12. According to ST I 25,3,3 God’s mercy is the greatest expression of his al-
mightiness.

13. In ST II— II 30,4,3 (and III 84,10) Thomas focuses more on the conse-
quences for our relationship with God; the neighbor is certainly not absent,
but, overall, the neighbor is more in view in his sermons than in his more theo-
centric, theological works.

14. Jesus Christ, the Savior, as in Prv 24.5.


50


THOMAS AQUINAS


called king, so that his authority would be designated by which
he would set the world free. Hence it says: “Behold, your king
comes” [Zee g.g, Mt 21.5]. And the Psalmist says: “Lift up your
gates, you princes,” et cetera, and he continues: “and the king
of glory will come in” [Ps 24.7, g].

Usually kings have their servants. Thus Christ had servants
or messengers whom he sent to save the people. These servants
are the apostles who received from the Lord the task of preach-
ing and bringing salvation [cf. Mk 16.15-16]. Hence it is said in
Obadiah 17: “The saviors will go up from Mount Zion.” These
glorious apostles, who received the task of savior or salvation
from Christ, are sent in twos [cf. Lk 10.1], by which it is signi-
fied that the whole choir of preachers ought to be led by two
precepts: the love ( dilectio ) of God and of the neighbor [cf. Lk
10.27]. O'" 15 ^ points to the active and the contemplative life, 16
which they ought to have, because they must draw by contem-
plation what they pour out by preaching, as Gregory says. 17

See that in these messengers we can consider three charac-
teristics: (1.2.1) their courage, (1.2.2) their power, and (1.2.3)
their justice.

(1.2.1) First, I say that in the apostles we can admire their
courage, 18 because, although they were poor and illiterate, they
had such a confidence that they invaded the whole world and
“conquered kingdoms by faith” [Heb 11.33]. 19 We read in Jb

15. When Thomas explains Scripture he often shows multiple interpreta-
tions, different layers of the mystery revealed through what is written; cf. ST I
1,10: the four senses of the Scripture texts.

16. ST II— II 188,2. Since Thomas was a Dominican friar, he promotes in his
sermons and in his theology a so-called vita mixta: a form of religious life that is
contemplative (monks, like the Benedictines and Cistercians, are living a purely
contemplative life) and active as well: ST II— II 186-189.

17. The device of the Dominican order is Contemplata aliis tradere, “Passing
the outcomes of contemplation on to other people” (whence Thomas’s formu-
lation in ST I intr.: Propositum nostrae intentionis in hoc opere est, ea quae ad Chris-
tianam religionem pertinent, eo modo tradere, etc.).

18. Audacia is a passion which belongs to the virtue of strength (fortitudo)
and can become a vice if it becomes too ardent and so out of control: ST I— II
45, 60,4-5; II— II 123,3, 127, 129,6,2.

19. The next thing Heb 11.33 mentions is that they administered justice,
which Thomas mentions further on, in 1.2.3.


SERMON 04


51


3g.2i: “He rejoices courageously; armed, he goes out to an en-
counter.” This courage is also mentioned where it says: “Go into
the fortress that is opposite to you” [Mt 21.2]. The world and
the worldly life were opposed to them. Hence the Lord says: “I
have chosen you from the world; therefore, the world hates you”
[Jn t5.igb]. “If you were from the world, (the world would love
\diligo\ you as its own)” [Jn 15-tga]. “Do not be surprised if the
world hates you” [1 Jn 3.13; cf.Jn 15.18].

(1.2.2) Secondly, their power must be admired, for although
they were earthly people, the Lord gave them the power to cast
out demons, to cure the sick, and to raise the dead [Mt 10.8,
Mk 16.20, Lk 10.17, et alibi]. He even gave them the power to
forgive sins [Jn 20.23] and to absolve from punishments or
sins, which is proper to God [Mk 2.7]. 20 Hence the Lord said
to Peter: “Whatever you bind on earth (will also be bound in
heaven, and what you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven)”
[Mt 16. ig]. And this is indicated where it says: “You will find a
donkey tied (and a colt with it).” And he continues: “Untie them
and bring them to me” [Mt 21.2]. The tied donkey is the syna-
gogue that was subdued under the Law; the young animal that
was not subdued is the people of the gentiles who until then
had not received the Law. The Apostle says: “All of us, Greeks
and gentiles, 21 are brought under the power of sin” [Rom 3>g].
He also says: “Indeed, all have sinned and lack the glory of
God” [Rom 3.23]. Or 22 we must say that the donkey signifies
the greater ones and the young animal the smaller ones, who
all were subject to sin. As we read in Is 1.6: “From the sole of the
foot to the top, there is no soundness in him.”

(1.2.3) 23 Third, we can admire in the apostles their justice.
Justice is giving back to everyone what is his. 24 And the apos-
tles were just, because they gave God back what was his, name-


20. Thus people become children of God, according to Hilary, quoted by
Thomas in his commentary on Mt 9.8 (c.g lectio 1). Still, they are not almighty;
cf. ST III 13,1.

21. The Scripture text reads: “Jews and Greeks.”

22. See note 15.

23. Here starts Th. Kappeli’s text. It ends just before section 1.3; see note 40.

24. One of the cardinal virtues: ST II— II 57-122; also I 21,1.


52 THOMAS AQUINAS

ly, glory. [Scripture] says: “I will not give my glory to someone
else” [Is 42.8].

The apostles have converted the whole world. Did they sub-
ject them 25 to themselves? Did they seek dominion or temporal
profit? No, they sought nothing else than that they would be
subjected to Christ. Hence they could say this: “I will not hold
dominion over you, nor will my son hold dominion among you,
but the Lord will rule over you” [Jgs 8.23]. The Apostle says:
“not seeking glory from the people” [1 Thes 2.6]. The apos-
tles did not keep the colt for themselves, but they brought it to
Christ and let him sit on it [Mt 21.7], to designate that the con-
verted people is subject to Christ. Someone who converts some-
one else, and seeks to subject him to himself, is not a guardian,
but a thief and a robber. 26

How are people led to Christ? Certainly through faith, since
it “is necessary that someone who draws near to Christ believes”
[Heb 11.6]. They are led to him through love ( caritas ) and the
observance of the precepts and counsels. 27 Take a look at this:
“If someone says something, tell him that the Lord (needs it)”
[Mt 21.3]. Bede comments on this that “erring magistri hinder
the apostles in leading the colt to Christ.”

But who are the ones who hinder in our time? For instance,
those who say that people should not be led to Christ in reli-
gious life unless they have been instructed in the precepts. 28 In
a gloss on Ps 131.2: “As a weaning child on his mother’s lap,”
we read: “Many overthrow this order, which is from the easier
things to the higher, like the heretics and the schismatics; they
want to be separated from the mother’s milk before their time,
and die thereupon. 29 Yet if one of them still holds that he keeps

25. 1.e., the people who inhabit the whole world.

26. We belong to Christ (Rom 14.8). Therefore, placing yourself in the cent-
er, his place, is theft; cf. Jn 10.1, 10.

27. In other words: following Christ in faith is a matter of learning by doing.

28. ST II— II 189,1. In this part of the sermon the conflict between the secu-
lars and the regulars, both teaching at the University of Paris, clearly resounds.

29. Thomas argues that people who are too radical should not be admitted
into a religious order; they must first learn the method of proceeding on the
way to perfection, in religious life (cf. ST II— II 186,2) and theological knowl-
edge: step by step, like a child; otherwise, it leads to a spiritual death, killing the


SERMON 04


53


this order, he binds himself to a curse,” as if he said: “May it be
done unto me as unto someone who reclines on his mother’s
lap and, not yet well grown, is not given any milk.” The gloss
continues: “I have not only been humble among other people,
since I learned in a humble way, but I was also humble in re-
spect to the knowledge itself; I was first fed with the milk that
the Word had become flesh [Jn 1.14], whereas later on I grew
on the angels’ food, which is ‘in the beginning the Word was
with God’” [Jn 1.1].

Yet do easier things always come before more difficult ones?
I say they do not. The abstinence of virginity is more difficult
than abstinence in marriage; should therefore the abstinence
in marriage precede the abstinence of virginity? Definitely
not. But I say that in the state in which we are 30 we must pro-
ceed from easier to more difficult things. Should someone who
wants to proceed to the perfection of a state first go towards an
easier state? He does not have to. But who [rightly] overthrow
this order? Those who conceive through the spirit and have fin-
ished with the flesh 31 [cf. Gal 3.3].

Some say that preachers who prefer to convert rich people
rather than the poor and make distinctions between people in
this way must be refuted. I say that if they do this in order to
become rich, they act in an evil way. But can converting rich
people come to pass with a good inclination? Yes. Thus Augus-
tine says in Confessions: “The ones with authority who are well
known to many, lead many to salvation and are an example for
many to follow. Therefore, the holy men rejoice more in them.”


true faith in a person. It is clear that, besides Psalm 131, Thomas’s imagery is
derived from 1 Cor 3.1-2, Heb 5.12, and 1 Pt 2.2.

In what follows, Thomas identifies “milk” as the teachings on Christ’s hu-
manity (cf.Jn 1.14), and “angels’ food” as the teachings concerning the divinity
of Christ (cf. Jn 1.1).

30. Thomas distinguishes between a life in the world, which can be living
single or as a married person or as a secular priest, and a life fully dedicated to
the Lord as a vowed religious. The latter is valued much more highly by Tho-
mas. Sometimes he mentions living as a bishop distinctly, e.g., in Sermon 21
Beatus vir; cf. ST II— II 185.

31. After all, some could have received the grace that makes this possible
for them.


54


THOMAS AQUINAS


Someone who converts a poor person does well, but someone
who converts a rich person well known to many does better, be-
cause others are edified . 32

But is this making a distinction between people? No. Hence
Augustine says: “It should not be that in your tent rich per-
sons would be received before the poor.” Thus it can be that
someone does this with a good inclination, says also Augustine:
“Concerning these things that can be done with a good and a
bad inclination, they ought to be interpreted with the benefit
of the doubt.” So does this mean for you that you should inter-
pret it negatively ? 33 If people who think so had lived in the time
of Christ, they would have refuted Christ, because he invited
himself to the house of the rich Zacchaeus; he converted him
who was a high person among the tax collectors, whereas there
were still many poor people there [cf. Lk ig.2-10]. Such people
would have said: “You go to him so as to be filled with meat and
drink .” 34

Others say: “Those who live well in the world are more praise-
worthy than those in religious life .” 35 They give an example and
say that a soldier who keeps guard well over a dilapidated cas-
tle for a king is more praiseworthy than a soldier who keeps
guard over a strong castle. You are deceived; you think that
serving God would be in exterior acts only and not in interi-
or acts of virtue. Yet the principal acts are the interior virtues,

32. So those who prefer to convert the rich cannot for that fact be counted
among those who hinder what the aposdes began or who err. From the outside
one cannot know what someone’s intention is, whereas this is essential for es-
tablishing whether an action is good or evil. Thomas explains in what follows
that favoring the rich over the poor is not the right thing to do for a Christian.
But someone who seems to do so must be treated with the benefit of the doubt
(in melius interpretari ) . The story of the conversion of Zacchaeus (Lk 19.1-10)
seems to be a basis for Thomas’s exposition.

33. Since Augustine is the highest authority for Thomas after Scripture, the
implied answer is obviously “no.”

34. Reference to Mt 11.19. Thus Thomas underlines the risk of this way of
thinking. In Scripture people who reason like this are depicted as people who
do not believe in Christ. Note that faith is the very subject of this section of
the text: the point of departure is the statement that people are led to Christ
through faith.

35. ST II— II 184,5-8. See note 28.


SERMON 04


55


like wisdom and prudence. 36 When someone preserves chasti-
ty in religious life, that is the stronger castle. You will say that
the one who shuns occasions for sinning 37 has lesser chastity
and prudence? This is certainly not true, because the Apostle
says: “Everyone who trains for a match abstains from all things”
[t Cor 9.25]. Someone who places the treasure of a king in a di-
lapidated castle, even though he would be very eager to watch
over it, still would not be as praiseworthy as someone who would
watch over it in a strong castle, because he should be rebuked
for his negligence. But if it almost cannot be in another way,
then the one who watches over it in a dilapidated castle should
be praised more. We have the example of St. Agnes, who pre-
served her chastity in prostitution. Must, therefore, people leave
the monastery to preserve their chastity and will they be more
praiseworthy? Certainly not, but if there is a necessity for you to
leave because you must be in the world, and if you preserve your
chastity there, it will be more praiseworthy.

I am amazed about some things: once it was said that it was
an evil that heresies were preached in Lombardy, but nowadays
they are preached in this very house! 38 There are two counsels
given by Christ: that of chastity and the one of poverty. About
chastity the Lord says: “Let him who can grasp it grasp it”
[Mt 19.12]. And the Apostle says: “I do not have a precept
about the virgins, but I give a counsel as someone who pursues
mercy” [1 Cor 7.25]. And about poverty the Lord says: “Some-
one who wants to be perfect should come and sell everything
he possesses and follow me” [Mt ig.21]. In the early Church
there were Jovinian and Vigilantius. Jovinian has said that
abstinence within marriage must be considered equal to vir-
ginity; this is what he preached. Vigilantius preached that the
state of the rich who give alms must be considered equal to


36. Wisdom is one of God’s gracious gifts which corresponds with the great-
est theological virtue, love: ST II— II 45. Prudence is the first of the cardinal vir-
tues: ST II— II 47-56.

37. That is, the person who withdraws from “the world” by entering a reli-
gious order.

38. A third issue in the conflict (notes 28, 35) at the university is addressed
by Thomas.


56


THOMAS AQUINAS


poverty, 39 which is at odds with what Jerome says: “It is good to
expend your means for the poor with stewardship, but it is bet-
ter to give your means at once with the intention of following
Christ, suffering want with Christ.” 40 Against all these things we
have what the Lord says: “If someone might say anything to you,
tell him that the Lord needs these things” [Mt 21.3].

(1.3) Furthermore, the human race was in need of salva-
tion, so that it would reject worldly glory. Well, you should know
now that someone who looks for salvation where it is not [cf.
Ps 146.3, Acts 4.12], is very much in need of it. Some look for
salvation in the things of the world, whereas there is no salva-
tion in those. The Psalmist says: “A king is not saved by a great
strength, nor will a warrior be saved in the greatness of his
strength” [Ps 33.16]. So in order to show that this is not the
proper way of salvation, the Lord showed us another way of sal-
vation: the way of humility. 41 As the Psalmist says: “He will save
the humble in spirit” [Ps 34.19]. He showed this humility when
he rode on the donkey [Mt 2i-7]; 42 he showed complete humil-
ity by willing to carry the cross-beam of the cross [cf. Heb 12.2].
As the Apostle says: “He humbled himself” [Phil 2.8], et cetera.
But for what did he will humility but for teaching us humility?
[Cf. Phil 2.5, 1 Pt 2.21] Hence he says in Mt 11.29: “Learn from
me that I am meek and humble (of heart, and you will find rest
for your souls).” Hence he wanted to maintain humility in or-
der to teach us to humble ourselves.

Now see that a human being ought to humble himself in
three ways: (1.3.1) he ought to humble his mind, (1.3.2) his
body, and (1.3.3) his affection.

(1.3.1) I say, to begin with, he ought to humble his mind.
We recognize a proud man by his mind: him who is “puffed up
by his carnal mind,” as it is said in Col 2.18. Against them the
Apostle says in Rom 12.16: “(Associate with humble people,)

39. So these heretics were of a different kind than the ones mentioned be-
fore; the former were too radical, but these do not go far enough.

40. Here ends Th. Kappeli’s text.

41. ST II— II 161. See also Thomas’s praise of this virtue in Sermon 18 Germi-
net terra, on the Feast of the Birth of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

42. Instead of a horse: Est 6.6-1 1, Eccles 10.7a.


SERMON 04


57


do not be the prudent among yourselves.” And in Prv 3.5 we
read: “(Have confidence in God with all your heart,) so that you
do not lean on your own prudence.” Let us follow the life and
the deeds of the great people. The crowds that followed Christ
have shown a sign of this humility. Christ has shown humility
because he rode on a donkey; the crowds have shown a sign of
this humility when they cut off the branches of trees and laid
them down on the way [cf. Mt 21.8]. For Gregory says that cut-
ting branches is accepting the authorities and examples of the
saints and placing them on the way of one’s moral life. There-
fore a man first ought to humble his mind.

(1.3.2) Second, he ought to humble his body by fasting and
vigils. The Psalmist says: “I humbled my soul in fasting” [Ps
35.13]. If someone had a slave and he gave him delicate food
to eat in the beginning instead of in the end [cf. Lk 17.7-8], he
would find him haughty. So it is with our body. Because of this
we should humble our body with fasting and vigils. The crowds
offer an image of this humility by spreading out their garments
on the road [cf. Mt 21.8], which stands for throwing the body to
the ground. In Rv 3.4 it says: I have “a few names in Sardis who
did not defile their garments.”

(1.3.3) Third, a man ought to weaken his affection in such a
way that he gives it completely over to God [cf. Phil 3.10]. When
you love ( diligo ) something that is yours which you do not link
to God, you are not perfectly humble. It is said in Jdt 8.17: “Let
us humble our souls and serve him with a contrite and humble
spirit” [cf. Lk 16.13]. See that the crowds humbled their affec-
tion in this way: that they yearned 43 for salvation from Christ,
saying: “Hosanna,” et cetera.

These things are sufficient about the task of the Savior.

(2) Let us take a look at his origin. You should know that in
the Old Testament salvation was promised in two ways: first, by
someone who would be born from the stem of David, where it
says: “In those days I will save Judah and I will raise for Dav-
id a just shoot” [Jer 23.5]. And elsewhere salvation is promised


43. Thomas uses the verb affecto.


58


THOMAS AQUINAS


to them in the coming of the Lord, as it says in Is 35.4: “The
Lord himself will come, and he will save you.” Thus the crowds
smartly connected these two: that he who will be from the seed
of David will save us and that the Lord will save us in his com-
ing. (2.1) As they were calling him “Son of David” [Mt 21.9],
they called to mind his humanity; (2.2) they called to mind his
divinity as they were saying: “Blessed is he who comes in the
name of the Lord” [Mt 21. g]. 44

(2.1) See that David bears the image of Christ in three
respects: 45 (2.1.1) first, as for the royal sovereignty; (2.1.2) sec-
ond, as for the victory of wars; (2.1.3) third, as for grace.

(2.1.1) As for the royal sovereignty, David bears the image of
Christ. Know that David was the first accepted king of God in
Israel [cf. 1 Sm 16]; and concerning Christ it is said: “The Lord
will give him the throne of David, his father” [Lk 1.32].

(2.1.2) Second, David bears the image of Christ as for the vic-
tory of wars, because he was victorious in war. Hence it says in
Ps 144.1: “Blessed is the Lord my God, who schools my hands
for the battle (and my fingers for war).” And [Christ] was espe-
cially victorious because he completely conquered the powers
of the air 46 and led “the defeated out of the lake in which there
is no water” [Zee g. 11].

(2.1.3) Third, David bears the image of Christ as for grace.
Thus says the Lord about David: “I have found a man after
my heart” [1 Sm 13.14, Ps 8g.2i] ; whereas the Lord says about
Christ: “This is my beloved ( dilectus ) Son (in whom I am well
pleased).” 47 Moreover, we find that David had love ( caritas ),
whence it says: “I made peace with those who hated peace
(when I spoke to them; they pursued me without reason)” [Ps
ng.7 (Vg)]. Furthermore: “If I have given what is due to those
who repaid me with evil things” [Ps 7.5]. Hence he was mild, in
accordance with this: “Remember, Lord, David and all his mild-

44. Cf. Thomas’s commentary on Is 6.3 ( lectio 1).

45. King David is the prefiguration of Christ the King: a Christological read-
ing of the Old Testament.

46. The devil and his demons; cf. Eph 2.2.

47. Mt 3.17, 17*5, a quotation from Ps 2.7 (although this Psalm is not explic-
itly ascribed to David) .


SERMON 04


59


ness” [Ps 132.1]. He had humility as well. Hence he said: “Lord,
my heart is not proud” [Ps 131.1]. Also Christ was mild and
humble. Thus he said to his disciples in Mt 11. 2g: “Learn from
me, for I am meek and humble of heart.” So, by calling to mind
the humility of Christ, the crowds said: “To the Son of David.”

(2.2) Next, as for the recognition of his divinity, it says: “Bless-
ed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.” Well, see that
Christ comes in the name of the Lord in a threefold manner:

(2.2.1) First, in the truth of the divine name. 48 For when a
generation is perfect, what is generated receives the nature
and the name of the one who generates. So, because the gen-
eration of Christ was perfect, therefore Christ received the na-
ture of the divinity from the Father as well as the name. Hence
the Apostle says: “He has given him a name that is above every
name” [Phil 2.g], the name of the divinity, that is. So, he comes
first in the truth of the divine name.

(2.2.2) Second, he comes in the strength of the divine name.
Hence we read in Prv 18.10: “A very strong tower is the name of
the Lord; (the just runs to him and will be exalted).” In natu-
ral things the strength of a cause does not have an effect unless
it is applied [cf. Jn 15.4]; in this way, everything that the saints
have done is entirely done in the strength of the name of the
Lord [cf. Is 26.12, Phil 2.13].

(2.2.3) Furthermore, he comes, thirdly, in the manifestation
of the divine name. Therefore he says: “Father, I have manifest-
ed your name to the people” [Jn 17.6].

Now the task of the Savior and his origin are clear.

(3) Let us look at the highest point of his power, because it
says “Hosanna,” meaning “save,” “in the highest” [Mk 11. 10]. 49
Some who are in hell are saved; the Psalmist says: “The Lord
will save people and beasts of burden” [Ps 36.7; cf. Jon 3.8], so
that people are saved and undamaged. Salvation “in the high-
est” is salvation in God. Thus we read in Hos 1.7: “I will save


48. ST I 16,5.

49. Mt 21.9 reads Osanna in altissimis, whereas Lk 19.38 reads Gloria in excel-
sis. Mark’s text is used in the liturgy of Palm Sunday.


60


THOMAS AQUINAS


them in their God,” that is, in the participation in divine glory.
Also, elsewhere this is said <. . ,>. 50 Such people say: “Hosanna
in the highest,” meaning: “I implore, Lord; let your salvation be
in the highest.”

But behold: although there is one God, it says “in the high-
est,” plural. The reason is that he 51 willed to distinguish the dis-
tinctions of the Persons, so that we might consider which things
are attributed to the Persons. Thus Hilary says that “eternity is
attributed to the Father; appearance,” or beauty, “to the Image;
and use,” or delight, “to the Gift.” 52 To the Father, who is the
beginning, eternity is attributed; to the Son, who is called “Im-
age” [cf. Col 1.15], beauty is attributed; to the Holy Spirit, who
is the Gift, use or enjoyment is attributed. Hence 53 our salvation
consists (3.1) in the stability of eternity, (3.2) in the beauty of
the light, and (3.3) in the enjoyment of delight.

(3.1) First, I say that our salvation consists in the stability of
eternity. 54 A ship is saved when it is on its way to a stable harbor
[cf. Ps 107.30]; in the same way a human being is not saved dur-
ing his life on earth (in via), but in the heavenly homeland (in
patria). Hence Is 45.17 says: “Israel is saved in the Lord through
an eternal salvation.” Errors perish and cease to be when peo-
ple get to know the truth.

(3.2) Second, it consists in the beauty of the divine light. Peo-
ple in this world are in a certain way saved, as the Psalmist says:
“Show us your face, and we will be saved” [Ps 80.4, 8, 20]. Yet
then they will be saved in a perfect way, as the Psalmist indi-
cates, at the sight of the face in which every good finds its exist-
ence, according to that saying in Ex 33.19: “I will show you every
good.” 55

(3.3) Third, [our salvation consists] in the enjoyment of the di-

50. Some words are missing in the original text. Thomas may have referred
to Hos 14.4: “Assyria will not save us, nor shall we have horses to mount.”

51 . It seems that God is the subject here: he has put the words in the mouths
of the people; cf. Is 51.16.

52. ST I 39,8.

53. The way in which our salvation takes place in time reflects who the eter-
nal God is; cf. Rom 1.20; ST I 32 and III 1,1 sc.

54. Eternity implies no change: ST I 9,1-2, 10,1-4.

55. Cf. Jn 12.46-47 and J11 14.9; Col 1.15.


SERMON 04


61


vine delight, as the Psalmist says: “Your houses will be drenched
with abundance” [Ps 36.9a]. A man who is drunk is beside him-
self; in the same way the saints in the heavenly homeland (in pa-
tria) will be; “and from the stream of your pleasure you will give
them drink” [Ps 36.9b], namely, when they will say: “My heart
has exulted in being saved” 56 [1 Sm 2.1, Lk 1.47], 57 et cetera.

We will ask the Lord, et cetera.

56. The words used in this subparagraph refer to ecstasy (ST I— II 28,3) as
well as contemplation (ST II— II 180,7).

57. In Lk 1.46-55 we find quite a few themes that play an important role in
this sermon, such as humility, handmaid/ servant, the power and mercy of God,
God’s holy name, et cetera; it seems that the Magnificat has been a directive for
the content of this sermon.


SERMON 05

ECCE REX TUUS

Sermon on the First Sunday of Advent 1


Matthew 21.5: Behold, your king comes unto you, mild.


part 1 : Prothema


ehold, your king comes unto you, mild” [Mt 21.5].
Many are the wonders of the divine works. Ps 139.14
says: “Wonderful are your works.” But no work of God
is as wonderful as the coming of Christ in the flesh, and the
reason is that in God’s other works God has pressed his image
upon a creature [Col 1.16], 2 but in the work of the Incarnation
God has pressed his very self upon a creature [cf. Jn 12.45], an d
he has united himself with the human nature in unity of per-
son, 3 or he has united our nature to himself. 4 And therefore, al-
though the other works of God cannot be thoroughly fathomed
either, that work, that is, the work of the Incarnation, is totally
beyond reason. Thus we read in Jb 5-g: “You who make great


1. This sermon was very probably delivered on the 29th of November 1271,
since in the Collatio in sero at the Vespers Thomas refers to Saint Andrew, whose
feast day is the 30th of November.

2. In ST I 47,1 Thomas speaks of the representation of God’s goodness in
the multitude and diversity of the creatures; cf. Rom 1.20. And this is in par-
ticular true for the human being: Gn 1.26, Wis 2.23; cf. ST I 93,6 (esp. 93,6,1
and 4) .

3. Here Thomas uses the term persona in the theological sense; later on he
does not: see note 24.

4. A typical approach of a mystery of faith: since we do not fathom it, we do
not have the exact words to formulate it; approaching it from different angles,
we need many words; cf. ST III 2-4.


62


SERMON 05


63


and wonderful things and countless things that cannot be fath-
omed.”

This is one work that I cannot see: “If he comes to me, I will
not see him” [Jb g.n]. 5 And in Mai 2.3 we read: “Behold, the
Lord of hosts comes, and who could imagine the day of his
coming?” As if he says that this exceeds human thinking. But
the Apostle teaches us who could imagine the day of his com-
ing, when he says: “We are not able to think of something by
ourselves as if it came from ourselves, but every ability of ours
comes from God” [2 Cor 3.5]. Thus we will ask the Lord at the
beginning that he may give me something to say, et cetera. 6


part 2: Sermo

“Behold, your king” [Mt 21.5], et cetera. These words are tak-
en from the Gospel that is read among us today. They are tak-
en from Zee g.g, although they are read in a slightly different
wording there. Anyway, in these words the coming of Christ is
clearly announced to us. In order to avoid talking about some-
thing uncertain, you should know that we speak of the coming
of Christ in a fourfold way: (0.1) The first is the way in which he
comes in the flesh. (0.2) His second coming is the way in which
he enters the mind. (0.3) The third coming of Christ is the way
in which he comes in the death of the just ones. (0.4) But the
fourth coming of Christ is the way in which he comes to judge.

(0.1) First I say that the coming of Christ is into the flesh.
And we must not understand this as if he came into the flesh
by changing place, because he says in Jer 23.24: “I make heaven
and earth full.” So how did he come into the flesh? I say that he
has come into the flesh descending from heaven, not by leaving
heaven, but by assuming our nature. Thus it says in Jn 1.11: “He

5. ST I 12,1-1 1. Seeing and knowing are almost synonymous, as in English:
“I see” means “I know/understand”; in Greek oI 5 a means “I have seen” and
therefore “I know.” Cf. ST I 84-89.

6. Thomas is aware that we need God’s help if we want to speak meaningful-
ly of the mysteries of God which we do not fully understand and yet believe and
are called to proclaim: ST I 12,12-13.


64


THOMAS AQUINAS


came into his own.” And how do I say that he was in the world?
When I say: “The Word has become flesh” [Jn 1.14]. 7

(0.2) And see that this coming leads to another coming of
Christ, which is in the mind. That Christ has come into the
flesh would not have been to our benefit at all if with this com-
ing he had not entered our mind as well, namely, by sanctifying
us. 8 Hence it says in Jn 14.23: “If someone loves ( diligo ) me, he
will keep my words, and my Father will love ( diligo ) him, and we
will come to him and make our home with him.”

(0.3) In the first coming only the Son comes. In the sec-
ond coming the Son comes with the Father to inhabit the soul
[Jn 14.23]. By this latter coming, which is by means of justify-
ing grace, the soul is freed from guilt — not from every punish-
ment — because grace is brought in, but not yet glory. And be-
cause of this the third coming of Christ is necessary: when he
receives them to himself. Thus he says in Jn 14.3: “When I will
have departed,” in the Passion, and “will have prepared a place
for you,” by taking away the obstacle, “I will come unto you
again,” that is, in death, “and I will take you to myself,” namely,
in glory, “so that where I am there you also will be.” 9 Likewise,
he says in Jn 10.10: “I have come so that they may have life,”
meaning his presence in our souls [cf. Jn 14.23], “and that they
may have it more abundantly,” that is, through the participa-
tion in glory.

7. Descending from heaven is the One who is in heaven. So here Thomas is
speaking about the descent of the divine Son. God is not a body (Jn 4.24: “God
is spirit”; cf. ST I 3,1 ); he assumed a body, a human body: Incarnation. This body
was like any human body (ST III 31,4) confined to place (and time), whereas,
insofar as he is God, Christ is not confined to place (and time) . In other words,
the divine Son is everywhere in his ubiquity, omnipraesentia (ST I 8,2). There-
fore, “coming down” and similar formulations must be understood in an analo-
gous way, not in terms of leaving one place in order to arrive at another. Accord-
ing to the Christian faith it was not the Son’s presence among us that was new,
but the way in which he became present among us was new: through the Incarna-
tion God was with us as a man (cf. SCG IV 30, ST I 43,1).

8. ST 1 43,5. Sanctification is the gracious gift of God himself by which sins are
taken away and virtues are infused and strengthened. Thus people become hap-
pier and (more) dedicated to God, while God makes himself a home in them.

9. Thomas interprets this text as concerning our soul; the human soul does
not die: ST I 75,6.


SERMON 05


65


(0.4) The fourth coming of Christ will be forjudging, name-
ly, when the Lord will come to judge, 10 and then the glory of
the saints will overflow all the way to the bodies, and the dead
will rise [cf. 1 Cor 15.52]. Therefore, he says in Jn 5.25: “The
hour has come, and now is the time when all who are in graves
will hear the voice of the Son of God and those who have done
good things will go forth into the resurrection of life.” And be-
cause of these four comings of Christ the Church expressly cel-
ebrates the four Sundays previous to Christ’s coming. 11

Now on this Sunday the Church celebrates the first coming
of Christ, and we can see four things in the verse mentioned
above: (1) first, the demonstration of the coming of Christ,
where it says: “Behold”; (2) second, who the one is that is com-
ing, where it says: “your king”; (3) third, the benefit of his com-
ing: “comes unto you”; 12 (4) fourth, the way of his coming,
where it says: “mild.”

♦♦♦

(1) First, I say, we can see the demonstration of the com-
ing of Christ, where it says: “Behold.” And we must note that
by “behold” we usually understand four things: (1.1) first, the
certification of a thing: we say “behold” regarding things that
are certain for us; (1.2) second, we understand by “behold” a
demarcation of the time; (1.3) third, the manifestation of the
thing; and (1.4) fourth, the comfort of people.

(1.1) First, I say that by “behold” we usually understand the
certification of a thing. When someone wants to certify, he says
“behold.” Thus the Lord says in Gn 9.13: “Behold, I will estab-
lish my bond with you and with your seed after you. I will place
my arch between me and you,” namely, in the sign of peace.
By this arch 13 God’s Son is signified, because, as the arch is
brought forth by the reverberation of the sun onto a cloud of


10. ST III 59.

1 1 . Advent is in this way presented not only as a time of preparation for
Christmas, but as a time to meditate upon the whole of the history of salvation.

1 2. In Latin it says tibi: he is coming “to you for your benefit.”

13. The rainbow.


66


THOMAS AQUINAS


water vapor, so Christ is brought forth from the Word of God 14
and from the human nature, which is as the cloud; 15 and just
as soul and flesh form one human being, so God and a human
being form one Christ. 16 And about Christ it is said that he as-
cended upon a light cloud [Acts t.g], meaning upon human na-
ture, by uniting it to himself. 17

Christ has come unto us as the sign of peace, and it was nec-
essary that it would happen in this way, since nowadays there
are some who doubt the second coming of Christ. Thus we read
in what the Apostle writes: “In the last days indeed mocking
people will come who leave the faith, who walk after their own
desires, and say: ‘Where is now his promise and his coming?’”
[2 Pt 3.3-4; cf. Jude 18] Such people will even say that there will
not be a soul after the body has died. 18 And because of this the
Prophet says to certify the coming of Christ: “Behold” [Zee 9.9],
et cetera. And in Hab 2.3 we read: “The Lord will appear in the
end, and he will not lie.” And in Isaiah: “The Lord of hosts will
come” [Zee 5.4].

(1.2) Second, we usually understand “behold” as a demarca-
tion of time. As for Christ’s coming to the judgment the time
is not marked out for us. Hence Jb 32.22 (Vg) says: “I do not
know how long I will remain and when my Maker will take me.”
Also in Lk 17.20 we read: “The reign of God will come unno-
ticed.” But why has the time not been marked out for us as for
this coming? Maybe because the Lord wanted us to be watchful
always. 19 But as for Christ’s coming into the flesh, the time was

14. Which is like the sun, e.g., in Ps 84.12.

i 5 -Jb 7 - 9 . 37.15; elsewhere in Scripture the cloud usually signifies YHWH’s
hidden presence.

16. It is remarkable that Thomas is making this comparison, since Thomas
endorses in his theology how different the union of God and human being in
Christ is in many ways, when compared to other unions in creation (ST III 2-5).
But what Thomas is referring to in this sermon is the oneness itself and “the un-
ion of the Incarnation means the greatest unity” (ST III 2,9: unio incamationis
hnportat maximam unitatem ) .

17. ST III 2,8, 3,1-7.

18. See note 9.

19. No wild speculation, but a tentative answer (“maybe”) on the basis of
Scripture: Lk 12.35-48, Mt 24.42.


SERMON 05


67


marked out for us. Thus [the Lord says] in Jer 23.5: “Behold,
the days will come, and I will give rise to the just offspring of
David, and he will reign and be wise.”

(1.3) Third, by “behold” we usually understand the mani-
festation of a thing. One of God’s comings unto us is hidden,
namely, the coming by which he enters the mind; it cannot be
known through certification. 20 Thus we read in Jb 9.11: “I will
not see him if he comes to me, and I will not understand if he
leaves.” But in the coming in the flesh the manifest and visi-
ble Christ has come. Therefore it says in Is 52.6: “Because of
this my people will understand my name, since I myself am the
One who said: ‘Behold, I am present.’” And John the Baptist
has pointed him out with his finger as present, saying: “Behold
the Lamb of God” [Jn 1.29]. Zechariah has truly pointed him
out as the One to come in the future by saying “behold” [Zee
9.9]. 21

(1.4) Fourth, by “behold” we usually understand the com-
forting of people, and this consists in two things. If someone
suffers from the troubles caused by his enemies, and his ene-
mies are made subject to him, he says: “Behold.” Thus we read
in Lam 2.16: “My enemies have opened their mouth, and the
day that I desired has come.” In a similar way someone says
“behold” when he obtains something. Thus it says in Ps 133.1:
“Behold how good and how pleasant it is that brothers live to-
gether,” et cetera. These two things we obtain in the coming of
Christ: the human being is freed from the insults of demons 22
and rejoices in the hope he gained. 23 It says in Is 35.4: “Say to
the petty-hearted: ‘Take comfort; fear not; behold, your God
will bring revenge over your enemies; he himself will come and
save you.’”


20. ST I 43,3.

2 1 . Thus this invisible coming must be pointed out to us explicitly, which is
done by God himself as well as by someone sent by God (a prophet, an angel,
an apostle, a preacher) .

22. This is completed through the Passion, by which we are freed from the
power of the devil: ST III 49,2.

23. ST II— II 1,7,1, also 7,1,2, 17,2 and 7.


68


THOMAS AQUINAS


(2) Let us now look at who the one is that is coming. The
coming of a person 24 requires that he be expected or announced
with festivity because of the greatness of the person — if it is a
king or a legate of the lord Pope — or because of friendship and
affection. And this one who is coming is a king as well as our
neighbor and friend. 25 Because of this we ought to expect him
with festivity. You know that a king rules with the authority of
dominion [cf. Rom 13.1, etc.], but not everyone who has the au-
thority of dominion is called a king; (2.1) four characteristics
are required for calling someone a king, and if one of the four
is lacking, he is not called king. For a king ought to be (2.1.1),
first, the only king; (2.1.2) second, he ought to have full power
(2.1.3); third, full jurisdiction; and (2.1.4) fourth, the equity of
justice [cf. Prv 2.9].

(2.1.1) First I say that a king ought to be the only king, be-
cause if there are in a kingdom many rulers and the domin-
ion does not belong to one, he is not called a king. In this sense
the Kingdom is like a monarchy, and Christ is the only King.
Therefore, it says in Ezek 37.22: “There will be one king over
all of us.” It says “one king” to signify that there is no other, no
other lord, for the Son with the Father will be one Lord, our
King. 26 Hence Christ says: “I and the Father are one” [Jn 10.30],
which is contrary to what Arius has said, that the Father would
be another one than the Son. The Apostle says: “Also if there
are many gods and many lords, we have one God and Lord” [1
Cor 8.5-6]. 27

(2.1.2) Second, “king” means fullness of power. 28 Someone
who does not rule with the fullness of power, but in accordance

24. (Cf. note 3.) Here Thomas does not use the word persona in the theo-
logical sense, but as we usually understand it: a human person, someone. From
here on, this term is used in this sense; cf. the beginning of the Collatio in sero
(see also note 39).

25. The theme of Jesus Christ as a close friend is not elaborated any further
here. See for this Sermon 13 Homo quidam fecit, part 2: Sermo.

26. In this sense Christ is called the Most High (e.g., in the Gloria ): ST III
574 - 5 . 5 8 -

27. Cf. ST I 1 1,3-4, 39 > 8 > 47,2,2.

28. Thomas refers to the situation in which the legislative, executive, and ju-
diciary power were united in the person of the monarch; cf. ST I— II 98,5,1.


SERMON 05


69


with laws imposed upon him, is not called a king, but a magis-
trate or a man in power. It had to happen, however, that, when
Christ came, the Law from God would be changed as for the
ceremonial laws. 29 Thus Christ himself is the One who can es-
tablish the Law. Therefore, he says: “It is said to our ancestors:
‘You shall not kill.' Yet I say,” as if he says, “I have the power and
I can establish laws.” 30 Hence we read in Is 33.22: “The Lord our
judge, our lawgiver, he himself will come and save us.” We read
that “the Father has given everyjudgment to the Son” [Jn 5.22]
and that the Lord is our lawgiver, and by consequence he is our
king. Thus we read in Est 13.9 (Vg): “Lord, almighty King, all
things together are placed under your dominion.” Hence the
Son says: “All power is given unto me in heaven and on earth”
[Mt 28.18]. 31

(2.1.3) Third, “king” implies the fullness of jurisdiction. The
paterfamilias has the fullness of power in his house, but still he is
not called “king.” In a similar way someone who has one house
in the country is not called a king because of this. But someone
who has dominion over many territories and over a big popula-
tion, such a man is called a king. We see that characteristic in
this man who comes to us, since every creature is subject to him,
because “God 32 is King over all the earth” [Ps 47.8]. And it had
to be that such a man came who had such power, since once
the Law was only given to the Jews and the Jews were called
God’s own people; but it had to come to pass that all would be
led to salvation [cf. 1 Tm 2.4], so it was necessary that he would
be the king of all things so that he would be able to save all

29. The ceremonial laws are the precepts of the Old Covenant concerning
worship (see ST I— II 101,1, 103,3).

30. Mt 5.21-22. Nowadays we know that this was a common formulation of
teaching rabbis. They were by doing so not changing the Law, but giving their
interpretation. For more nuances of how Thomas taught on the relation be-
tween the Old and the New Law/ Covenant, see ST I— II 107, where he considers
this in view of Mt 5.17: “Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the
Prophets. I have come not to abolish, but in order to fulfill.”

31. On the power of Christ: ST I 42,6 (as for his divinity) and III 13 (as for
his humanity) .

32. Because of the Incarnation we speak of Christ as a man and as God; cf.
ST III 16.


70


THOMAS AQUINAS


people. 33 Such was this One who comes to us. Therefore, Ps 2.8
says: “Ask me, and I will give unto you the gentiles as your in-
heritance, and the ends of the earth as your possession.” 34

(2.1.4) Fourth, a king must be equitable, because otherwise
he would be a tyrant. For a tyrant turns everything that is in his
kingdom to his own benefit, whereas a king organizes his king-
dom in view of the common good. Thus we read in Prv 29.4:
“A just king raises up the land; a greedy man destroys it.” 36 But
this One does not come to seek after his own benefit, but af-
ter yours, because “the Son of man has not come to be served
but to serve” [Mt 20.28]. 36 And he who has come to serve surely
came to give his life for the redemption of many [ibid.], and to
lead the redeemed to eternal glory,

to which he may also lead us, et cetera.


part 3: Collatio in sero

“Behold, your king comes” [Mt 21.5], et cetera. We said that
in these words we can see a demonstration of his coming be-
cause it says 37 “behold.” Second, the benefit of his coming,
where it says “he comes.” Third and fourth, the way in which he
is coming, where it says “mild.” 38 We also said that (1) we usual-
ly understand four things by this word “behold”: first, the certi-

33. So this necessity is not absolute; it is not the result of blind fate or a lack of
any other way (for God) . It had to come to pass only because it was God’s will (cf.
ST III 46,1), as Thomas endorses here with an implicit reference to 1 Tm 2.4.

34. The preceding verse reads: “You are my Son; this day I have begotten
you.”

35. Cf. ST I— II 105,1,5. Since for Thomas “king” is not a neutral term, “a just
king” is in his view a pleonasm. See also Sermon 19 Beati qui habitant section
2.2.1 and 2.2.2..

36. In brief: a king in the true sense of the word looks like God, our King
(Ps 93.1 etc.). Note that in ST I— II 105,1,2 Thomas warns in this context against
corruption (absolute power may well corrupt) in view of 1 Samuel 8: King Saul.

37. Cum dicit, usually conceived as a temporal construction ( cum temporale )
and thus translated as “when” (or “where,” as synonymous with ibi, as also Tho-
mas uses it) “it/he says.” In some cases (e.g., in Sermons 05, 08, 09, 12, 15, 20,
and 2 1 ) it could be interpreted as a cum explicativum: “because (of the fact that).”

38. This is a different layout from the one given at the beginning of the Ser-
mo. Maybe the secretary lost Thomas here for a moment? After all, the text fol-
lows the original plan.


SERMON 05


71


fication of a thing; second, a determination of the time; third,
the manifestation of the thing; and fourth, comfort. (2.1) We
also spoke about who the one is that is coming, which is men-
tioned where it says “your king”: we said that someone’s com-
ing requires that he be expected or announced with festivity
because of his greatness if he is a king or a legate or because
of the friendship and the affinity with the person 39 — and [all]
these things apply to this One who comes.

♦♦♦

(2.2) Well, we must consider that the same One is the king
of the whole of creation. Thus we read in Jdt 9.12: “Creator of
the waters and king of the whole of creation.” Yet in a special
way he is called “your king,” that is, the king of humankind, for
four reasons: (2.2.1) first, because of the likeness of his image;
(2.2.2) second, because of a special love ( dilectio ); (2.2.3) third,
because of a special care and concern; and (2.2.4) fourth, be-
cause of his fellowship with the human nature. 40

(2.2.1) First, I say that Christ is called “your king,” that is, the
king of humankind, because of the likeness of his image. You
know that we say that those who wear the decorations of the
king belong to the king in a special way, as if they bear his im-
age. And although every creature is God’s, still we say more spe-
cifically that there is only one creature of God that bears God’s
image, and this is the human being. Thus we read in Gn 1.26:
“Let us make the human being to 41 our image and likeness.” In
what does this likeness consist? I say it does not apply to a physi-
cal likeness, 42 but to the intelligible light of the mind: in God is
the originality of the intelligible light, and we have the sign of
this light. 43 Thus we read in Ps 4.7: “The light of your face, O

39. See note 24.

40. In 2.1 Thomas has mentioned the highness of Christ; now he is going to
emphasize how much he is with us.

41. In the Latin text we find the preposition ad, which indicated an ap-
proaching movement, or growth; we are on our way to becoming more and
more like God (as he was in Jesus Christ: Col 115); cf. ST I 4,3; I— II 3,2,4.

42. Jn 4.24 (“God is Spirit”), cited in ST I 3,1. This text has so great an au-
thority because it is Christ himself who says this, plainly.

43. Signum: sign or image, as on a seal-ring. ST III 5,4,2; cf. ST I 14,1, 16,5,3,
79,4, and 103,5,3 ( also 1 1 5»4> 2 ) ■


72


THOMAS AQUINAS


Lord, is imprinted ( signatus ) upon us”; humankind bears the
seal ( sigillum ) of this light. Hence this image is created in man.

But it happens that it is diminished and obscured through
sin. Ps 73.20 reads: “And you will bring their images back to
nothing.” 44 Because of this, God has sent his Son, in order to
reform this image that is deformed by sin. 45 Thus we apply our-
selves to be reformed in accordance with the Apostle who says:
“As you lay aside the old man, put on the new man, which is cre-
ated according to God and which is renewed in the image of
him who created him” [Eph 4.24]. And how are we renewed?
Surely, when we follow Christ. This image, which is deformed
in us, is perfect in Christ [cf. Eph 4.13]. Thus we ought to bear
the image of Christ, as we read in the Apostle’s Letter to the
Corinthians: “Just as we have borne an image of the earthly, let
us bear the image of the Heavenly” [1 Cor 15.49] and in today’s
Epistle reading: “Put on Christ” [Rom 13.14], which means “act
like Christ”; the perfection of the Christian life consists in this.

(2.2.2) Second, Christ is called “your king,” meaning the
king of humankind, because of a special love (amor ). 46 Usually
in a group of clerics a bishop who loves ( diligo ) some in a more
special way than the others, is called “their” bishop. God loves
( diligo ) everything that is, but he loves ( diligo ) humankind in a
more special way. Thus we read in Is 63.15: “Where is your [that
is, God’s] zeal and your strength, the multitude of your tender-
ness upon me?” 47

See that God loves ( diligo ) the human nature in a special
way. For we find different ranks of nature, but we do not find
that God raises an inferior nature to a higher nature, for in-
stance, a star to the rank of the sun, 48 or lower angels to the
rank of higher angels. But God has raised the human being up

44. ST I-II 85.

45. ST III 1,2. The fullness of what Thomas says here is expounded further
on by him, in III 46,3 and 49.

46. For Thomas’s use of the different terms for “love” see Sermon 01 Veniet
desideratus, note 39.

47. Verse 16 proceeds: “For you are our Father” (italics added).

48. The sun was considered the greatest heavenly body, on the basis of Scrip-
ture (and experience) .


SERMON 05


73


to the rank and equality of the angels. 49 Thus we read in Lk
20.36: “The children of the resurrection,” the holy ones, “will
be equal to angels.” So God has loved ( diligo ) human beings
in a special way. Hence we should not be ungrateful for such
a great love ( dilectio ), but we ought to direct our love (amor) en-
tirely to him. If a king loves ( diligo ) a poor person, that poor
person would consider himself miserable if he did not recom-
pense the king for his love (amor) as much as he can. Out of the
infinity of his love (amor) the Lord has said to humankind: “Be-
ing with the children of humankind is my delight” [Prv 8.31].
Hence we ought to recompense him for this love (amor ). 50

(2.2.3) Third, Christ is called “your king,” that is, the king of
humankind, because of a unique care and concern. It is true
that God cares for all things. As we read in Wis 12.13: “He cares
for all things.” There is not a thing so small that it is withdrawn
from divine providence, since just as the thing is from God, so
also the order is from God, and providence is the same as this
order. 51 Yet human beings are subject to divine providence in
a special way. Hence Ps 36.7-8 says: “You will save the people
and the yoked animals, Lord,” namely, through the salvation of
the body, “the children of humankind will hope in the protec-
tion of your wings.” And how do they hope? I say that not only
spiritual goods, but indeed even eternal goods are prepared
for them by God who leads them to eternal life [cf. 1 Cor 2.9];
God’s care for other creatures does not go this far. Thus the
Apostle says: “God’s care does not concern cattle” [1 Cor g.g] .
God does not leave an action of a man unexamined. 52 Thus we
read in Wis 12.18: “Yet, as the master, you judge sins with great
calmness.”

(2.2.4) Fourth, Christ is called “your king,” meaning, “the
king of humankind,” because of the fellowship with the human
nature. Thence we read in Dt 17.15: “You will not be able to
make someone of another nation king if he is not your broth-

49. Cf. ST I 108,8. 50. ST II-II 27,8.

51. ST I 22,1-2.

52. ST I — II 105,1,1: Thomas underlines that God’s love is beyond measure
and that his care is about our well-being: it is special care or intensive care, so to
speak; cf. Ps lgg, Mt 10.28-31.


74


THOMAS AQUINAS


er.” In this prophecy about Christ, the Lord determined that
he would appoint a king for the people. He did not will that he
would be of another nation, that is, of another nature, for then
he would not have been our brother. Hence the Apostle says
about Christ: “He has never made the angels his own, but the
seed of Abraham” [Heb 2.16]; in these words it becomes clear
that humankind is privileged over the angels. Christ is king
of the angels and yet he is a man, not an angel. 53 Angels even
serve humankind. 54 Thus the Apostle says: “All are helpers of
the Spirit” [Heb 1.14]. It was even necessary for Christ to be a
man in view of his saving work, as the Apostle says in Heb 2.11:
“The One who sanctifies and the one who is sanctified are tak-
en from one and the same.” By reason of this it necessarily fol-
lows that we are [his] brothers and sisters, where he says: “I will
make my name known to my brothers and sisters” [Heb 2.12].

(3) The manifestation of the coming and the identity of the
coming One are clear now. Next we will look at the benefit of
his coming, which is mentioned by the words: “He comes unto
you.” For his coming was not required for his own benefit, but
for ours. Well, he has come for four reasons: (3.1) first, he has
come to make the divine majesty known; (3.2) second, to recon-
cile us to God; (3.3) third, to free us from sin; and (3.4) fourth,
to give us eternal life.

(3.1) First, I say that Christ came to make the divine majes-
ty known to us. 55 A human being desires to the highest extent
to have knowledge of the truth, 56 and truth is especially con-
sidered as regards God. 57 The people, however, were in such a
great ignorance that they did not know what God was. Some


53. ST III 8,4, where Thomas cites Col 2.10 (and other texts from Scrip-
ture).

54. The angels are sent by God to serve and protect us: ST I 1 1 2-1 13.

55. Namely, by being born as a poor and weak boy in a poor country and
city: ST III 35,7,3.

56. Which is also God’s will, according to 1 Tm 2.4, although people can
hate the truth, too: ST I— II 29,5,2.

57. For God is in himself the truth as well as the first and highest truth: ST
I 16,5.


SERMON 05


75


said he would be a body; others have said that he did not care
for individual people. 58 And therefore the Son of God came to
teach us the truth. Thus he says: “For this I was born, for this I
have come into the world, that I may bear witness to the truth”
[Jn 18.37]. And in John we read: “No one has ever seen God”
[1 Jn 4.12], and because of this the Son of God has come, so
that you may come to know the truth [cf. Lk 1.4, Jn 8.32]. Our
ancestors were erring so much that they did not know divine
truth [cf. Gal 4.8, 2 Pt 2.12]. But by means of the coming of the
Son of God we are led back to the truth of the faith.

(3.2) Second, Christ has come to reconcile us to God. You
could say: “God was an enemy for me because of sin; so it was
better for me not to know him than getting to know him.” Be-
cause of this, Christ came not only to make the divine maj-
esty known to us, but also in order to reconcile us to God. 59
Therefore, the Apostle says in Eph 2.17: “And as he is coming
he will bring the good news of peace to those nearby and to
those far away.” And elsewhere the Apostle says: “We are rec-
onciled to God by the death of his Son” [Rom 5.10], and be-
cause of this the angels sang at the birth of Christ: “Glory to
God in the highest” [Lk 2.14]. And after the Resurrection the
Lord brought peace to his disciples, saying: “Peace be with you”
[Jn 20. tg, 21, 26]. 60

(3.3) Third, he is coming in order to free us from the slav-
ery of sin. 61 Hence the Apostle says: “Jesus Christ has come into
the world to save sinners” [1 Tm 1.15]. “One who sins is a slave
of sin” [Jn 8.34], and therefore we need what is said: “If the Son
sets you free, you will be truly free” [Jn 8.36]. And: “The Son of
man has come to seek and save what was lost” [Lk tg.to]. 62

58. These issues are discussed in ST I 3,1 resp. 22,2,4, 10 5 > 5 > an< ^ SCG III
113.

59. ST III 49,4,61,1,3.

60. This reference to John 20 is plausible only in the light of the second part
of Lk 2. 14, which Thomas does not quote here: “and peace on earth to the peo-
ple of good will.”

61. Through the Passion of Christ (ST III 48,4), for which the Incarnation
is a prerequisite.

62. Cf. ST III 1,3.


76


THOMAS AQUINAS


(3.4) Fourth, Christ is coming to give us a life of grace 63 in
the present and in the future a life of glory. Thus we read in
Jn 10.10: “I have come, so that they may have life,” namely, a
life of grace in the present; and since “a just person lives from
faith” [Gal 3.11], [he adds:] “and that they may have it more
abundantly,” namely, a life of glory in the future through love
(caritas ) . 64 Hence it says in John: “We know that we are trans-
ferred from death to life, because we love ( diligo ) our brothers
and sisters” [1 Jn 3.14], so let us live through good works. Like-
wise, we read injn 17.3: “This is eternal life, that they know you,
the true God, and him whom you have sent, Jesus Christ.”

Now also the benefit of the One who is coming is clear.

❖

(4) But how does he come? I say that he has come as some-
one mild or tamed, the meaning of which is manifold. As we
read in Prv 19.12: “The anger of the king will be as the roar-
ing of a lion, and his gaiety will be as the dew over vegetation.”
Mildness is anger that is mitigated. 65 God is coming with mild-
ness now, but in the future 66 he will come with anger. There-
fore, Is 30.27 says: “Behold, the name of the Lord will come
from afar, as if it were his burning rage.” But Jb 35.15 reads:
“Now he does not bring rage along nor is he zealous to punish
very heavily.” For now Christ is coming with mildness, and we
ought to receive him with mildness. Thus it is said by St. James
in 1.21: “Receive with mildness the word sown in [you] that can
save your souls.” 67

See that we can consider the mildness of Christ in four as-
pects: (4.1) first, in his way of life; (4.2) second, in his correc-


63. See note 8.

64. Love is a unifying force (ST I 20,1,3); it aims at unifying the lover with
the beloved. The object of love ( caritas ) is the ultimate end (ST I— II 19,10) or
the eternal good (II— II 83,15), i.e., God.

65. Attributing mildness to God in this sense can, therefore, only be under-
stood as a metaphor: ST I 1 ,g and 21,1,1.

66. Again, Thomas is placing Advent, the beginning of a new era, in the
broader context of the history of salvation (i.e., the end, the Last Judgment).
Also in ST III 36,1,3.

67. Cf. ST II— II 157,4,1.


SERMON 05


77


tion; (4.3) third, in his gracious reception of people; and (4.4)
fourth, in his Passion.

(4.1) First, I say, we can see the mildness of Christ in his way
of life, because his whole way of life was pacific [cf. Jas 3.17];
he has not sought issues for disputes, but he has shunned all
the things that could lead to a quarrel. Therefore, he has said:
“Learn from me, because I am meek and humble of heart” [Mt
11.29]. And in this we ought to imitate him. 68 As Christ goes up
to Jerusalem he is sitting on a colt, which is a mild animal —
not on a horse 69 — and he has been a subjugated son. 70 Thus we
ought to be mild. Therefore, it says in Sir 3.19: “Son, make your
works perfect in mildness and you will spread your glory among
the people.”

(4.2) Likewise, the mildness of Christ appears in his correc-
tion. He has borne many abusive words from his persecutors;
still he did not respond with anger or agitation to them [cf. Is
53.7]. About this it says: “(Ride on triumphant) for the sake of
truth and mildness” [Ps 45.5] . 71 Augustine says in an exposition
of this text that “as Christ spoke, truth was acknowledged; as
he answered his enemies patiently, mildness was praised.” Ps
8g.io (Vg) reads: “Mildness conies over us, and we will be ad-
monished.” And in Is 42.2 it says: “Neither did he raise his voice
nor did he shout.”

(4.3) Third, the mildness of Christ appears in his gracious
reception of people. Some people do not know how to receive
with mildness. But Christ received sinners benignly and ate with
them; he allowed them to his banquets or went to theirs, so that
the Pharisees were amazed and said: “Why does your master eat

68. Mildness is mentioned as one of the twelve fruits of the Holy Spirit in Gal
5.22-23; cf. ST I— II 70,3, also 69,3,3; ^ moves us with reverence towards God.

69. In biblical times as well as in the 13th century, horses were used by sol-
diers (see Ex 14.23, Prv 21.31), and only the rich could afford them (see 1 Kgs
5.6; cf. Eccles 10.6-7).

70. Cf. Lk 2.51. In the text Thomas quotes Mt 21.5: filius subjugalis, where
these words refer to the young animal on which Jesus rode.

71. Still in verses 4 to 6 the Psalmist speaks warlike language. Yet a Psalm is
a sacred text; it contains a deeper, spiritual meaning. E.g., in his commentary
on Psalm 45 (44) Thomas explains, referring to Eph 6.17, that the sword men-
tioned in verse 4 is the sword of the Spirit, the word of God.


78


THOMAS AQUINAS


with tax collectors?” [Mt 9.11] So he was mild. 72 Therefore, the
Church can say about him what is written in 2 Srn 22.36: “Your
mildness has made me many.” 73

(4.4) Fourth, the mildness of Christ appears in his Passion,
because “as a lamb he has gone to the Passion” [cf. Is 53.7, Acts
8.32] and “although he was cursed, he did not curse” [1 Pt
2.23]. Yet he could have delivered all to death. 74 Hence he says
injer 11.19: “I am as a lamb that is carried to the block.” St. An-
drew 75 has imitated him truly well in mildness, for when he was
nailed to a cross and the people wanted to take him down from
the cross, he continued to pray and asked them not to take him
down from the cross, but to follow him in the Passion. Thus it is
fulfilled in him that “this most meek man has appeared among
the people.” 76 Mildness enables us to inherit a happy world.
Therefore, we read in Mt 5.5: “Happy the meek, for they shall
inherit the earth.”

May we be deemed worthy that this may be fulfilled for us by
the One who with the Father and the Holy Spirit, et cetera.

72. Thus Thomas is advocating for a mild approach to sinners in pastoral
work; his audience consists of preachers-to-be. Also in Sermon 14 Attendite afal-
sis, in the Collatio in sero.

73. Mildness is attractive; a mild Church will attract people, will grow (cf.
note 68).

74. Thomas does not mention this among the ways in which Christ could
have foiled his crucifixion in ST III 47,1.

75. See note 1.

76. Responsory verse 2, in the third Nocturne of the Feast of St. Andrew: Vir
iste mitissimus in populo apparuit: sanctitate autem et gratia plenus.


SERMON 06

CELUM ET TERRA TRANSIBUNT


Sermon on the First Sunday of Advent 1

Another Sermon of Brother Thomas of Aquino
Given on the Same Sunday in the House of the Preachers
at Paris before the University of Paris


Luke 21.33: Heaven and earth will pass.


SUMMARY


Prothema


a


eaven and earth will pass” [Lk 21.33]. Dearest breth-
ren, how great the delight, how great the pleasure, how
great the sweetness that is in the heavenly words of wis-
dom! This is even obvious in the words of the natural philoso-
pher, 2 who writes in Book 10 of Ethics about created knowledge:
“All delights are at some point cut off. The greatest, however, is
the delight that is in accordance with the operation of wisdom,
and the most delightful operation is the one that is in accord-


1. This sermon dates from the first Parisian period (1252-1256). Only sum-
maries of this sermon have been preserved. The point of departure for this
translation is the “M” text, Milano Ambrosiana A11 sup. (which consists of a Pro-
thema, parts I and II). Text version “P,” Paris BnF lat 14595 ( no Prothema, parts I,
II, and III), is referred to in the notes and in the text where indicated.

2. Thomas usually refers to Aristotle as Philosophus, “the Philosopher.” In
other words, it is not a specifically Jewish or Christian, but a universal insight:
every right-thinking person, even a (wise) pagan, can know it. This principle is
worked out by Thomas in Part I where he first cites Aristotle and concludes with
Scripture.


79


80


THOMAS AQUINAS


ance with the operation of wisdom.” Also the theological phi-
losopher 3 writes in Wis 7.8 that he “loved ( diligo ) it more than
gold and outward appearance”; “it” is the heavenly wisdom
about which we speak.

Because of this we will ask, at the beginning of this homily,
our Lord Jesus Christ, the fountain of all wisdom [cf. Sir 1.5],
who is, according to St. Dionysius 4 in Book 6 part c of The Hier-
archy of the Angels, the principal instructor of all heavenly spirits
and devout souls, to illumine our understanding, to kindle our
hearts, and to make my mouth eloquent for the honor of his
name in accordance with the Gospel teaching and the edifica-
tion of our souls.


part 1

“Heaven and earth will pass” [Lk 21.33], et cetera. In these
words 5 the situation of the just and the unjust is described ac-
cording to a spiritual knowledge. Our most providential and
meek Savior commended these words 6 — out of care for his
sheep’s salvation in faith [cf. Jn 10.13] — to his disciples and in
them to all believers for serious attention to the Last Judgment,
without mentioning the term, because it is clear. (1) By the
noun “heaven” the marvelous loftiness of the heavenly man is
mentioned, and (2) by the noun “earth” the deserved lowliness
of the worldly person is mentioned, and (3) by the verb “will
pass” he carefully refers to a distinctive quality of each. 7

3. Only here does Thomas refer to the writer of Wisdom, allegedly Solomon,
as philosophus theologicus, as distinct from the philosophus naturalis.

4. I.e., not St. Dionysius “the Great” of Alexandria (c. 200-c. 265), Pope
St. Dionysius (f268), or St. Denis, patron saint of France (1258), but someone
whom we call Pseudo-Dionysius: for a long time people thought that this author
from the late 5th century who called himself Dionysius the Areopagite was the
same person as the Dionysius in Acts 17.34. This identification contributed to
the great spread and authority of his works.

5. P adds: “the beautiful but deformed variety of’; it seems that it is beau-
tiful because the just and the unjust are where they deserve to be (as Thomas
says in Part II), and yet it is deformed since God made all people to be just [cf.
Rom 3.26].

6. P adds: “like a most merciful shepherd.”

7. In Thomas’s time as a magister there was a vehement controversy about the


SERMON 06


81


(1) So, as he describes the marvelous loftiness and the wor-
thy eminence of the heavenly man, he calls him “heaven.” Yet
we must consider that the heavenly man is signified by the noun
“heaven” for four reasons:

(1.1) Heaven is of a great brightness, 8 as the Philosopher dem-
onstrates in Book 2 of On Heaven and Earth. Thus it is shown
that the just man ought to be full of light by heavenly wisdom,
as we read in Sir 24.4: “I have made (my home) in heaven, so
that perfect light may rise.” 9

(1.2) It has a splendid appearance, as the Philosopher dem-
onstrates in Book 2 of On Heaven and Earth. Thus it is shown
that the just man ought to be like a circle by a wide mercy,
or like an orbit by a broad devotion and perfect love ( caritas
perfecta ). 10 “I alone have gone round the canopy of heaven,” 11
says eternal Wisdom in Sir 24.5. 12

question of whether the world would be eternal due to the Averroist interpreta-
tion of Aristotle’s position on this, which was taken on by philosophers in Paris.
Thomas, reasoning as a theologian, responded that creatures cannot be from
eternity (only God is ab aeterno, according to Scripture) and yet that as soon as
they are made they remain forever (in aetemum) in a way ( secundum aliquid),
namely, insofar as God has made them as such. Thomas cites Eccl 3.14 among
others in this context (cf. ST I 46, 65,1,1, 104,4).

8. P continues: “Thus the heavenly man is very bright by reason of Gospel
wisdom radiating from God, as we read in Sir 24.4: ‘I have made my home in
heaven, so that perfect light may rise.’ ‘In heaven,’ that is, in holy men; in them
the eternal Spirit of the Father kindled the spiritual ‘light’ of wisdom.”

Also, in what follows, P has left out any (explicit) reference to Aristotle.

9. P reads “the heavens” (in celis), plural, and adds: “‘In the heavens’; this
means: the eternal Wisdom of the Father has kindled the spiritual light of wis-
dom in holy men (in sanctis viris).”

10. The vault of heaven is circular. The mercy and the devotion of the just
must be like a circle: perfect and spreading as wide as possible. P speaks like-
wise, leaving out the reference to Aristotle, and, instead of “a wide mercy,” it
reads, “a wide compassion ( compassio ) and a devout mercy (misericordia ) .”

Wisdom (section 1) corresponds to love ( caritas , ST II— II 45 intr.), and love is
the first movement of the will toward what is good (ST I 20, 1 ) . Mercy is a virtue,
closely connected with love and justice (ST II— II 30,3; cf. ST I 20-21).

1 1. P ends instead with: add: ‘I, the Wisdom of the Father,’ by dwelling

with him through grace.”

12. Section 1.2 echoes Ps 19.7 (cf. Thomas’s commentary on Vulgate-Psalm
i8nn.i-3),Ps 45.5, and Dn 12.3.


82


THOMAS AQUINAS


(1.3) It sets in motion, 13 as the Philosopher shows in Book 8
of Physics. Thus it is shown that the just man ought to be moved
always by a spiritual carefulness. 14 Jb 38.37 reads: “Who will nar-
rate the heavens’ thoughts, and who will put to sleep what they
contain?” 15

(1.4) It is high 16 in location, as the sight and the effect of it
prove. By this it is pointed out that the just man ought to excel in
holiness 17 by eminence. Because, as we read in Sir 43.1: “The fir-
mament of highness” — that is, the highness of the firmament —
“is his beauty, (the sight of heaven in a vision of glory).” 18

PART 11

(2) The worldly man is absolutely not comparable to him; he
is compared to the earth, 19 [as follows:]

(2.1) On the ground of his capacity of understanding, as we
read in Gn 1.2: “Darkness was over the face of the abyss. The
earth was void and empty.” 20

(2.2) On the ground of the weakness of avarice, 21 as we read
in Col 3.2: “Taste the things that are above, not those upon

13. P adds ( ordinatissimum ): “and orders to the highest extent” or: “and puts
all things in order, precisely.” P continues: “Thus we always find the just man
moved by carefulness and ordered by honesty.”

14. The virtue of diligentia implies caring, being thoughtful, attentive, con-
siderate, precise, and solicitous; cf. ST II— II 54,1,1.

1 5. P adds: “And furthermore in the same place we read: ‘Do you know the
arrangement ( ordo ) of heaven?’” [Jb 38.33].

16. P reads: “the highest.”

17. Holiness in human beings is serving God in everything: ST II— II 81,8,
which Christ did to the full. Therefore, he became the source of salvation (cf.
ST III 72,4,2) and of holiness for the whole Church: ST III 83,3,2. For God’s
holiness see ST I 36,1,1: in divinis the word “holy” signifies the purity of the di-
vine goodness.

18. P quotes another verse instead, namely, Jb 35.5 (not verse 25 as the Lat-
in text reads): “Look up to heaven; it is higher than you.”

19. P leaves out the first sentence. It reads: “After the wondrous loftiness of
the heavenly man thus described briefly by the word ‘heaven,’ the little value
of worldly man follows by the word ‘earth.’ Now, we must know that the unjust
man is compared to the earth.”

20. Cf. also ST II— II 4,2sc and 4,4,1 and 171,4,2, with reference to 1 Cor
13.10-12: we will understand as the perfect comes.

21. Avaritia, one of the seven capital sins: ST I— II 84,3-4; II— II 118.


SERMON 06


83


the earth” and Ps 44.25 says: “Our stomach is stuck to the
ground.” 22

(2.3) On the ground of the aridity of wickedness [cf. Jn 4.10-
15], 23 as we read in Gn 1.10: “And God called the arid land
‘earth.’”

(2.4) On the ground of the immutability of the soul, or of
the life, 24 or opinion, as we find it in Eccl 1.4: “The earth tru-
ly stands forever.” And this is preceded by: “The generation” of
the good ones “passes, and the generation” of the just ones “ar-
rives” [ibid.]. 26 Why? Because an evil person is not led in the
right direction, nor is he changed. 26

(3) 27 Well, now that the most deserved disdain toward the
worldly man and the marvelous loftiness of the just have been
described, the quality of the way of life of each of them must be
distinguished, in view of the verb “to pass {transire)” Indeed, we
must note that passing is said (3.1) of the just in a different way
than (3.2) of the unjust.

(3.1) For the just passes on,

(3.1.1) firstly, from sin to justice, 28 as it says in Is 45.14: “Lofty
men” and proud sinners “will pass over to you, and they will be
yours.”

(3.1.2) He passes, secondly, by advancing from virtue to vir-


22. P omits Ps 44.25.

23. P adds: “For such people are barren and arid.” Malice is one of the
causes of sin (ST I— II 78) as well as a consequence of sin (ST I— II 85,3: one of
the four wounds, as Bede says) and leading to more sinning. On malice as such:
ST I— II 18-21.

24. The soul is the life-giving principle in the human body (cf. ST I 70,3,2,
76,1 and 8).

25. Without Thomas’s interpretative additions the Scripture text says: “Gen-
erations go and come.”

26. P gives a shorter version here: “Fourthly, by reason of the immutability of
his resolution. For such people are not moved towards penance, as we read in
Eccl 1:4: ‘The earth stands forever.’”

On stubbornness ( pertinacia ) , the opposite of the virtue of steadfastness/per-
severance: ST II— II 132,5 and 138,2.

27. This last part of the homily is preserved only in P.

28. On the cardinal virtue of justice: ST II— II 57-122. God’s justice: ST I


84


THOMAS AQUINAS


tue, 29 as it says in Sir 29.26: “Pass, stranger; prepare the table,”
meaning, “prepare your conscience for the heavenly spouse”
[cf. Prv g. 1—6] . 30

(3.1.3) He passes, thirdly, from labor in the present to
the eternal refreshment, as it says in Ps 66.12: “We have
come through fire and water, and you have led us out into
refreshment.” 31

(3.2) Yet the unjust passes,

(3.2.1) first of all, from innocence to guilt, 32 as Sirach 28
reads: “He passes from justice to sin” [Sir 26.19 or 26.28].

(3.2.2) He passes, secondly, from guilt into guilt, 33 as Prv
14.16 has it: “A wise man fears and turns away from evil; (a fool-
ish man passes on and is self-confident).” 34

(3.2.3) He passes, thirdly, from guilt into eternal punish-
ment, as Jb 36.12 reads: “If they will not listen, they will pass
through the sword,” namely, through eternal punishment. 35

❖

So in view of the short description of the marvelous loftiness
of the heavenly man in the noun “heaven,” also in view of the
very well deserved disdain toward the worldly man in the noun
“earth,” and in view of the difference of the life of these two in
respect of the verb “to pass,” let us apply ourselves to renounc-
ing earthly things and to loving ( amo ) heavenly things [cf. Col
3.1], in such a way that we disdain the worldly life and embrace
the heavenly life, that we may pass over from labor to rest [cf.
Heb 4.10], from the world to glory,

which may he grant us, et cetera.


29. ST I— II 63,2-4.

30. The image of a laid or clean table as a reflection of a person’s readiness
to receive someone is also found in 2 Chr 13.1 1 and Ezek 23.41.

31. Latin: refrigerium. Cf. Wis 4.7, Is 28.1 2, Jer 6.16, Acts 3.20.

32. A consequence of voluntarily turning away from God; cf. ST I 48,5; I— II
21,2; II— II 34,2.

33. ST I— II 75,4 and 84,1-2; cf. also note 23.

34. Thomas cites this verse twice in the ST: when he discusses the question
whether an accused person may defend himself with cunning and guile (I— II
69,2) and when he distinguishes between the vice of fearlessness and the virtue
of strength (II— II 126: the quotation is in 126,1,2).

35. Since the ST is not finished, there is not a section on the last things. For
the distinctions of punishments see SCG III 141-145.


SERMON 07
ECCE EGO MITTO

Sermon on the Second Sunday of Advent 1

Matthew 11.10: Behold, I send my angel before your face.


FRAGMENT


ehold, I send my angel before your face” [Mt 11.10].
These words are taken from the last chapter of Mala-
chi [3.1]. In these words three aspects of the gracious
arrival of the Savior are described: (1) the marvelous estima-
tion of God the Father, (2) the obliging ardor of the precursor,
and (3) the marvelous kindness (benignitas) of the Savior. The
first, where it says: “Behold, I send”; the second, where it says:
“my angel”; the third, where it says: “before your face.”

So note, regarding all these things, that, just as the Savior
was sent, 2 so also the precursor was sent to us by the Father
through the commission of an angel, not through nature. 3 For
they have truly been our angels who were sent to us in the name
of God, in order to prepare the ways 4 that lead to the heaven-
ly dwelling places. Gn 28.12 reads: “Jacob saw the ladder and
God’s angels ascending and descending on it.” This was [as fol-
lows:] (a) In order to disclose the secrets of the decrees of the
divine will, “the Law was issued by the angels at the hand of a
mediator,” as it says in Gal 3.19. (b) In order to fulfill their duty

1. Probably given on the gth of December 1 268, at Milan.

2. Lk 1.26-38; cf. ST III 30.

3. John the Baptist: his coming was through a gracious act of God: Lk 1.10-
20, 24-25; cf. ST III 27,1 and 6.

4. Is 40.3, Mk 1.2-3. O n icons and in other art John the Baptist himself is
sometimes depicted with wings of an angel; he is pre-eminently the messenger
( angelos ) of God; cf. ST III 38,1-2.


85


86


THOMAS AQUINAS


concerning the divine things coming down from heaven, “an-
gels came to him and served him,” as Mt 4.11 reads. 5 (c) In or-
der to render examples and proofs of spiritual perfection, “the
angels of God had gone to meet Jacob, and when he had seen
them, he said: ‘These are the encampments of God’”; Gn 32,
33.t2. 6


5. The mission of the angels was completed as Christ began to reveal him-
self; mediators were not needed anymore. What had been announced by angels
and prophets and expected by the people for ages (cf. Mt 13.16-17) now be-
came true (cf. ST I— II 98,3; II— II 172,2).

6. The words quoted are from Gn 32.1-3.


SERMON 08

PUER JESUS

Sermon on the First Sunday after Epiphany 1


Luke 2.52: The boy Jesus advanced in age and wisdom
and in grace with God and the people.


part 1 : Prothema


u


he boy jesus advanced in age and wisdom and in
grace with God and the people” [Lk 2.52]. All the
things together that the Lord has done or undergone
in the flesh are salutary lessons and examples. Hence we read
this in Jn 13.15: “I have given you an example, that whatever I
have done you may do likewise.” 2 And because there is not any
age from which the way of salvation is absent — and to the high-
est extent this applies to the years in which one comes to dis-
cernment — the adolescence of Christ is made an example for
adolescents. 3 Growth and progress are proper to adolescents.
Therefore, the progress of Christ is made an example for ado-
lescents.


1 . Since we find many texts from the Catena Aurea in this sermon, we pre-
sume that it was given in the second period in which Thomas taught in Paris
(1268-1272).

2. Cf. ST II— II 174,6 (last sentence of the corpus ); III 37,1,2 and 46,3 (refer-
ring to 1 Pt 2.21). Also SCG IV 36 ( Nihil . . . aut nobis imitandum fuit, quoting Mt
1 1.29 andjn 13.15) and 54 (. . . necessarium fuit homini . . . a Deo humanato et doc-
trinam et exempla virtutis acciperet: ]n 13.15). Whereas the examples which Aristo-
tle gives in his logical works should not be given much attention: ST I 67,2,2.

3. Thomas’s audience consists, for the major part, of students. He presents
the boy Jesus as the example for their lives: following him in everything is the
road that leads to salvation.


87


88


THOMAS AQUINAS


But, to begin, let us ask God to enable us to say something
about the progress of Christ for the honor of God and for the
salvation of our souls.


part 2: Sermo

“The boy Jesus,” et cetera. If we want to consider these words
carefully, we will find in them four progresses of Christ, name-
ly, (1) the progress of age in regard to the body, (2) the progress
of wisdom in regard to the intellect, (3) the progress of grace
with God, and (4) the progress also of grace in view of his liv-
ing together with the people.

❖

(o) Truly, all these progresses are amazing, yes, even full of
astonishment and amazement. (0.1) For we must be amazed
that eternity advances in age, for the Son of God is eternity 4 5
and from eternity. Psalm 117 and Psalm tig: “In eternity, Lord,
your truth remains” [Ps ttg.go, 160; cf. 117.2].

(0.2) Likewise, we must be amazed that the truth advances
in wisdom, because the progress of wisdom is knowledge of the
truth, whereas Christ is himself the truth, as we read in Jn 14.6:
“I am the way, the truth, and the life.” 6 (0.3) Likewise we must
be amazed that the One from whom grace originates advanc-
es in grace; Christ is the One who renders grace. Thus we read
in Jn 1.17: “Grace and truth came through Christ.” 6 (0.4) Like-
wise we must be amazed that the One who exceeds all people
advances with the people. Even more, the people ought to ad-
vance in grace with him. Ps 113.4 says: “The Highest is he above
all the nations.”

How, then, would Christ advance in these respects? I say


4. Insofar as Christ is God, what is said in ST I 3 applies to him. Since God
is perfectly one, he is what he has (ST I 3,4 and 6): God is good and goodness,
eternal and eternity, et cetera.

5. Alsojn 18.37-38; cf. the quotation from Psalm 119 in 0.1. By reason of
the hypostatic union, the man Jesus Christ shared in God’s omniscience (ST III
10,2, 11,1).

6. ST I 73,1,1; III 2, 11, 27,5 ( Christus autern est principium gratiae, secundum di-
vinitatem quidem auctoritative, secundum humanitatem vero instrumentaliter) , 38,3.


SERMON 08


89


that if we want to consider this properly, immediately the rea-
son regarding his progress in age comes to our mind: (ad o.i)
the eternal Son of God willed to become temporal, so that he
could advance in age. Is 9.5 says: “A little child is born unto us.”
If he is born as a little child, why then would he not have grown
as a little child does? 7

(ad 0.2-4) The other progresses of Christ contain a greater
difficulty. Christ took on the full human nature: according to
the flesh he was born as a little child, but not according to the
soul. For, from the beginning of his conception, his most bless-
ed soul was full of every grace and truth, because it was con-
nected with God. Thus we read in Jn 1.14: “We have seen his
glory, the glory as of the only-begotten Son of the Father, full of
grace and truth.” He was full of every grace and truth because
he was the only-begotten Son of God. Well, from the beginning
of the conception he was the only-begotten Son. Hence from
the very beginning he was full of grace and truth and perfect
in virtue. 8 Jer 31.22: “A woman will encompass a man”; not in
age, but as for the perfection of the mind.

But in what is meant by advancing in wisdom and grace? We
must say that someone is said to advance in wisdom, not only
when he acquires a greater wisdom, but also when the wisdom
in him is more evident. It is true that Christ from the begin-
ning of his conception was full of wisdom and grace, but he
has not shown it from the beginning, but at an age when others
usually show it. In that case we speak of advancing in wisdom,
not in the absolute sense of the word, but in view of the effect
through which he advanced amidst other people. 9


7. Thomas emphasizes that Christ had a real human body. And since he is
living in this world as a true man (homo), he is aging as time goes by. Within the
framework of the mystery of the Incarnation, this consequence is as such not
that amazing; cf. ST III 5,1-2.

8. ST III 7,12.

9. Concerning Jesus we say “advancing in wisdom” not because he advances
in wisdom as such (through the Incarnation he is already full of it from the very
beginning) , but because the wisdom that was already present in him is revealed
to us in his works as time goes by more and more, which looks, from the out-
side, like a progression, growth; cf. ST III 7,12,3.


90


THOMAS AQUINAS


If he had willed to show his wisdom when he was seven years
of age, people could have doubted the truth of the assumed hu-
man nature. 10 And because of this, Christ wanted to be similar
to others. Thus the Apostle says in Phil 2.7: “He has emptied
himself, taking the form of a slave, being made in the likeness
of men.” Christ has made himself little by taking on our little-
ness, in order to show that he truly was little: “He was made
in the likeness of men.” Bar 3.38 reads: “He is seen on earth,
and he has lived with the people.” At the time when a sign of
wisdom normally appears for the first time in a human being,
Christ manifested his wisdom for the first time, namely, when
he was twelve years of age: thus little by little. He did not will to
show his [full] wisdom, so that the truth of the human nature
in him would be acknowledged and in order to give us an ex-
ample of advancing in wisdom. 11

So, fourfold, as was said, is Christ’s progress, namely, of (1)
age, (2) wisdom, (3) grace, and (4) the human life.

(1) Let us first take a look at the progress of Christ’s age,
which is physical. It is set as an example for us so that we may
advance in the age of body and mind as he did, because the
progress of age in the body is empty if there is no progress in
the soul as well. Therefore, we discuss the progress of Christ’s
age and of his wisdom and of his grace in one and the same ser-
mon. Because if someone does not advance through a progress
of the mind together with the progress of the body, four improp-
er things would follow: (1.1) it would be monstrous, (1.2) damag-
ing, (1.3) burdensome or troublesome, and (1.4) dangerous.

(1.1) First, I say, advancing in age of the body and not of the
mind is monstrous. 12 A human being is composed of a soul and

10. If Jesus had shown the fullness of his wisdom from the beginning, he
would have seemed super-human or not human at all, only divine (ST III 40,3).
Cf., e.g., also the reactions of the Lycaonian crowds to the healing of a crippled
man by the Apostle Paul, in Acts 14.10-13.

1 1 . Cf. ST III 24,3: insofar as Jesus Christ was God, he cannot be an example
for human beings as for their growth in wisdom.

12. The Latin term is monstruosus. That it is not good is not a moral judg-
ment here (as in I— II 21,1,1), but a biological qualification.


SERMON 08


91


a body, just as the body is composed of various members. But
imagine that a body would grow in one member and would be
little in the other members. This is monstrous. Likewise, when
someone is a man according to the body and not according
to the mind. Because of this the Apostle says in t Cor 13.11:
“When I was a little child, I understood as a little child, I spoke
as a little child; but now that I have become a man, I have left
the things that belong to a little child.” Little children think of
playing and the like. 13

It is true that the Lord ordered that we be like little chil-
dren, saying, in Mt 18.3: “Unless you will be converted and be-
come like little children, you will not enter into the Kingdom
of the heavens.” There is something in little children that we
ought to preserve, because little children are not wicked and
they are humble. But there is another thing in little children
that we should get rid of: the lack of wisdom. 14 Because of this
the Apostle says in 1 Cor 14.20: “Do not become little children
with your mind, but be little children in respect of wickedness.”
We ought to think with the mind of the perfect man [Col 1.28,
Eph 4. 13], 15 so that insofar as we advance in the age of the body
we advance in the age of the mind. If only one of the feet of a
man is growing and not the other one, he focuses all his atten-
tion on a doctor, so that the other foot may grow in the same
way. Likewise should you, whose body grows in age, focus all
your attention in such a way that also your mind grows in age. 16

(1.2) Furthermore, growing in age of the body and not of
the mind is damaging. Someone who had the time to acquire

13. Thomas implies that students in his audience must not behave like little
children, but apply themselves to their studies. He comes back to this explicitly
in 1.3 and 1.4.

14. Also, e.g., intemperance or excess; cf. ST II— II 142,2,1.

1 5. Which is a human being led by wisdom and love ( caritas ) : ST II— II 1 84, 1 ;
III 39,3 (cit. Col 1.28; cf. Eph 4.13).

16. As the body grows without extra effort, we must focus our attention on
Christus medicus, who makes us healthy in body and especially in the soul. Peo-
ple, however, tend to focus their attention on the less important parts of the
body; cf. 1 Cor 12.23 ST II— II 145,2. Elsewhere Thomas underlines that the
well-being of the soul is connected with the well-being of the body (ST I 75,3,
76), and that, therefore, we should also take good care of our body; see esp. II-
11 25,5.


92


THOMAS AQUINAS


a great thing and wasted it, doing nothing [cf. Lk ig.16], would
consider this a great damage. It is with a market vendor in the
time of trading, who believes that then much profit can be
gained, as with a student who believes that listening to a lec-
ture is useful: if he lets that time pass by, he believes that he has
damaged himself a lot.

Time is given to you, that you may not gain those cheap
things, but God and heavenly goods, which no one can grasp.
Hence the Apostle says in t Cor 2.9: “eye has not seen, and ear
has not heard, neither did it come up in the heart of a man,
what” you, “God,” have “prepared for those who love ( diligo )”
you. 17 And because of this, Sir 14.14 says: “Let even a small piece
of the good gift not escape you,” that is: a part of the good time.

And Solomon says in Prv 5.9-10: “that you may not give your
honor to others and your years to the cruel one; that foreign-
ers may not take their fill of your strength, and that your labors
may not be in a strange house.”

(a) “That you may not give your honor to others.” Honor is
given to a man in war, when it is given to him because he tri-
umphs over his enemies. Such honor is given to you, namely,
if you triumph over the world [1 Jn 5.4], the flesh [2 Cor 10.3-
5], and the devil [Jas 4.7; cf. 2 Tm 4.7-8]. But when you give
your natural strength for service to the devil, although it is giv-
en that you may triumph over him, then you give your honor to
a stranger.

(b) Solomon continues: “that you may not give the years” of
your youth “to the cruel one,” that is, the devil; he is cruel, be-
cause he will not give you rest 18 no matter how well you serve
him. Thus we read in Jer 16.13: “You will serve strange gods,
who will not give you rest.”

(c) “And that your labors may not be in a stranger’s house.”
Maybe you do good works, in which you have labored. If you are
converted to the Lord, those labors will be in your house. Yet
if you are not converted to the Lord, your labors, that is, your

17. ST I— II 5,5, and II— II 28,3.

18. Thomas alludes to Mt 11.28-30 (“Learn from me and I will give you
rest”) and Jas 4.1 and Rom 6.19-20, et cetera: following your own desires re-
sults in wanting always more; cf. Jn 8.34.


SERMON 08


93


good works, will be in a stranger’s house, because the saints in
the heavenly homeland ( patria ) will rejoice in your good works,
but not you. 19 Hence it says in Rv 3.11: “Hold on to what you
have, that someone else may not take your crown.” 20

(1.3) 21 Furthermore, growing in age of the body and not in
mind is troublesome. But you may say: “I am a young man; I
want to play in my youth; when I am an old man, I will convert
myself to the Lord.” Surely, thus you commit yourself to great
labor. Doing something is easy for someone if he is accustomed
to it from his youth. 22 And this is clear, because it is easy for
a farmer to work on the land, because he accustomed himself
to it, whereas it is difficult for you. If you accustom yourself to
doing your will and live in sins, either you despair about eter-
nal life 23 or you preserve yourself with great labor. Therefore,
Solomon says: “The adolescent will walk on his path, and when
he gets older, he will not turn away from it” [Prv 22.6]. 24 And
Jeremiah says: “It is good for a man when he carries the yoke
of the Lord from his adolescence” [Lam 3.27], 25 because such
a man can raise himself above himself from what is easy. And
therefore Christ has given us the example of working well from
a young age, because when he was twelve years of age, he grew
in wisdom [Lk 2.42].

19. The saints in heaven rejoice in every good work, but the one addressed
will not rejoice in his own good works, because he will not benefit from them;
they are not done in the right context, i.e., for the right master. What Thomas
calls “your house” is God’s house in view of Eph 2.19.

20. See Thomas’s explanation of this text in ST I 23,6,1, where he distin-
guishes between divine predestination and merit.

2 1 . Throughout the Serrno, but especially in this part we hear the echo of
Sir 5 1 .13-3 1 : relentlessly seeking wisdom, from the very beginning of the (life)
journey, and the benefits of it, the Temple, joy, praise to the teacher/Teacher,
et cetera.

22. “What’s learnt in the cradle lasts till the tomb”; in Latin: in teneris con-
suescere multum est.

23. Despairing about eternal life is something we should never do in view of
our faith in the Almighty and Merciful: ST II— II 14,3,1; cf. I— II 62,3,2 (where
Thomas refers to the Crucified through 1 Cor 1.25).

24. In the ST Thomas cites this verse in the consideration of baptism of in-
fants: ST III 68,9.

25. Cited in ST II— II 189,5, on t ^ ie question whether boys should be admit-
ted to religious life.


94


THOMAS AQUINAS


(1.4) Moreover, it is dangerous when someone grows in age
of body if he does not grow in age of mind. The Lord demands
from all people an account. Thus we read in the Gospel, in Mt
18.23: “The Kingdom of the heavens is like a man who demand-
ed an account from his household.”

God has given you time, that you may serve him. But it is said
in Jb 24.23: “He has given him time, and he abuses it in pride.”
The Lord will require an account from you regarding how you
spent your time. In Is 49.4 we read: “And I said: ‘Without a rea-
son and in vain I have consumed my strength.’” He consumes
his strength in vain and without a reason who passes his time
doing useless things. And therefore Is 49.4 continues: “Hence
my judgment is with the Lord.” And Solomon says in Eccl 11.9:
“Rejoice, young man, because of your adolescence. Know that
for these things the Lord will lead you to judgment.” But is that
judgment not light? No! Because Is 65.20 says: “A boy of a hun-
dred years of age,” that is, a sinner, “will be cursed.” Hence we
read in Bar 3.11: “You have grown old in a strange land; you are
counted among these who go down into hell.” But, although
you deserve it [hell], do not despair about God’s mercy. 26

So the first point of attention is this: that we may grow in
mind as we grow in age. But how does a human being grow in
mind? Certainly when he grows “in wisdom and grace.” And al-
though in the verse that is the point of departure for this hom-
ily, wisdom is mentioned before grace, we will nevertheless
speak about grace first, since “the beginning of wisdom is the
fear of the Lord,” 27 according to Sir 1.14.

(2) Grace is something hidden, because it is in the soul. Hid-
den causes are not known except through manifest effects. Well,
among all the effects none is as manifest as peace. 28 Hence the
Apostle always connects peace with grace: “The fruits of the
Spirit are joy, love ( caritas ), peace” [Gal 5.22]. And when some-
one has peace, it is a sign that he has grace, because “there is

26. See note 23. Also Thomas’s interpretation of Heb 4.16 in ST III 59,2.

27. Cf. ST II— II 19,7. And fear of the Lord is a gracious gift of the Lord: ST
II— II 19,9, referring to Is 1 1.2.

28. Cf. Thomas on peace in ST II— II 29.


SERMON 08


95


no peace for unbelievers, says the Lord” in Is 48.22. And this
is what God has signified in the progress of grace [in Christ]:
when he was twelve years of age, he went to the city of peace, Je-
rusalem, which is interpreted as “the idea of peace (visio pads)”
[cf. Ps 122.7, Sir 24.11]. Hence, when we have the age of discre-
tion, we ought to attempt to attain peace.

But many are deceived, because, while they believe they have
peace, they do not have it. Thus the false prophets have said:
‘“Peace, peace,’ but there was no peace,” as we read in Jer 6.14.
In order to know true peace, we must see that peace must have
four characteristics: (2.1) it should be high, (2.2) customary,
(2.3) persevering and constant, and (2.4) cautious.

(2.1) First, the peace that comes from grace should be high.
A human being is constituted between two, and in accordance
with this there can be a twofold peace. In one respect he is con-
stituted between flesh and spirit. These are at war with one an-
other, because “the flesh desires ( concupisco ) against the spirit
and the spirit against the flesh” [Gal 5.17]. The spirit is high, 29
and the flesh is low.

According to this a human being can make peace in two
ways: if he makes peace in such a way that the spirit consents
with the flesh, this is neither a high peace, nor is it true peace;
rather, it is low and false. Hence we read in Wis 14.22: “Those
who live in a great war of ignorance regard so many and great
evils which they undergo as peace.” Such people are in a great
war, because they fight against ignorance 30 and are tormented
by their conscience. 31

29. Thomas speaks of the higher part and the lower part of the soul; the
higher part is directed towards what is (from) God, the Most High, the lower
part towards earthly things: ST III 9,4,2.

30. Ignorance is a lack of knowledge in our intellect — especially about God,
as Wis 14.22 says. Our knowledge directs the human actions, and the more per-
fect it is, the more it makes us avoid sin. Cf. ST I— II 76, 85,3.

31. No matter how sinful someone is, deep down he/she “knows” what is
right and wrong (ST I 79,13). The peace between the spirit and the flesh is dur-
ing our earthly life never true peace; at the most it is concordia, i.e., two different
wills brought together in one. Since the spirit and the flesh do not always will
the same, due to ignorance, the one must be surrendered to the other in order
to have a oneness. Thus during our life on earth there will always be a tension


96


THOMAS AQUINAS


The other peace is when the flesh consents with the spirit.
And how does this peace come to pass? Surely, when the flesh is
subjected to the spirit by means of wearing out the flesh. Some-
one will say: “I want to make peace in such a way that the spir-
it consents somehow to the flesh and thus there will be peace;
and then later on the flesh will be subjugated under the spir-
it.” This cannot come to pass, since the flesh has a servile na-
ture, and the more one indulges a slave, the more brazen he
becomes. Thus we read in Prv 29.21: “The one who gives his
slave something delicate to eat will find him stubborn.” And the
Philosopher says: “The appetite for what is delightful cannot be
satisfied, and from all sides the operation of concupiscence in-
creases the urge for the unwise.” If you satisfy the delight of the
flesh, it is not calmed down because of this; the urge rather in-
creases, because “someone who drinks from this water will be
thirsty again” [J114.13]. 32

This true peace, how must it be brought about? Certainly, by
wearing out the flesh. 33 Therefore, it says in Is 27.5: “In the fight
I walk over it, and this will bring about peace for me.” Because
of this we read that the Lord went to Jerusalem, not that he de-
scended to it. Thus it is said: “As they went up into Jerusalem,” 34
he went with them, Lk 2.42.

(2.2) Some practice abstinence when they want to bring
about peace of the spirit with the flesh, but they do not com-
ply with what is customary. They want to distinguish themselves


between the two, for the spirit naturally longs for what is good in the right or-
der. Peace means, above concordia, a union even in the will of the two. So for
peace the full knowledge is required that the aim of our life and our happiness
are found in God. The fight that Thomas depicts here takes place in the context
of our quest for happiness and peace, for which all people strive (ST I 2,1,1 ; II-
II 29,1-2).

32. Cf. ST I— II 2,1,3, 30,4 and 33,2.

33. Thomas reckons it with the virtue of temperance, the fourth cardinal vir-
tue. Abstinence, fasting, sobriety, chastity, and virginity are virtues that wear out
the flesh (ST II— II 146-147, 149, 151-152). In ST I— II 64,1 Thomas endorses
that in this we should not fall into extremes, as the Cathari and all kinds of peni-
tential groups did.

34. Ascendentibus : Jerusalem is built on Mount Zion; the city, the place of
peace is high.


SERMON 08


97


from others, contrary to the command of the Lord in the Gos-
pel: “When you fast,” he says, “do not become sad as the hypo-
crites; (they neglect their appearance, so that they may appear
to others to be fasting)” [Mt 6.16]. A man ought to do good
works in secret [cf. Mt 6.1-4, 18] and in public he ought to be
like others. Hence we read in Sir 32.1: “Amidst them he must be
like one of them.” When Augustine came to Milan, the people
there did not fast, whereas the Romans and the Carthaginians
fasted. His mother was very troubled: should she fast or not?
So Augustine, then a catechumen, asked Ambrose whether she
ought to fast or not. And Ambrose said: “To whatever church
you go, comply with its manners if you do not want to be scan-
dalized or scandalize others.” 35 Hence Jesus went up “according
to the custom” [Lk 2.42]. Do not distinguish yourself, because
God really seems to abhor attracting attention to yourself.

But note what is said: “for the feast day” [Lk 2.42] . If compan-
ions want something contrary to virtue, as for that you ought
not to be as they are. 36 Therefore, it says in Ex 23.2: “Do not fol-
low the crowd doing evil.” And Jer 6.16: “Inquire about the an-
cient paths, and see which is the good way and walk in it.” That
pertains to peace. Ps 122.3: “Jerusalem, which is built as a city
whose union through fellowship is in itself.” “In itself” mean-
ing: “according to the concord of rules and other manners.”

(2.3) Furthermore, that peace ought to be constant, because
it is not enough to have it for a time; it is necessary that a man
be persevering in it. 37 Thus we read in Jb 27.6: “Until I depart,
I will not recede from my innocence; the justification which I
began to have I will not abandon.” He says two things. First he
says: “Until I depart,” meaning: “to my death,” and: “from my
innocence I will not recede.”

A human being recedes from his innocence by sinning.
Hence we read in Sir 26.28: “Who passes over from justice to in-


35. See Augustine, Letter 54.2.3.

36. Thomas maps out a very delicate distinction: we should not distinguish
ourselves in order to draw attention to ourselves, but we must dissociate our-
selves from sinful actions and customs.

37. Thomas speaks of a habitus: ST I— II 49.


98 THOMAS AQUINAS

iquity, God has prepared him for the rhomphaia,” that is, for the
sharpened sword. 38

It is not enough that someone would not sin. But if you have
accustomed yourself to doing good, you ought not to abandon
the good works. 39 Thus it says: “that I may not abandon the jus-
tification which I began to have.” And therefore we read in Rv
2.4: “I hold against you that you have left behind your first love
(caritas).” 40 This is also signified in the Gospel today, in Lk 2.43:
“(When) the feast days (were over), Jesus remained in the Tem-
ple.” Some may well abstain from sin during a feast, but after
the feast they return to sin. Truly, man ought to remain injus-
tice and in his innocence, which is designated in 1 Kgs 2.36-
37, where Solomon says to Shimei, who is regarded as obedient:
“Build yourself a house in Jerusalem, and live there; and do not
leave it hither or thither; if one day you would leave, know that
you must die.” This means that this peace should be constant.

(2.4) Fourth, it ought to be cautious. You want to make peace
with the spirit against the flesh? If you want to make peace with
someone else and subject him to you, watch out for his friends.
You want to make peace with the spirit against the flesh? You
ought to watch out for the friends of the flesh. 41 Hence Jer g.3
says: “Let everyone watch out for his neighbor,” that is, the car-
nal neighbor, “and let him not put his trust in any of his broth-
ers,” that is, the flesh. For it says in Mi 7.6: “The enemies of man
are the ones who live in his house.” And this is signified in to-
day’s Gospel, when the Lord wanted to remain in Jerusalem:
“His parents did not know” [Lk 2.43]. Those who apply them-
selves to the perfection of the peace of the spirit ought to watch
out for the friends of the flesh and for familiarity with the flesh.


38. A reference to the Last Judgment (Rv 2.12) and/or to a consequence in
daily life, a judgment in time (e.g., Sir 21.3, 40.9); cf. ST I— II 85,3-5.

39. Doing good is not a matter of unconnected acts, but should become
a habit: the habit of doing good all the time becomes a disposition; it makes
someone do good spontaneously (ST I— II 49,1).

40. Even after receiving the Sacrament of Penance someone can sin again:
ST III 88, SCG IV 70.

41. Characteristic of friendship is willing and not willing the same thing, ac-
cording to Thomas in ST I— II 28,2 and II— II 29,3.


SERMON 08


99


Ps 45.11 reads: “Forget your people and the house of your fa-
ther, and the king will desire ( concupisco ) your beauty,” name-
ly, in the present by carrying you, and in the future by leading
you, to glory.

May he deem it worthy to bestow this upon us, who lives and
reigns, et cetera.


part 3 : Collatio in sero

“Jesus advanced” [Lk 2.52], et cetera. Today we have spoken
about the double progress of Christ, that is, about (1) the prog-
ress of age and (2) that of grace. So it remains that we must
speak about the other two progresses, namely, about (3) the
progress of wisdom and (4) his life with the people.

(3) And just as the progress of grace is shown in peace, so
the progress of wisdom is shown in contemplation. 42 Therefore,
Solomon says in Eccl 1.16: “I have surpassed all who were be-
fore me in Jerusalem”; and he adds why: “My mind has contem-
plated many things wisely.”

Someone who contemplates many things wisely advances in
wisdom. Behold: a building is called a temple by reason of the
contemplating that takes place in it, or we speak of contempla-
tion by reason of the fact that it takes place in a temple. So,
since the Lord is found in the Temple, he shows us the applica-
tion to contemplation and that by the Temple contemplation is
signified. Ps 27.4 reads: “One thing I have asked from the Lord,
this I will seek: that I may live in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life and may go and see his holy Temple.” He tru-
ly goes and sees the Temple, who goes to it not for foolish and
trivial things, but in order to contemplate God’s will. 43

Let us see what Christ has done in the Temple; and on the
basis of these things we can know whether someone advances


42. Pain and sadness are midgated through the contemplation of the truth:
ST I-II 3 8,4; cf- 35 . 5 -

43. Cf. Thomas on prayer, in ST II— II 83,1,2 and 83,14,2. In this part of the
sermon Thomas etymologically connects templum and contemplatio.


100


THOMAS AQUINAS


in the Temple. Now four things are necessary for man in or-
der to advance in wisdom: (3.1) that he listens open-hearted-
ly, (3.2) inquires diligently, (3.3) answers prudently, and (3.4)
meditates attentively.

(3.1) First, I say that it is necessary for a man who advanc-
es in wisdom that he listen open-heartedly, because wisdom is
so profound that no one is by himself sufficient to contemplate
it. 44 So it is in itself necessary that he listen. Hence it says in Sir
6.33: “If you love ( diligo ) to listen, you will be wise.” 45 You will
say: “I am wise enough; I do not want to listen.” Because of this
it is said in addition: “A wise man who listens to wisdom will be
wiser,” in Prv 1.5. No one is so wise that he would not learn any-
thing by listening. Thus his parents found Jesus as he was listen-
ing [Lk 2.46].

But how should you listen? Surely, with perseverance. 46 Some
want to listen, in passing, to just one lecture in one academ-
ic field. Their heart is not there. In contrast: after three days
they found that Jesus had been [in the Temple] constantly.
Thus you, too, ought to listen constantly. Hence it says in Prv
8.34: “Happy the one who listens to me and keeps watch over
my gates daily.” 47

Furthermore, we should not just open our ears to one teach-
er only, but to many, because the Apostle says in 1 Cor 12.4 that
“there are different graces.” One man has not advanced in all
fields. St. Gregory knew the morals very well; St. Augustine was
very good at finding solutions to problems; and St. Ambrose
was very good at giving the allegorical meaning of sacred texts.
What you do not learn from one, you learn from someone else.
Thus we read in Sir 6.34: “Stand in the midst of prudent elders,
and dwell in the wisdom of their hearts, so that you may be able

44. Cf. ST II— II 9,2, where Thomas distinguishes between wisdom and knowl-
edge, sapientia and scientia.

45. Cf. ST II— II 157,4,1: humility and obedience as a way to wisdom; also II-
II 162,3,1.

46. On perseverance, categorized under the cardinal virtue of strength: ST
n-ii 137.

47. In order to enter as they open or to welcome the Wisdom that comes
forward through them (cf. Prv 8.35-36).


SERMON 08


101


to hear what God is telling.” And what one does not tell is told
by another. I am not saying that I believe that it is useful that
those who just begin to study (audio) a certain academic held,
open their ears (audio) to different teachers. They should rather
study (audio) with one until they are well-grounded; and when
they are well-grounded, let them study with different teachers,
so that they can “pick the flowers” from different teachers, that
is to say: learn from different teachers the things that are use-
ful [cf. Song 2.5 (Vg)].

Moreover, Jesus is found listening to many while he is stand-
ing in their midst. This is proper to a just judge. The office of
judge is entrusted to someone who listens, because in a just way
he ought to form a judgment about the things he hears. 48 Jb
12.11: “Does the ear not assess words?” A just judge should be a
listener. Now some follow the opinion of magistri, because they
attend their lectures (audio ). 49 No one, however, ought to have
a friend in truth; we ought to cling only to the truth, because
the Philosopher says that disagreement in opinions is not in-
compatible with friendship. 50 Christ was in the midst, because
it says in Sir 15.5: “He has opened his mouth in the midst of the
Church, and the Lord has filled him with the Spirit of wisdom
and understanding.”

(3.2) Second, for progress in wisdom it is required that some-
one inquire diligently, because wisdom is more precious than
all things that can be desired (desidero). Therefore, it says in Prv
3.15: “Wisdom is more precious than all jewels together; and all
the things that people desire (desidero) do not have value com-
pared to it.” 51 And in Wis 7.8: “I have preferred it to thrones
and kingdoms.”


48. Cf. ST II— II 60,3. Jesus Christ will be our final judge (Mt 25.31-46). He
listens to the just who call upon him (Mt 25.1-13, Lk 18.1-9; c f- 7 > 34 - 7 ’
5 8 )-

49. Cf. ST I 106,4 (l ast sentence of the corpus).

50. In other words, friendship is about love that goes beyond disagreement,
in settings that include the Church and a religious order. We must adhere to the
truth for the sake of the truth and not abandon it or our friends when we disa-
gree with the latter; cf. also ST II— II 29,3,2.

51. Cf. ST II-II 100,1-2.


102


THOMAS AQUINAS


Take a look: for those who cannot do without a [certain]
temporal thing, waiting until it is offered to them is not satisfy-
ing; they seek it diligently. In this way we ought to seek wisdom
diligently. Hence Solomon says in Prv 2.4: “If you seek it as if it
were money, you will find it.” Some travel over mountains and
seas in order to acquire money. In this way you too ought to la-
bor for wisdom [cf. Eccl 1.13]. Thus they also found Jesus in the
Temple as he put questions and sought wisdom, so as to give us
an example of seeking wisdom.

But where ought we to seek wisdom and from whom? Surely
from three:

(3.2.1) First, from a magister or from people who are wiser
[than you are]. Hence it says in Dt 32.7: “Ask your father,” that
is, a magister. Because, as a father has brought you forth physi-
cally, a magister brings you forth spiritually; 52 “and he will tell
you; ask the greater ones,” that is, the wise, “and they will tell
you” [ibid.].

Besides, you should not be satisfied inquiring only of the
ones present, but you ought to inquire also of the old ones who
are not with us any more. If you do not have an abundance of
people, you still have an abundance of texts. When you see texts
of Augustine and Ambrose, examine these. Jb 8.8: “Examine
the former generation, and inquire diligently what we remem-
ber of the fathers,” 53 that is, the texts which they left for you to
keep in mind.

(3.2.2) Furthermore, it is not only enough that you inquire
of people or even these texts, but you ought to seek in the con-
templation of creatures as well, for it says in Sir 1.9: “God has
poured out his wisdom over all his works.” God’s works are his
judgments of wisdom. 54 In the same way we can conjecture in a
piece of art a lot 55 about the wisdom of the artist. Thus we read

52. ST I 1 17,1.

53. I.e., the Church Fathers, the Doctors of the Church. At this time no
woman had been declared Doctor of the Church yet.

54. Wisdom itself is eternal. What God eventually does and makes in time
is based on and comes forth from this eternal Wisdom; cf. ST I 1,6 22,1,2 (and
22,3).

55. Multa, but not all {omnia): the goodness and the order that we see in


SERMON 08


103


injb 12.7: “Examine the yoked animals, and they will teach you;
the winged animals of the sky will also tell you.”

(3.2.3) Furthermore, man ought to acquire wisdom by shar-
ing with other people. 56 Hence the Wise says: “1 have learned
without delusion, and I share without envy,” in Wis 7. 13. 57 Eve-
ryone can perceive that no one can advance in knowledge so
well as when he shares with others what he knows himself. This
is even an obligation ( debitum ): that someone tells others in re-
turn about the thing he got to know. Thus it says in Prv 22.21:
“(I have given insightful advice to you,) that I may show you the
firmness and words of truth, so that you may give answers on
the basis of these to the people who sent you.”

(3.3) Christ gave answers, and “all were amazed at his pru-
dence 58 and his responses” [Lk 2.47]. In an answer prudence is
required in three ways:

(3.3.1) First, that the answer be in proportion with the one
who gives the answer. 59 If someone asked from you what is be-
yond your knowledge and strength, you should not consider
yourself obliged to respond. Therefore: “If you have the knowl-
edge, answer your neighbor. If not, place your hand over your
mouth, that you may not be captured in a foolish word and be
confounded,” as Sir 5.12 puts it.

(3.3.2) Furthermore, prudence in an answer requires that it
be in proportion with the listener. Not just everybody must be
answered, because maybe someone seeks something from you
in order to attack or to accuse you [cf. Jn ig.g-10]. Hence it says


creation do not coincide with God’s wisdom; they are coming forth from it (cf.
Rom 1.20, in ST I 2,2); cf. the difference between God’s absolute and ordained
power, in ST I 25,5.

56. Contemplari et contemplata aliis tradere is the adage of the Dominican or-
der; cf. II— II 186,6 and 7; III 40,1,2 and 40,2,3.

57. As also Christ did: ST III 42,3; cf. Sir 20.30, 41.14, and the scriptural ref-
erences there. Again, Thomas’s audience consists of the university’s teachers and
students.

58. The first of the four cardinal virtues: ST II— II 47-56. Prudence is a nec-
essary virtue for a good life; cf. ST I— II 57,5.

59. Cf. also ST I 12,1,4: hence we can speak of God only insofar as we know
him, i.e., insofar as he has revealed himself to us and insofar as we have under-
stood what he has revealed.


104


THOMAS AQUINAS


in Prv 26.4: “Do not answer a fool with the same foolishness, in
order to avoid your becoming like him.” But what is a sign that
someone is a fool? Certainly when he asks with insolent words,
as we read in Prv 20.3: “The questions of a fool come with inso-
lent words.” But you ought to respond to a fool “with the same
foolishness, so that you may not seem unknowing in his eyes,”
as Solomon says in Prv 26.5. 60 Christ has done this well; when
some people asked him with which power he worked miracles,
he replied to them by asking them another question in return
[Mt 21.23-27].

(3.3.3) Furthermore, there ought to be prudence in an an-
swer so that it is in proportion with the question, not with ele-
gant epithets of words, but to the point. Otherwise the answer
would be full of wind. Thus it is said in Jb 15.2: “Will the wise
answer in the wind?” Christ responded prudently: “All were
amazed at his prudence and his responses,” in Lk 2.47.

(3.4) The fourth thing that makes prudence complete is that
someone meditates with attention. 61 Ps 19.15: “The meditation
of my heart is always directed towards you.”

We have an example in the blessed Virgin; she “kept all
these words with her in her heart,” Lk 2.51 reads. In an expla-
nation of this verse, a certain Graecus says quite remarkably:
“Consider Mary, the most prudent woman and the mother of
true wisdom, how she was made the mother of a scholarly boy:
already she was focused on him, neither as a boy, nor as a man,
but as God. And just as she had conceived the Word itself in
her womb, she then conceived all his deeds and words in her
heart.” Take a look at three things concerning the meditation
of the Blessed Virgin Mary:

(3.4.1) First, that it was fruitful. What is the fruit of medita-
tion? I say that meditation is the key to the memory of someone
who can read and listen to many things, but cannot keep it un-
less he meditates. 62 Ps ng.gg: “I have understood more than all
who taught me, because your testimonies are my meditation.”

60. So one should neither become a fool nor make a fool of someone else
even though one may consider the questioner foolish.

61.SCGIII37.

62. Cf. ST I-II 56,5,3.


SERMON 08


105


For, just as food does not nourish unless it is first chewed, so
you cannot advance in knowledge except by chewing, through
frequent meditation, the things that you have heard.

(3.4.2) Furthermore, the meditation of the blessed Virgin
was complete, because “she kept all the words.” A man ought to
meditate on all the things he has heard.

(3.4.3) Furthermore, the meditation of the blessed Virgin
was profound. Some only want to meditate superficially. If you
cannot meditate on all things at once, you may meditate anoth-
er time. Mary “kept all the words with her in her heart.” Ps 77.7:
“I have meditated at night in my heart, and I trained my spirit
and kept it focused.”

There is no doubt that someone who listens open-heartedly,
responds prudently, inquires diligently, and meditates with at-
tention will advance much in wisdom. This is the way to advance
in wisdom.

(4) Now it remains to speak about the progress of his living
together with the people. It is true that on the basis of this Gos-
pel passage someone who wishes to do so could well conceive
this living together as with subservient people as well as with
highly placed people. And since there are few highly placed
people here and very many subservient people, we will speak
about the subservient people. 63

And we must note that if you want to advance in living to-
gether with people, you ought to have four characteristics: (4.1)
devotion, (4.2) purity, (4.3) humility, and (4.4) discretion.

(4.1) First, I say that if you want to advance in living togeth-
er with people, you ought to have devotion. Some are only de-
voted to themselves, that they may live in peace and advance in
wisdom, but do not want to reach out to others. Such people
can advance in grace with God, but not with people. But Jesus
advanced in grace and wisdom “with God and the people” [Lk
2.52]. This is signified in his coming down [to be] with them: Je-
sus remained in Jerusalem during his time, but he came down

63. In tune with what Thomas just said in 3.3.2: his words are in proportion
with the listener.


106


THOMAS AQUINAS


when he wanted. 64 Hence it says in Song 6.2: “My beloved ( dilec -
tus) has come down into his garden,” that is, the garden of de-
lights. And on the ladder that Jacob saw, he saw “the angels of
God going up and down”; Gn 28.12. Thus we also should go up
by a spiritual progress and go down by devotion to our neigh-
bor. 65

(4.2) Some reach out to others, but too much, even to the
point of sinning. 66 That is the reason why Christ came down to
Nazareth, which means “flower,” which stands for purity [cf. Sir
50.8]. 67 Therefore, it says in Song 1.14: “Our couch is made of
flowers.” Happy the one whose conscience is free of what stinks
or what is scandalous, but holds only the odor of a good name.
Thus we read in Sir 24.17: “My flowers are the fruits of honor
and honesty”: fruits, namely, in merit. Therefore, the Apostle
says in Rom 6.22: “You have fruit in sanctification.” The flowers
are in the future homeland ( patria ) [cf. Song 2.1013-13].

(4.3) Third, we ought to have humility. 68 As Augustine says:
“Let the proud man blush with shame, because God has be-
come humble.” 69 Christ was subservient to the people, so that
you may be subservient to highly placed people. Gregory says:
“He never loses whatever by his progress advances obedience”
[cf. Phil 2. 8]. 70

Before someone arrives at progress in living with people, it
is necessary that he be obedient, since obedience leads to what
is good [cf. Rom 16. ig] . And Christ had the ultimate obedience
[cf. Heb 5.8-g]. Some obey well in light things, yet not in great

64. Jesus never did anything against his will; cf. ST III 18 and 19,1-2.

65. On loving your neighbor: ST II— II 26,2 and 4-12.

66. ST II-II 26,4.

67. Thomas did not know Hebrew; he relies on explanations by Jerome and
other Church Fathers. The Hebrew verb nzr means devoting oneself to fasting.
A nazir was a man devoted to God who did not shave his hair, did not eat un-
clean food, and did not drink alcohol (cf. Samson in Jgs 13.4-5), whence he
was considered pure. A Hebrew word for flower is nitsah, which occurs in Sir
50.8, where it is connected with purity.

68. See note 45. On humility, categorized under the cardinal virtue of tem-
perance (ST II-II 143): ST II-II 161.

69. A similar line of reasoning is found in the corpus of ST III 46,3.

70. Cf. ST III 47,2.


SERMON 08


107


things, but Christ was obedient in great things [too]. 71 Hence a
gloss on “He was obedient to them,” [Lk 2.51] says [about his
parents] : “They were righteous and honest people, though poor
and in need of necessary things, as is witnessed for instance by
the manger of the child to be adored [cf. Lk 2.7]; they sought
the physical necessities of life by continual labor, and Christ
toiled with them,” as Ps 88.16 reads: “I am poor and in labor
from my youth.” 72 Many come to study, many want to advance in
wisdom, but they do not make an effort to go down, [to reach
out,] but only to go up. They are not in Nazareth, but in the
foulness of sin. For they do so not in order to become subservi-
ent people, but highly placed people. 73 But Christ “went down
to Nazareth,” where “he was subservient to them.”

(4.4) The fourth necessary characteristic is discretion, which
is discretion in being obedient. For certain we ought to be obe-
dient to our superiors in those things that do not lead us away
from God. Thus St. Peter says in Acts 5.29: “We must obey God
more than people.” 74 Christ had this discretion; in the things
that did not lead him away from God he was subservient to
them: “Did you not know,” he says in Lk 2.49, “that I had to be
in these places that are my Father’s?” And Ps 73.28 says: “It is
good for me to cling to God,” namely, in the present through
grace 75 and in the future through glory,
which for us and for you, et cetera.


71. Obedience is a very important virtue, not only for a religious. It should
not, however, make someone refrain from thinking and taking responsibility:
ST II— II 104,3-5.

72. Also 2 Cor 8.9; cf. ST III 40,3. Voluntary poverty belongs to religious life:
ST II— II 186,3, referring to Mt 19.21.

73. High ranks in the Church are not to be sought-after; cf. ST II— II 185,1.
See also Sermon 21 Beatus vir, section 3.2.1; cf. ST II— II 185,1.

74. ST II-II 104,5.

75. ST I— II 4,7: so external goods are not necessary for our happiness; cf. ST
II-II 23,7 and 82,3.


SERMON 09

EXIIT QUI SEMIN AT

Sermon on the last-hut-one Sunday before Lent,
“Sexagesima”


Luke 8.5: A sower went out to soiv his seed.


part 1 : Prothema

sower went out to sow his seed,” Lk 8.5. Because our
sermon is about a spiritual sowing, let us call upon the
one who sows, our Lord Jesus Christ, who makes
trustworthy people servants of this sowing; let us call upon him,
so that he may give me something to say, et cetera.


part 2 : Sermo

“A sower went out,” et cetera. Holy Mother the Church is
a vineyard and a field, for the spiritual fruits of the Church,
which are the works of justice, are wine as well as bread. 1 Wine,
because these fruits make joyful: “for wine makes joyful,” as Ps
104.15 reads and in Prv 13.9 it says: “The light of the just ones
makes joyful.” They are bread, because they make us strong; Ps
104.15: “and bread strengthens a man’s heart.” And in Prv 12.12
we read: “the root of the just ones will not be shaken.”

There is one winegrower, one farmer of this vineyard and
held, namely, Christ. “I am the true vine,” he says insofar as he
is a man, “and my Father is the winegrower” [Jn 15.1]; and inso-

1. In ST II— II 80 Thomas enumerates the virtues that are connected with jus-
tice, among which is eucharistia. The Sermo is preached at morning Mass.


108


SERMON 09


109


far as I am God, I am the winegrower with him; 2 that is to say,
as Augustine says: “This winegrower is the whole of the Trinity
who plants this vineyard and this held.” 3 Thus it says in Jer 2.21:
“1 have planted you as a chosen vineyard, every seed.”

Bernard says: “Let us sow an example for the people through
good works, out in the open, as we read [in Mt 5.16]: ‘Thus may
your light shine before the people, that they may see your good
works (and praise your Father in heaven).’ For, on account of
the hidden sighs and the like which are only known to them,
the joy of God’s angels is great over one sinner who repents,
et cetera, as Lk 15.17 [that is, 15.10] says. Because of this the
Apostle said in Rom 12.17 (Vg): ‘caring for doing good things
not only before God but also before the people.’ He said ‘be-
fore God,’ meaning: before the ones who serve in the sight of
God. 4 For it pleases them to the highest extent when they see
us pray in secret or go over a certain Psalm again and again
or do something like that. You too, sow! Because many be-
fore you have sown. O descendants of Adam, how many have
sowed in you and how precious the seed; how disastrously will
you perish, and how justly, if so great a seed perishes in you to-
gether with the effort of the sowing. You will be handed over
to this destruction by the farmer [cf. Mt 3.10, Jn 15.2], if these
seeds perish in you altogether [cf. Lk 8.5b — 7] . The whole Trin-

2. For, insofar as Christ is God, he is equal to the Father; cf. ST I 39,2 and
42.

3. Ad extra: i.e., in creation, God is acting as one: the three Persons of the
Trinity do not act independently from one another in creation; that “God” cre-
ates, loves, and heals is understood as that the triune God creates, loves, and
heals; cf. ST I 45,6; III 23,2. Hence, calling the Father the Creator is not giv-
ing an exclusive name to the Father as if only the Father is the Creator and not
also the Son and the Spirit. The name Creator is appropriated to the Father, be-
cause the word “father” is more associated by us with “source,” or “beginning,”
than is “son” or “spirit”; cf. ST I 39,7-8. Likewise, “love” is a name of God which
signifies the essence of the triune God; this name is usually appropriated to the
Spirit, because love is as elusive as the wind. “Healer” is appropriated to the Son
as well as to the Spirit, depending on how the healing takes place: if the person
to be cured is touched, it is said to be the work of the Son, but if the cure is for-
mulated as a healing flow, it is appropriated to the Spirit (cf. ST I 39,8,3, on Lk
6.19: “a power went out from him”). The basis of appropriation is Scripture.

4. The angels; cf.Jb 1.6, Dn 7.10; cf. ST I 112,2,4.


110


THOMAS AQUINAS


ity has sown on our earth, the angels have sown in like manner,
and the apostles, the martyrs and the confessors, and the vir-
gins have sown. The Father has sown peace from heaven; the
Son, truth; and the Holy Spirit, love ( caritas ). 5 The angels have
also sown, because they have stood by others who were falling
[cf. 1 Kgs 19.5, 7-8]. It is obvious that the martyrs have sown
strength; the confessors, the justice which they have followed
during their whole life; and the virgins, temperance, because
they have scorned lust.”

Now there are three things that must be considered here: (1)
first, this seed; (2) second, who the sower is; and (3) third, the
sowing, what and of what nature it is. 6

(1) So first we must pay attention to the question what that
seed is. Well, we cannot say that this seed is anything else than
what the Lord says: “The seed is the word of God” [Lk 8.11].
Note that [Jesus] distinctly says: “his seed,” that is, the seed of
the Son of God. This is good seed. The seed that is not his,
is bad seed, of which Is 17.10 speaks: “tares,” as it is called in
the Gospel [Mt 13.25-30]. We must carefully consider what that
seed is because it saves us from sin. Thus we read in 1 Jn 3.9:
“Everyone who is born from God does not sin, because the seed
of God is in him.”

But how can we know whether it is [God’s] seed? I say in the
same way as we know that a certain seed is a seed of a particu-
lar herb. Well, we know this in three ways: (1.1) first, because

5. See also note 3. Since the name “sower” does not signify God’s essence,
these attributions are not called appropriations; it is an attribution according to
figurative speech. The basis for the attributions here is found in Scripture: re-
spectively, Rom 1.7 (among others), Jn 14.6, and Gal 5.22. Note that such at-
tributions are not strict: on the basis of Rom 1.7 and other texts, Jesus Christ
can be called the sower of our peace as well; because ofjn 16.13 (“the Spirit of
truth”), the Spirit can be called the sower of truth (as in ST I— II 106,4,2; II— II
i,gsc); injn 3.16 the motive for sending the Son is called love, which links “sow-
ing love” also with the Father.

6. Thus the method is this: from (1) the effects to (2) the author — which
is also the order in the Prima Pars of the ST, e.g., I 2,3 — and then (3) what this
means for our task of collaborating with him.


SERMON 09


111


that seed is coming from that herb; (1.2) second, because the
seed is borne in it; (1.3) third, because it brings forth such an
herb. Hence the seed of Christ is from Christ, which has also ap-
peared in Christ and makes someone similar to Christ, or which
leads to Christ. Therefore, the seed of Christ is the seed that is
from him as well as in him as well as leading towards him.

(1.1) Let us look at the first. I say that the seed of a certain
herb is the seed that comes from it. Thus we read in Gn 1.11:
“Let the earth put forth the green plant which produces its
seed according to its own kind.” But what seed is coming from
the Lord Jesus Christ? I say that the word of wisdom is coming
from him. Hence it says in Sir 1.5 (Vg): “The fountain of wis-
dom is God’s Word in the highest.” 7 Hence whatever pertains to
the heavenly wisdom that is in the highest, is a word of wisdom
or a seed of God.

But St. James says in 3.15 that there is a wisdom that is not
from above; it is earthly, beastly, diabolic. 8 Earthly wisdom
is the wisdom that is totally occupied with acquiring earthly
things. So if you are confronted with a word that stimulates you
to acquire earthly things, it is not a seed of God. Furthermore,
beastly wisdom is totally focused on pursuing the pleasure of
the body. So, if you are confronted with such a doctrine, you
know that it is not a seed of God and that you should not be-
lieve it. It is said in Mai 2.15: “What does one look for, but where
the seed of God is?” And which is the diabolic knowledge? Jb
41.26 reads, “It is king over all the children of pride.” So the
wisdom that is totally focused on being proud is diabolic. 9 So if
someone confronts you with such a doctrine, it is not a seed of
Christ. Hence the Apostle says: “My words and my preaching do
not come from error or uncleanness” [2 Thes 2.3].

Of what kind, then, is the wisdom that is in the highest,
whose fountain of wisdom is the Word of God in the highest?

7. Also 1 Cor 1.23-24, where (the crucified) Christ is called “the wisdom of
God.” Cf. ST III 3,8, 10,4.

8. Cf. ST II-II 45,1,1.

9. Thomas indicates pride as the beginning of every sin on the basis of Sir
10.15 (ST I— II 84,2) and Genesis 3 (frequently quoted in ST II-II 162-165).


112


THOMAS AQUINAS


St. James says in 3.17: “The wisdom that is from above is first
of all modest. Next, it is peaceftd; it does not bring about dis-
agreements.” Hence whatever brings about disagreements and
is against peace and wisdom from above, is not a seed of God.
And it is certain that whenever a teaching leads to rectitude
of the virtues, 10 it is a teaching of Christ, whereas if it leads to-
wards the corruption of the good, it is not a teaching of Christ.
Therefore, it says in Prv 8.8: “(All my words are just, and) noth-
ing (in them is crooked or) perverted.” 11

So, first, a seed of something is what comes from it.

(1.2) Second, a seed of something is what is in it. Hence it
says in Gn 1.11: “Let the earth put forth the green plant which
produces its fruit whose seed is in itself.” So any teaching that
is in Christ is the seed of God. Ps 109.3 (Vg): “In the splendor
of the saints I brought you forth from the womb before day-
break.” 12 The splendors of the saints are the radiance of the vir-
tues. Well, every radiance of the virtues is derived from the Son
of God, just as an example is from the exemplar, “for in him all
treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden” [Col 2.3], et
cetera. 13

But you could say: “This does not apply to me, for I cannot
see the Word in its eternity.” Therefore, it is sufficiently provid-
ed for us: that Word has become man, and this [Word that has
become man] shows us the example of each teaching of his,
whence we read in Jn 1.14: “The Word has become flesh (and
dwelt among us).” Augustine comments on this: “God’s wisdom
itself is made an example in a man whom it has taken on: an ex-
ample for the people of returning up above and abiding with the
angels.” 14 So if someone came and confronted you with a doc-
trine whose exemplar is not in Christ, it is not a seed of God.

10. ST II— II 45,6,3: therefore, people who have received the gift of wisdom
and live in accordance with it are called “children of God,” in accordance with
the seventh Beatitude.

1 1. Cf. ST II— II 34,3,1, where Thomas explains this verse by saying that hate
towards a neighbor is a perversion, citing 1 Jn 2.9 and 3.15.

12. Thomas’s text reads Lucifer, the Vulgate text lucifer, that is, “the carrier
of (the) light.”

13. ST I-II 68,1; III 7,2.

14. Thus Thomas says at the beginning of the Summa Theologiae that Christ,


SERMON 09


113


Jovinian came to Rome and preached that being married
must be regarded as equal to virginity, although Christ want-
ed to have a virginal mother and chose her, and although he
loved ( diligo ) the virginal disciple to the highest extent. 15 The
heretic Vigilantius preached in France that the state of the rich
who give alms is equal to poverty. This teaching is [also] not
in Christ, who became very poor for our sake [cf. 2 Cor 8.9].
Augustine says in the book The Christian Struggle: “Someone
who contemplates the things Christ said and did does not miss
this perversion; he loves ( diligo ) 16 and thoroughly examines the
things said and done by that man, in whom the Son of God of-
fers himself as the example for our life. Thus all men and wom-
en, every age and dignity have run to the hope of eternal life:
some have run to the divine things, as they do not care about
temporal things. Others proceed by their virtues: they practice
them and praise what they cannot fulfill. A few, however, mur-
mur and are tormented by too much envy: either they seek after
things for themselves in the Church, although they seem to be
Catholics, or they are heretics who seek honor in the very name
of Christ.” Also St. Gregory says: “There are several people in
the Church who not only do not do good things, but even coun-
teract the good things in others and detest the things in others
which they themselves neglect to do. Their actions do not come
from weakness or ignorance, but they do this because they are
determined to do so; when done with determination, it is a sin
against the Holy Spirit.” 17

(1.3) Third, we know whose seed it is when it leads to the
same thing. The seed of a tree has the strength to produce a
similar tree. Hence it says in Gn 1.11: “Let the earth put forth


insofar as he is a man, is for us the way into God (ST I 2,1 intr.), an implicit ref-
erence to Jn 14.6, where Jesus Christ says that he is the way.

15. The virginal disciple is John. Especially to religious who take the vow of
chastity, this John was presented as a great example: ST II— II 186,4,1 and III
45 > 3 > 4 -

16. For Thomas’s terminology of love, see Sermon 01 Veniet desideratus, note
39 -

17. Cf. Mt 12.31; ST II— II 14,1; i.e., rejecting out of contempt the gifts of the
Holy Spirit, which prevent us from sinning.


114


THOMAS AQUINAS


the green plant which produces its seed according to its own
kind.” The strength of a species to bring forth is located in the
seed, 18 whence it says in Jn 10.35: “He has called them gods to
whom God’s words were spoken.” When you hear God’s words
with your ear and you love ( diligo ) them with your heart and ac-
tually fulfill them with works, then God’s words were spoken
to you [cf. Mt 13.23. Lk 8.15]. But it is true that the life of the
saints is slandered, as we read in Wis 5.4-5: “We, foolish, con-
sidered their lives madness and their end without good. But be-
hold how they are reckoned among the children of God.” It pro-
ceeds: “Hence, we have strayed from the way of truth” [Wis 5.6].
I come to the conclusion: therefore you ought to imitate Jesus
Christ, so that you may become like him [cf. Song 1.8 (Vg)].

Hence Augustine says, in The Christian Struggle: “If you have a
high opinion of yourself, may you not scorn imitating him who
will be called Son of the Most High. If you think little of your-
self, dare to imitate the fishermen and the tax-collectors who
have imitated Christ.” 19 So the first point is clear, the one about
the seed.

(2) Now it remains to speak about the second thing, namely,
the sower, because it is said that “a sower went out.” Who is the
one who went out? With certain authority it is Christ, in whose
service all teachers are. Is 32.20 says about them: “Happy are
you who sow beside the waters.” 20

This sower, Christ, went out because he wanted to sow. Thus
other preachers must go out. There is, however, a difference
between Christ and these preachers: For Christ went out in
one single movement in order to teach thereupon, whereas a
preacher ought to go out time and again. Christ went out from
the hidden bosom of the Father. He says: “I have gone out from
the Father,” not because he had left the Father behind, but be-

18. ST I 78,2,2, 92,3,2, 118,2,3; I— II 17,9,3, 81,1,4 and 81,4, 114,3,3; HI
32,1,1; cf. Ill 31,5,3 ( semen feminae).

19. So if you think imitation of Christ is aiming too high, you can still follow
him by imitating the poor sinners who followed him. Cf. Thomas’s explanation
ofjesus’ call “Follow me” (Lk 5.27), in ST II — II 184,3,1.

20. Cf. Ps 1.3 and 23.2, and Ezek47.i2.


SERMON 09


115


cause he was made visible, “and I have come into the world” [Jn
16.28], although he was there already, but now he appeared as
visible. 21 But when? Early in the morning. 22 Hence it says in the
Gospel that the paterfamilias went out early in the morning, at
the first hour, to hire workers for his vineyard [Mt 20.1].

Now for a preacher it is necessary to go out in a twofold way:

(2.1) in the first way, by leaving the state of guilt, because it
must not be so that a preacher preaches to others what he is not
doing himself. 23 Ps 50.16 reads: “Yet, to the sinner God has said:
‘Why do you speak of my justice?’” et cetera. Why do you preach
that we must not steal, if you are stealing yourself, and that we
must not commit adultery, if you are committing adultery?
Therefore, we ought to leave the state of guilt, as the Apostle
says: “Go out from their midst and separate yourself from their
situation and do not touch anything unclean” [2 Cor 6.17]. 24

But whither should we go out when we leave sin? Certainly to
Christ, that is, to the Passion of Christ. As the Apostle says: “Let
us go out to him outside the camp, bearing his reproach” [Heb
13.13], that is, his cross. 25 The Apostle says that “the old man is
crucified with him, so that the body of sin may be destroyed”
[Rom 6.6].

When should we go out? Early in the morning. Therefore,
it is said, “In time of trouble, rise early in the morning” [e.g., 1
Sm 29.10], and elsewhere: “Do not hesitate to be converted to
the Lord, and do not delay it (day after day)” [Sir 5.7], and in
Sir 2i. 1: “Have you sinned? Do not turn to it again.”

(2.2) The other going out that is necessary for a preacher is
leaving the world. 26 And this is signified in Jn 4.28-29, where


21. See Sermon 05 Ecce rex tuus, note 7.

22. Thomas explains this further on, in section 2.2.

23. A golden rule for preaching; otherwise, he denies his own preaching:
1 Tm 4.12, Ti 2.7b, as in Lk 1 1.39-52; cf. ST II— II 97,1,3, 100,3,2, 187,5,5; HI
40,3,41,3,1

24. Cf. ST 102,5,4.

25. The desire to be united with the suffering Christ through our own suf-
ferings. This union is desirable, since his suffering is redemptive; we share in his
sufferings so that we may share in his glory; cf. Gal 2.19-20 and Col 1.24. The
stigmata are a most extraordinary form of such a participation in the Passion.

26. Exitus de mundo or Fuga mundi (cf. ST I— II 39,3). This is the image tradi-


116


THOMAS AQUINAS


it says that the woman left her water jar and went to announce
Christ. Augustine expounds this, saying that someone who
wants to preach ought to leave the water jar behind, meaning
the cupidity of the world, at least the affections that accompany
it, so that he does not love ( diligo) the cupidity either because of
the affection or because of its effect. About this going out, the
Lord says in Gn 12.1 to Abraham: “Leave your land and your
kindred and your father’s house,” meaning: let go of whatev-
er is earthly and can be loved ( amo ), “and come into the land
that I will show unto you.” It is remarkable that he says this,
for the Law does not lead anyone to perfection [cf. Heb 7.19],
and the way of the counsels had not yet been shown. There-
fore, the Lord has said to someone who had observed the Com-
mandments: “One thing is missing for you; if you want to be
perfect, go (and sell everything you have and give to the poor,
and you will have a treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me)”
[Mt ig.21]. “Come into the land” [Gn 12.1]: certainly that is the
land of vision or contemplation, which is characteristic of the
religious life.

But when should we come into that land? Early in the morn-
ing, that is, in our youth. Ps 5.4: “Early in the morning I will
stand before you and I will see you,” et cetera. Jerome’s transla-
tion from the Hebrew text reads: “and I will contemplate you.” 27
Is 50.4-5: “Early in the morning he excites my ear, that I may
hear him as my magister. The Lord has opened my ear, and I
have not talked back.” Now because a lord has the authority
and a magister wisdom, he has opened my ear as he came to my
ear.

You will say: “I may not do what is said to me, for someone
might call me an unlucky, senseless boy.” Against this Is 51.7
says: “Fear not the people’s reproaches or their blasphemies.”
Augustine says: “Let the boys who vowed modesty rejoice.”


tionally used for entering religious life, also for Dominicans and other mendi-
cants who left their monasteries regularly to preach in the city or in the country.

27. St. Jerome translated Scripture from the original Hebrew and Greek
into Latin. The version of the Psalms usually cited by Thomas is the Vulgate iux-
ta LXX (not the iuxta Hebraica), a translation from the Greek text of the Old Tes-
tament, the Septuagint, which was also used in the liturgy.


SERMON 09


117


You will say: “1 only have a word, but I need an example.” 28
May the holy boy Benedict come to mind then, who, after leav-
ing his parents behind and temporal goods as well as his nurse,
wisely retreated and took up a remote hermitage. If this is not
enough for you, let the saintlier boy John the Baptist come to
your mind, of whom it says in Lk i.8o: “The boy John grew and
became strong, and he lived in deserted places until the day
of his public appearance.” 29 If even that is not enough for you,
let the holiest boy Jesus come to your mind, who, when he was
twelve years of age, stayed behind [in Jerusalem] unbeknownst
to his parents, and was found in the midst of teachers [Lk 2.41-
43, 46].

But you will say: “Three things warn me that I should not
leave the world in my youth: 30

(2.2.1) “The first is that one must gradually come to perfec-
tion, for no one becomes the best at once.” But, my dearest, 31
you have less to do to come to perfection in your old age. The
Apostle says: “May we be brought to the perfect One” [cf. Eph
4.13 and Heb 7.19]. Some want to become soldiers, others
house-builders, et cetera. But there is no one who eagerly de-
sires a certain state without eagerly desiring it in his youth, if he
wants to be perfect in that state. Hence may you from the begin-
ning of your age start with leaving the world, because no matter
how much a person makes progress, he always grows. Besides,
it is easy to do the things that have become a habit for us from
our youth. Because of this it says in Lam 3.27: “It would be good
for a man, if he carried (the yoke from his adolescence),” and in
Prv 22.6: “(Train) an adolescent along his way; (even when he is
old, he will not recede from it.)”

But you will say “Adolescence and pleasure,” as it is said in


28. After all, examples are more convincing than words: ST I— II 34,1.

29. In the same context, ST II— II 188,8.

30. Issues concerned with entering religious life (when, how) are also treat-
ed in ST II— II 1 89, the last quaestio of the Secunda Pars.

31. “ Karissime .” This interjection seems to indicate that the secretary gives
a very precise account of what Thomas said. Furthermore, it seems to be a sign
that he was a vivid preacher. The word also shows Thomas’s sympathy with his
audience.


118


THOMAS AQUINAS


Eccl 11.10 (Vg), (“are empty”). I say that that book is written by
way of conclusion, and it has two conclusions: one of the wise
and one of the foolish. The conclusion of the foolish is: “Re-
joice, young man, in your adolescence (and let your heart be
glad in the days of your youth. Walk in the ways of your heart
and in the sight of your eyes)” [Eccl n.g]. The other conclusion
leads to this advice: “Do not go after your lusts; if you give in to
the lusts of your soul, those will hand you over to the joy of your
enemies” [Sir 18.30-31]. This other conclusion is the one of
the wise people: “Remember your Creator in your youth” [Eccl
12.1]. 32

(2.2.2) But you will say: “Another thing reminds me why I do
not want to leave the world from my youth on: I do not know
whether it is from the Holy Spirit, 33 because the saint is usually
not brought out in boys.” Well, the Holy Spirit has the freedom
from the Father and the Son to blow where he will [cf. Jn 3.8],
and you want to block his paths? Ambrose says: “This Spirit is
not bent back by ages, nor limited by death, and it is not ex-
cluded from the womb.” 34 Gregory: “I want to consider how this
Holy Spirit is a master artist, and I fail in my very considera-
tion, because he fulfills a boy who plays the cither and makes a
Psalmist, he fulfills a shepherd of herds who picks mulberries
and makes a prophet, he fulfills a boy who fasts,” et cetera, 36
things which he mentioned in a homily for Pentecost and which
you have heard before in a sermon on the Holy Spirit.

You will say: “It is not through the Holy Spirit that boys leave
the world behind, because many boys are converted, yet do not
persevere in religious life; but if it had been from God, they
would have stayed in the order.” Be careful, because if you un-
derstand this in a perverted way, you give way to the Manichae-
ans. Mani says that God is not the author of corruptible things

32. Thus Thomas gives an instruction on how to read Scripture: one cannot
just quote verses haphazardly in order to sustain one’s own opinion; the context
and the structure of a text are important for a correct understanding of what it
says.

33. Cf. ST II— II 189,9,1.

34. Cf. 1 Sm 3, Is 49-i,Jer 1.5-6, Ezek 37.1-14, Lk 1.15, Gal 1.15.

35. Through Gregory, Thomas refers to David.


SERMON 09


119


and that what comes from God is not destroyed. This heretic
also says that grace once possessed cannot be lost. In answer to
these things we must explain: God’s works are thoroughly cor-
ruptible; it also happens that someone receives the grace of en-
tering religious life, but that the Lord does not give him the
gift to persevere — but this does not alter the fact that it comes
from God. It is true that the plan of God is not destroyed; it re-
mains forever [cf. Ps 33.11]. 36

(2.2.3) But you will say: “Another thing reminds me why I do
not want to leave the world behind in my youth: I am a boy, so I
cannot carry arms.” The arms of religious life are not the arms
of Saul [cf. 1 Sm 26.7-8, 31.9-10], but the arms of David [cf. 1
Sm 17.45; cf- P s 35 - 1- 3 ’ Wis 5], that is, the arms of Christ [cf.
Rom 13.12, 2 Cor 10.4-5]. The arms of Saul are the observanc-
es of the Old Law, which are heavy arms. Hence St. Peter says:
“This is a burden that neither we nor our fathers could carry”
[Acts 15.10]. The observances of the New Law 37 and religious
life 38 are light arms, whence the Lord says: “My yoke is sweet
and my burden is light” [Mt 11.30].

Therefore, early in the morning we ought to leave the world
behind and come to Christ. But what will be our fruit? Certain-
ly, attainment of the kingdom of heaven. Thus the Lord says
in the Gospel: “Allow the little ones to come to me, for of such
people is the Kingdom of heaven” [Mt ig.14]. 39


36. Thomas distinguishes between, on the one hand, what is God and in
God, for instance, his eternal, unchangeable plan, and, on the other hand, what
is not-God, outside God, for instance, how things come to pass in time. The for-
mer is perfect as only God can be; it remains forever. Creation, including cre-
ated grace, comes forth from God’s perfection, but is not God; it is imperfect,
unfinished; it grows towards perfection, fulfillment, but can also be corrupted.
Cf. how Thomas speaks of God’s eternal will and the execution of it in time in
ST I 19,4-9.

37. ST I— II 107,4.

38. STII-II 189,10,3.

39. Also cited in the context of entering religious life: ST II — II i8g,5sc.


120


THOMAS AQUINAS


part 3: Collatio in sero

(2.3) “A sower went out” [Lk 8.5], et cetera. Today we spoke
about the seed and about the sower’s double way of going out.
It remains now to speak about the sower’s third way of going
out, 40 that is, preaching, because a preacher ought to go out
from hidden contemplation and go to the public [field] of
preaching, for a preacher first ought to draw in contemplation
what he will pour out later on in preaching. 41 Hence it says in
Is 12.3-4: “With joy you shall draw water,” that is, with the joy
of contemplation, 42 “from the fountains of the Savior,” — that is,
from divine wisdom [cf. Wis 1.5 (Vg)] — “and then you will say
on that day,” after you have drawn: “Give thanks to the Lord”
[e.g., Ps 33.2, 106.1], et cetera. This going out is very similar
to the Savior’s going out from the secret dwelling place of the
Father to the public area of what is visible. 43 Therefore, it says
in Song 7.11: “I am (here) for my beloved ( dilectus ), and he is
turned towards me,” namely, in the hidden realm of contempla-
tion.

There are two things that can turn the soul towards God: de-
vout prayer and contemplation; 44 and through internal speech
God is turned to the soul. 45 Hence the soul says: “My beloved
( dilectus ) is mine, and I am his” [Song 2.16]. But will we not al-
ways be here? No. 46 Therefore, he says: “Come, my beloved (di-

40. N.B.: This point was not announced by Thomas at the beginning of the
Sermo.

41. Contemplari et contemplata aliis tradere (ST II— II 188,6, III 40,2,3): the ad-
age of the Ordo Praedicatorum, the Dominicans.

42. Contemplation of the divine things is most delightful: ST I— II 3,5.

43. Thus Jesus Christ coming into this world is presented as the model for
preachers who contemplate before going out.

44. Thomas’s theology on prayer in a nutshell in ST II— II 83; on contempla-
tion: I— II 35,5 and II— II 82,3.

45. Cf. Ps 6.5. As in Ps 53.7 it is an image that God is listening and that he is
favorably disposed towards us, because we have turned wholeheartedly towards
him. Cf. Thomas’s exposition of Ps 90.1 (Ps 89.1 [Vg]) in ST I 13,7,2.

46. That is, in prayer and contemplation. The answer is “no”; Dominican fri-
ars are not contemplative monks. He advocates for what is called a vita mixta: a
religious life which is characterized by a balanced combination of action in the
world and a rhythm of prayer and contemplation every day. Cf. ST II— II 182.


SERMON 09


121


lectus), let us go out in the field” [Song 2.10], meaning: the pub-
lic held of the preaching; “let us remain,” when we preach, “in
the country houses” [Song 7.11], that is, with the people who
are open to the preaching [cf. Lk 10.5-9]. Note that when he
says “let us remain,” a particular familiarity of God with the
preacher is indicated; “Let us go out”: I by inspiring you, and
you by preaching. 47

When shall we go out? Let us go out early in the morning
to the vineyards; in the same way Christ went out early in the
morning, as we read in the Gospel: “He went out most early in
the morning to hire workers for his vineyard” [Mt 20.1]. We
read that Christ went out at three hours, namely, at the third
hour early in the morning, at the sixth hour, and at the ninth
hour. And Gregory says that the fact that he hired workers early
in the morning signifies that he converts boys in the first period
of life. It is said in Eccl 11.6: “Sow your seed early in the morn-
ing and let your hand not be inactive in the evening.” By “early
in the morning,” a young age is signified; by “in the evening,”
old age. Some say that boys must not preach. Against them it
says: “Sow your seed early in the morning.” Others say that old
men must not preach, because they are hardened. Against them
it says: “Let your hand not be inactive in the evening.” Boys as
well as old men must preach, because “you do not know wheth-
er the latter or the former [seed] comes up, and if both come
up it is even better” [Eccl 11.6].

You will say: “You must not summon such people nor lead
them to religious life, according to a sentence passed by the
Lord, who says: “You have gone round sea and dry land to make
one proselyte” [Mt 23.15], et cetera. May you see that the mean-
ing of this is that some go round sea and dry land to convert
others. This is praiseworthy. Thus the Lord says: “Go into the
whole world, preach the Gospel to every creature” [Mk 16.15].
This was already announced beforehand by Isaiah, who says in
27.6: “And they will enter from Jacob with force and fill the face
of the earth with seed.” 48

47. As in Mk 16.20; cf. ST II— II 171,1.

48. That is, the seed of God’s word: Lk 8.1 1.


122


THOMAS AQUINAS


What is meant by what follows: “and you make him a son
of Gehenna, twice as bad as yourselves” [Mt 23.15]? Concern-
ing whom do we understand this? It is explained by the saints 49
in two ways. First, concerning the Jews and the scribes. Chrys-
ostom says that it is understood concerning the Jews and the
scribes who keep the statutes of the Old Law. And why do they
make [the newly converted proselyte] a son of Gehenna twice as
bad as themselves? This is not because they have sinned by con-
verting others, but because they led others to sinning by bad
examples. 50 And why does it say “twice as bad as yourselves”?
Chrysostom says that a disciple sins more carelessly when he
sees a teacher sinning, and, just as a preacher who gives an ex-
ample of a bad life is to be condemned, so is the one who gives
an example of a good life to be praised. Another interpretation
with authority is the explanation byjerome, who says that these
words concern the Pharisees and scribes who, being under the
Old Law, converted others to circumcision: these sin in a dou-
ble way, because they let go of the Law of Christ [cf. Gal 6.2, 15]
and because they want to be circumcised.

You will say: “It is good for boys to preach, so that they let go
of the secular world and come to Christ in religious life, but it
is not good to attract or allure them with temporal benefits, be-
cause Scripture says that the Jews are not attracted to the faith
by threats, terrors, and benefits. But Scripture does not say that
they cannot be allured by flattery” [cf. Prv 29.5]. Twofold is the
Covenant, namely, Old and New: under the Old Covenant God
promised temporal things, promises which we make to little
children who are allured by benefits. Thus he said: “If you are
willing and listen to me, you will eat the goods of the earth”
[Is 1.19]. Still some among the people were spiritual, like Dav-

49. These saints are the Doctors of the Church who are believed to be in
heaven now. See also ST II— II 189,9,2.

50. This explanation is clear in the context of Mt 23.15, where Jesus criti-
cizes the scribes’ and Pharisees’ behavior. Jerome’s exposition, in the follow-
ing text, is also found in ST II— II 189,9,2, but the emphasis in this homily is on
Chrysostom’s interpretation: as a preacher one must give the good example;
you have a great responsibility, for people will do as the preacher does (cf. ST
I— II 34,1; II— II 33,1 and 3, 187,2).


SERMON 09


123


id, who clung to God because of God, whence he said: “Yet for
me it is good to cling to God” [Ps 73. 28], 51 et cetera. Likewise,
he said: “One thing I have asked from the Lord, for this I long:
(that I may live in the house of the Lord all the days of my life)”
[Ps 27.4].

Likewise, under the New Covenant there are some per-
fect people who do not want to be allured by temporal things.
Others are imperfect men who are allured also by temporal
things. 52 Therefore, regulations are given in the Church, so
that they would be led by the hand to come to the liturgy of the
hours. Let it not be so that they go [and pray] because of these
[temporal] things, but that they become more kind-hearted
and lead a happier life. 53

You will say: “It is allowed to attract boys to religious life, but
not to let them take vows.” 54 Why not? You will say: “Because
many who had taken vows returned [into the world] .” I then
will say what the Apostle says: “Will the unbelief of those make
the faith empty?” [Rom 3.3] He says in so many words: No. If
someone gives up the religious life, others are not to be bound
any less to the religious life. Christ called many disciples, and
many returned [into the world] [cf. Jn 6.66]. Philip the apostle
called Simon the magician, and yet he left and went back [Acts
8.9-24].

The net is twofold: the one is that through which some are
brought to eternal life, about which we read in Jn 21.11: “The
net was full of great fishes.” The other one is that through which
some are brought to religious life; in this one good and evil
people are brought together, the ones who are known before-
hand and the ones who are predestined [cf. Mt 20.14]. There is
a place in the Gospel where we read about this: “The Kingdom

51. This Psalm is in fact not attributed to David, but to Asaph.

52. So Thomas is not saying that the Jews were focused on temporal goods
and Christians are not; he rather points at something generally human. After
Christ it still is not an exception for people to be attracted by temporal gain.
That is why we need to translate Christ’s wisdom into rules and regulations.

53. A regular prayer life leads to insight; see, e.g., Psalm 49. Thomas pres-
ents here very briefly the purpose of religious life; cf. ST II— II 189,1.

54. Cf. ST II-II 189,5.


124


THOMAS AQUINAS


of heaven is like a dragnet thrown in the sea and gathering fish
of every kind” [Mt 13.47], et cetera.

You will say: “Many have entered and left and remained in
the world and became good bishops and good archdeacons.”
It cannot be that someone who did not fulfill his vow would be
a good bishop. The bishop of Geneva had made a vow about
joining religious life, and the Pope says that he cannot have a
sound conscience unless he resigns the episcopate and enters
religious life. 55

Hence it is allowed that preachers call boys and bring them
to religious life and let them take vows.

(3) It is clear what has been said about the seed and the
going-out of the sower. It remains that we look at the sowing it-
self, about which we must say two things: (3.1) the first is what
hinders the sowing; (3.2) the second is about the fruit of the
sowing.

(3.1) Concerning the first we must note that there is a triple
hindrance for the sowing on behalf of those for whom the seed
is sown: (3.1.1) the first is emptiness of the affection; (3.1.2) the
second, hardness of the heart; and (3.1.3) the third, fierce con-
cupiscence or cupidity.

(3.1.1) I say the first hindrance for sowing is emptiness (or
the vanity) of the affection. Some have a heart so empty and so
ready to sin that they immediately consent to sin when it is pro-
posed to them. And about these it says in Ps 4.3: “Sons of men,
till how long do you, with a heavy heart, (love [diligo] empti-
ness and do you seek after lies)?” They are empty and worldly,
because they promise things that they cannot fulfill. Such peo-
ple surrender their seducible heart to every sin. These are signi-
fied by the road, where the seed does not bear fruit [Lk 8.5]. Is
51.23 reads: “You have lain down on the ground, as if your body
were a road for travelers.” On this road seed cannot bear fruit
nor can it prosper. Hence it says in Ezek 33.31-32: “They hear
your words, but do not do them, since they turn them into the


55. ST II— II 185,4; cf. 189,2-3 (esp. 189,3,1). If, however, someone is a reli-
gious and is created a bishop, he remains a religious: ST II— II 185,8.


SERMON 09


125


song of their own mouth, for they say: ‘This one blesses, that
one curses,’ and their heart follows avarice, 56 and you are for
them like a musical song that is sung with a pleasing and sweet
sound; they hear your words, but do not do them.”

Twofold is the danger when seed is sown on the road, because
it is trampled upon and eaten by the birds [Lk 8.5]. In this way
the seed of God’s word is trampled upon by the bad examples of
people who are your companions, and it is eaten up by the evil
plans of demons and so the fruit is lost. Thus it says in Ps 89.42:
“All who passed him on the way have plundered him,” et cetera.

(3.1.2) The second hindrance is on account of the fact that
seed does not bear fruit when it is sown over rock. Rocks are
hard and solid things, which are held together on their own
terms. Who has no love (amor) but for himself, has a hard heart,
and “a hard heart will behave badly in a very young person” [Sir
3. 27]. 57 If it is sown in a hard place, the seed does not take root
deeply. Thus some take up a good plan, but have a hard heart,
and therefore it does not stay with them long. Therefore, the
Apostle says: “But in accordance with your hardness and your
impenitent heart you store up the wrath for yourself for the day
of the revelation of the just Judgment” [Rom 2.5].

(3.1.3) The third hindrance that does not allow the seed to
bear fruit is concupiscence or cupidity. Someone hears God’s
word, places it in his heart, lets it take deep root, and then con-
cupiscence or cupidity of having a thing overpowers it: it puts
down whatever man considers good. These sow over thorns [Lk
8.7]. Against them the Lord says in Jer 4.3: “Renew your fallow
land, and do not sow over thorns.” Those who want to sow re-
move thorns, and so you ought to remove every concupiscence
or cupidity, as the Apostle did, who says: “I chastise my body,
and I bring it back to servitude” [1 Cor 9.27]. Passions of the
soul are called thorns [cf. 2 Cor 12.7], because, as thorns mu-
tilate the body, so the passions of cupidity mutilate the soul. In
Gn 3.17-18 it says: “Cursed is the land in view of your work. It


56. On the capital sin of avarice: ST II— II 118. It is even considered the root
of all evils; cf. ST II— II 1 19,2,1.

57. For God’s role in this: ST I— II 79,3.


126


THOMAS AQUINAS


will bring forth thorns and thistles for you.” This is because of
the sin of the first parent.

These are the hindrances for the fruit-bearing of the seed. 58

(3.2) It comes to pass [in Lk 8.8], however, that the earth in
which it is sown is good — and then it produces a triple crop:
(3.2.1) thirty-fold, (3.2.2) sixty-fold, and (3.2.3) hundred-fold.
When does it produce a hundred-fold crop?

(3.2.1) I say that when people hear God’s word, it produc-
es a triple crop. Some are converted, so that they pursue the
fruit that [converted people] necessarily bring forth. This is the
thirty-fold crop. Now the number thirty comes from multiply-
ing three by ten: you have faith in the Trinity and the Ten Com-
mandments of the Law, 59 as Mt 19.17 says: “If you want to enter
into life, follow the Commandments.” Thus you have produced
a thirty-fold crop. And in order to show that the thirty-fold fruit
is necessary for salvation, the Lord wanted to be baptized 60 in
his thirtieth year, 61 and there the whole Trinity appeared: the
Father in the voice, the Son in the flesh, and the Holy Spirit in
the form of a dove, as Luke records in 3.21-22.

(3.2.2) Others go further and convert to the highest state of
perfection through a way of penitence 62 after having commit-
ted sins, and thus produce a sixty-fold crop. The number of six-
ty comes from multiplying six by ten. Six is a perfect number.
The six counsels 63 must be added to the Ten Commandments,
and then you will produce a sixty-fold crop.

58. It is for these reasons that a preacher must have left “the world” before
he starts preaching; cf. ST III 40,3,2, 41,3,1: the preacher must be a good listen-
er, he must have a loving heart, and he must not be swept away by his passions.

59. These two elements are basics of the Christian faith: ST I— II 100,8; II— II
1,1 and 1,5.

60. Cf. ST III 68,7, where Thomas refers to Rom 6.4. Note also that Thomas
explains that not being baptized does not necessarily imply that someone is not
saved: the disposition of the soul is decisive (ST III 68,2). In the same way, faith
is not required for baptism: it is good to be prepared for it, but, after all, faith is
God’s gracious gift that comes with the sacrament (ST III 68,8). Since faith can
be kindled by the word preached, the preacher has a great responsibility.

61. ST III 39,3.

62. ST I— II 35,8 and II— II 152,3,3. Religious life is the place of penance par
excellence: II — II 1 86, 1 ,4.

63. Christ’s interpretation of the Law in Mt 5.21-48. The evangelical coun-


SERMON 09


127


(3.2.3) But what’s more, some produce an even greater crop:
they are not so much converted through a way of penitence,
but to the state of perfection through a way of innocence, 64 and
they produce a hundred-fold crop. By experience they know
that they count to one hundred with the left hand, but with
their right hand they already count one hundred. By the left
hand the temporal things are understood, by the right hand
the spiritual things [cf. Prv 3.16]. Therefore, it is said that the
ones that are at the right hand only know spiritual things and
nothing about temporal things [cf. Col 3.1-17]. They produce a
hundred-fold crop. We read in Gn 26.12 that Isaac sowed in the
earth that year and found a hundred-fold.

(ad 3.2.1) In Matthew 4 65 it says: “Thus they make one
( unum ) bear fruit thirty times.” A gloss between the lines ex-
plains: “faith in the Trinity in the hearts of the chosen ones”;
and concerning “one bears fruit sixty times,” a gloss between
the lines says: “the perfection of a good operation, because the
ornamentation of the world is completed in six days”; and about
“one bears fruit a hundred times,” it says: “a perpetual benedic-
tion, because the hundred-fold fruit is transferred from the left
hand to the right hand one by one. 66 Likewise it is written in
a gloss on Mt 13.8: “thirty refers to marriage; sixty to widows;
hundred is someone who is in the right hand already, and the
right hand refers to virginity.” And it continues: “Or the good
earth of the martyrs brings forth a hundred-fold crop, either by
their abundance of life or their contempt of death; 67 the good
earth of the virgins, a sixty-fold crop, because of the peaceful-
ness of their way,” 68 since they do not fight against the habits of

sels are not aimed at destroying, but at fulfilling, the Law, including the Com-
mandments (cf. Mt 5.17); they are aimed at a perfect Christian life; cf. ST I
19,12; I-II 100,2; II— II 44,4,3, and thus they are focused upon in religious life;
cf. ST II-II 189,1,5.

64. The innocent is regarded as more perfect than the penitent sinner: ST
I 20,4,4.

65. It is in fact Mk 4.20.

66. Thus he/she becomes a spiritual person.

67. Martyrs do not despise their lives; cf. ST II-II 124.

68. So these interpretations of 30, 60, and 100 are not absolute: in one, vir-
ginity refers to 100; in another one, to 60.


128


THOMAS AQUINAS


the flesh, for after service in the army usually peace is given to
sexagenarians; “of the ones who are married a thirty-fold crop,”
because this is the age of the ones who fight. This is a greater
combat, for it is fought in order to avoid being overwhelmed by
lust. 69

(ad 3.2.2) Counsels are not given in order to hinder the Com-
mandments; a precept of the Law is for instance that you do not
commit perjury [Lv 19.12]. Thus Christ, who advises you not to
take an oath [Mt 5.34], causes you to be further away from the
possibility of committing perjury. 70 And the same applies to the
other ones. Thus the Counsels are safeguards to make sure that
the Commandments are kept.

(ad 3.2.3) So, accordingly, someone who is in the state of in-
nocence and pursues the state of perfection, has a hundred-
fold fruit. Hence we read in the Gospel according to Matthew
ig.29: “Everyone who left behind father or mother,” et cetera,
“will receive a hundred-fold” — that is, a pile of spiritual goods
in the present — “and in the future he will possess eternal life.”

May he guide us to this, et cetera.


69. In Thomas’s view someone who lives in marriage has a greater chance
to be swept away by feelings of lust ( libido) than someone who lives as a reli-
gious; for the latter, abstaining from sexual activity becomes a habitus, whereas
the former is tempted more seriously, because what starts out as making love
can end in pure lust (cf. ST I— II 72,2; II— II 154, 170,1,2; also III 27,3).

70. Taking an oath is discussed in ST II— II 89, perjury in II— II 98.


SERMON 10

PETITE ET ACCIPIETIS

Sermon on the Sunday before the Feast of the Ascension
(authenticity uncertain f


John 16.24: Ask, and you will receive, so that your joy may be complete.


part 1 : Prothema

sk, and you will receive, so that your joy may be com-
plete” [Jn 16.24]. St. Jerome says that the Lord’s Prayer
ought to precede all our works, and the working of
the graces ought to follow. Hence he says in a letter of his to
Paula: “Pray the Lord’s Prayer at the beginning of any work of
yours and press the sign of the Holy Cross upon your forehead.”
Likewise: “Just as it does not befit a soldier to go to war with-
out arms, so it does not befit a soldier of Christ to go to war
against a demon unless he would be protected by these arms:
the Lord’s Cross and the Lord’s Prayer.” And I add to this: the
angel’s greeting. 1 2 And hence we will hrst say an Our Father and
a Hail Mary beforehand, et cetera.


1 . Since there is no parallel either between themes in this sermon and Tho-
mas’s commentary on the Gospel according to John or between this sermon and
his exegesis of the parallel text Mt 7.7, the Catena Aurea, or passages in Thomas’s
theological works where he speaks about prayer (e.g., ST II— II 83), and since
one of the two reportationes of this sermon mentions a certain William Brito as
the author, it is not very likely that this sermon is Thomas’s.

2. The Hail Mary, Ave Maria; the second part of the prayer, “Holy Mary,
Mother of God, . . . our death,” was not part of the prayer in the 1 3th century; it
is a later addition. Cf. Thomas’s Collationes on the Hail Mary: Expositio Salutation-
is angelicaer, and on the Our Father: In orationem dominicam and ST II— II 83,9.


129


130


THOMAS AQUINAS


part 2 : Sermo

“Ask,” et cetera. [Jn 16.24]. The Apostle says in Rom 12.12
that quite often we do not know what we ought to ask. There-
fore, our Advocate, Jesus Christ, of whom John says in his let-
ter [1 Jn 2:1-2] that “we have an advocate with the Father, Je-
sus Christ, and he is the atonement for our sins,” this Advocate
invites us today to pray, and he promises to give to us, yes, he
even swears to give to us, provided that we ask in the name of
the Savior the things that are necessary for our salvation. Thus
at the beginning of today’s Gospel this Advocate of ours invites
us to ask and teaches us to formulate our petition, saying: “Very
truly, I tell you, if you ask the Father for something in my name,
he will give (it) to you” [Jn 16. 23]. 3

Accordingly he touches in these words upon three things. (1)
First, the Lord invites us to pray: “Ask.” (2) Second, he assures
us about our obtaining: “and you will receive.” (3) And third,
so that we may rightly ask, he underlines what is necessary for
us to have, when he adds: “So that your joy may be complete.”
For elsewhere it is said: “To every one who has, it will be given,
abundantly even” [Mt 25.29]; and elsewhere, in Lk 11.9: 4 “Ask
and you will receive, seek and you will find, knock and it will be
opened for you.” “Ask” with confidence; “and you will receive”
the gift of prosperity by which the body is upheld; “seek” care-
fully; and “you will find” the good of grace by which the soul is
refreshed; “knock” ceaselessly, and the door of paradise “will
be opened” for you, so that your heart may be filled with “joy.”

(1) So first, the Lord invites us in these words to ask; in this
we see the highest courtesy of him who so courteously invites
us to ask. There are four things that really ought to move us to
ask: (1.1) first, our poverty and want; (1.2) second, the greatest
generosity of Christ; (1.3) third, the favorable time for asking;
(1.4) fourth, the surety of obtaining.

1.1 I say that the first thing that ought to move us to ask is


3. Cf. Thomas’s discussion of this verse in ST II— II 83,7,2.

4. Cf. Thomas’s discussion of Mt 7.7 in ST II— II 83,3,2.


SERMON 10


131


our poverty and want. For we have nothing good from our-
selves, but from God. The Apostle says in Romans: “What do
you have,” that is, what good do you have, “that you have not
received? If you received, why do you boast as if you did not re-
ceive it?” [t Cor 4.7] A sinner has nothing from himself but his
sin, and someone who is in the state of mortal sin loses every-
thing good that he has done, because, as Jas 2.10 says: “If some-
one has served the whole Law, yet offends against one, he has
become the transgressor against all.” Someone who offends
God by transgressing a mandate of his will be condemned for
this one sin as he would be condemned for all sins; yet he will
not be punished as he would be punished for very many sins.
Or, someone who offends against one, the distributor of all
goods, Christ, is made the transgressor against all, meaning: he
will undergo the suffering for all evils. Or someone who offends
against one thing, namely, the precept of love ( caritas ), is made
the transgressor against all other virtues, because love ( caritas )
is the mother of all virtues; just as someone who offends the
paterfamilias consequently offends the whole family. Hence, a
sinner who lies down in many mortal sins is in a great misery,
because he does not know his defects. John says this plainly in
Rv 3.17 in respect of a sinner: “You say: ‘I am rich and wealthy,
and I do not lack anything,’ but you do not know that you are
wretched: miserable as well as poor and blind and nude.” “You
say: ‘I am rich’” in knowledge, “‘wealthy’” in riches; “‘I do not
lack anything,”’ for I am healthy and strong; “but you do not
know that you are wretched” because you commit sins, “miser-
able” because you have been robbed of the virtues, “poor” be-
cause you lost the grace of God, “blind” because you do not
know, “naked” because of a bad reputation. Mortal sin causes
all these evils, for “sin makes peoples wretched” [Prv 14.34].
Hence, first our poverty and want should move us to ask. These
are so big, because we do not have anything good from our-
selves. Indeed, we only have our sins and defects of ourselves,
and each and every good that we have we have from God.

(1.2) The second thing that ought to move us to ask is the
greatest generosity of Christ. For he himself is the most boun-
tiful distributor of all goods. He is prefigured as such by King


132


THOMAS AQUINAS


Ahasuerus, who has said to Queen Esther: “What is your peti-
tion, Esther? If you asked me for half my kingdom, I would give
it to you” [Est 5.3]. Yet he does not give a part of his kingdom
to his friends, but the whole of his kingdom [cf. Mt 5.3, 25.34].
The former reigned over 120 provinces, the latter reigns over
the whole world. Therefore, more than Ahasuerus, he is some-
one who gives (a) with courtesy, (b) to all people, (c) abundant-
ly. These three characteristics are also mentioned by James in
his letter: “He gives to all abundantly and does not reproach”
[Jas 1.5]. He does not sell; “he gives”: behold courtesy. “To all”:
behold abundance. “And he does not reproach”: behold his
generosity.

His gift is not the gift of a fool, about which we read in Prov-
erbs: “The gift of a fool will not be useful for you; he will give
to you and reproach you” [Sir 20.14]. This popular dictum has
no place there: “a bon demandeur, bon refuseur " 5 but rather: a
good requester finds a bountiful giver. 6 For, “every very good
present and every perfect gift” [Jas 1.17] is from him. A good
present is the good of prosperity like riches; a better gift is a
gift of nature, like physical strength or health; the best is the
gift of grace, like the virtues; the perfect gift is the gift of glory.
He gives all these gifts.

He is more ready to give than we are to receive. And so,
because his generosity is so great, a complaint is made about
those who do not want to ask, because it is St. Gregory who says:
“He does not deny that he himself is a debtor who goes to meet
those who ask him to give a lot, knowing that we need a lot.” He
also says: “Human laziness blushes with shame, because God is
more willing to give than we are to receive; he is more willing
to show mercy than we are to be liberated from misery.” 7

(1.3) The third thing which ought to move us to ask is the fa-
vorable time [cf. 2 Cor 6.2]. Someone who has to do something
in the palace of a prince serves in a favorable time when the

5. A bon demandeeur, bon escondeeur: “You may well ask; it may well be refused.”
Or in Dutch: Kinderen die vragen worden overgeslagen ; i.e., “Children who ask will
not receive.”

6. Ad bonum petitorem largissimum datorem.

7. Thomas’s view of misery ( miseria ): ST I 21,4 and II— II 30,1.


SERMON 10


133


lord is joyful and the family is joyful. Likewise, the time to ask
is favorable now, since our Lord Jesus Christ goes to the heaven-
ly palace with the representation of our flesh, [to ask the Father
on our behalf]. So, now are the dies Rogationum, [“the days for
asking,”] during which the Lord wants us to ask him, because,
after he has ascended into heaven, the angelic citizens and all
the heavenly nobles rejoice. And so, since the time is favorable
now, because on Thursday Christ enters heaven to ask the Fa-
ther on our behalf, let us ask him now. Let us neither anticipate
with the gourmand, who was late asking for a drop of water and
who did not obtain it [cf. Lk 16.24], nor let us anticipate with
the foolish virgins for whom the door was closed [Mt 25.10-11],
but let us in the name of Christ the Savior ask the things that
are necessary for our salvation, and we will obtain it. Hence it
says in today’s Gospel: “Until now you have not asked anything
in my name. Ask and you will receive” [Jn 16.24].

(1.4) The fourth thing is the surety of obtaining it, and this
follows from three things mentioned before: by reason of our
great poverty and want, God’s greatest generosity, and the favo-
rable time for asking, we can be sure that we will obtain it. Thus
John says in his letter: “And this is the trust we have in the Fa-
ther, that whenever we ask, he will hear us” [cf. 1 Jn 3.22]. This is
true if we ask for the things that are necessary for our salvation.

It is true that nowadays people are lazy with respect to ask-
ing God and praying; therefore, two things in particular ought
to move us to pray: (1.4.1) the preciousness of prayer and (1.4.2)
our necessity.

(1.4.2) Its preciousness, because, although these three, fast-
ing, almsgiving, and prayer, ordain us to have eternal life,
prayer is the most worthy one, since fasting and almsgiving
have to do with what is next to us, whereas prayer has to do
with what is above us. So it is more worthy, because a person 8
approaches God as someone familiar, and there he fulfills the
command, where the flesh cannot arrive.

(1.4.2) The necessity to pray is clear because of three reasons
why people cry out: fire, water, and robbers. The fire of lust-


8 . Cf. Sermon 05 Ecce rex tuus, note 3 .


134


THOMAS AQUINAS


fulness attacks us; the water of avarice troubles us; the infer-
nal robber and his henchmen disquiet us. And therefore, be-
cause in the present we have so many assailants, we ought to
direct prayers to God more often, so that he may hear us in the
present by his grace, and in the future grant us eternal life.


part 3: Collatio in sero

“Ask, and you will receive” [Jn 16.24]. I n the first sermon it
was mentioned what those things are that move us to pray, for,
as was said, there are four: our necessity, Christ’s generosity, the
favorable time, and the surety of obtaining it. 9

It is true that there are many hindrances because of which
our prayer is frustrated. Therefore, we can put forward seven
hindrances in this homily, by reason of which our asking is frus-
trated and our prayer is not heard by God. 10 The first hindrance
is due to the indiscretion of the asking; the second is due to the
doubt of the one who asks; the third is due to the uncleanness
and the unworthiness of the petitioner; the fourth is due to hy-
pocrisy and feigning; the fifth is due to hatred and rancor; the
sixth is due to harshness towards the neighbor; and the seventh
is due to contempt of the divine law and disobedience.

(1) So the first hindrance is due to the indiscretion of the ask-
ing. James says about this: “You ask but do not receive, because
you ask in an evil way” [Jas 4.3], 11 that is, indiscreetly, as the
mother of John and James did: she asked God that one of her
sons would sit at his right hand and the other at his left hand
in his Kingdom. To them the Lord responds: “You do not know
what you are asking. Can you drink the cup that I will drink?”
[Mt 20.22], meaning: suffer a passion similar to that which I will
undergo. “We can,” they said. And the Lord: “You will drink
my cup, yet sitting at my right or left is not mine to give you”

9. This is the only connection with the Sermo ; the steps announced there are
not taken in the Collatio in sero. It seems that a completely different Collatio in
sero is added to the Sermo.

10. Some of these are also discussed by Thomas, in SCG III 95-96, but there
in the context of the friendship between God and us ( amicitia ).

1 1. Cf. in contrast Thomas’s discussion of this verse in ST II— II 83,5,1.


SERMON 10


135


[Mt 20.22-23; Mk 10.40]. A gloss adds: “without preceding mer-
its.” Augustine speaks against those who ask for worldly honor
as follows: “When you ask for the things that God praises and
promises to give, ask him with confidence, because God grants
those things to us. Yet if you ask for temporal things, 12 ask with
discretion, for God knows better than man whether things are
good or bad for us.” Still, many ask God more freely for tempo-
ral than for eternal goods. All such people ask in an indiscreet
way, because it does not befit God to give such a small gift, just
as it does not befit the king of France to give a dime. Or God
prefers not to listen to such people, because what they ask for is
not salutary for them, just as he did not listen to Paul [asking to
be delivered from] the stimulus of the flesh [cf. 2 Cor 12.7], and
just as he does not listen to boys in schools asking that they not
be flogged, because it is of no avail to them.

(2) The second hindrance why someone is not heard is his
doubt. Against them James says: “Let him ask in faith, not hesi-
tant about anything. For someone who hesitates is like a wave
of the sea that is moved by the wind” [Jas 1.6]. 13 And he adds:
“Therefore, that person should not think that he receives an-
ything from God” [Jas 1.7]. Gregory says: “Someone is made
unworthy of a heavenly blessing who asks the Lord in doubt to
bring about something.” And this is what John says in his letter:
“All things, whatever you may ask” in faith, “believe that you re-
ceive them” [Mk 11.24].

(3) The third hindrance is the unworthiness of the one who
asks and his uncleanness. About this, Is 1.15 says: “When you
have multiplied your prayers, I will not hear you.” Then he gives
the reason: “for your hands,” that is, your works, “are full of
blood” [ibid.], meaning: sins. And in Lam 3.42 we read: “We
have acted unjustly and have brought about your rage; for that
reason you are inexorable.” Against such people it says in Ps
66.18: “If” I have “iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear.”
A gloss there says: “Purity of prayer is heard by God.” A prayer
is pure which is not disturbed by worries of worldly things, by
love (amor) of the flesh. The mind is far away from God when it

12. Cf. ST II-II 83,6.

13. Cf. Thomas’s discussion of this verse in ST II— II 83,15,3.


136


THOMAS AQUINAS


is occupied with worldly worries and dedicated to the desires of
the flesh. Therefore, the mind must first be purified from the
worldly worries and separated from the desires of the flesh first,
so that the attention of the mind may be directed to God. This
is clear through a visible example: the Bishop of Paris would not
give the allowances ( prebendae ) of his church to unclean people,
villains, and those who openly charge interest [cf. Lv 25.36-37];
likewise, the heavenly High Priest will not give the allowances
of his glory to such people.

(4) The fourth hindrance why someone’s asking is frustrat-
ed is hypocrisy and feigning. For a hypocrite shouts with his
mouth, but is silent in his heart. Is 29. 13 14 says, referring to such
a person: “This people praises me with the lips, but their heart
is far from me.” Gregory says: “If we seek eternal life with our
mouth but do not desire it with our heart, we are silent as we
shout.” Hence, aiming at a hypocrite the commonly known say-
ing goes: “A hypocrite cries out when the tribulation of tempo-
ral things frightens him; God does not hear him in this favora-
ble time, because he has not heard the cry of the Lord in the
time of peace.” 15

(5) The fifth hindrance 16 is due to hatred of the heart and
rancor. In Sir 28.3 we read: “A man maintains anger against an-
other man and asks help from God.” No one receives a favor
from God unless he lets go of his rancor against his brother or
his neighbor. We find in the Gospel the example of a wretched
slave to whom his lord says: ‘“Wretched slave, I have forgiven you
every debt, because you asked me; should you then not have had
mercy upon your fellow slave, just as I have had mercy upon you?’
And he ordered that he would be handed over to be tortured,
until he would have paid back the entire debt.” And the Evan-
gelist concludes: “In the same way my Father in heaven will do
with you, if each one of you does not forgive from your hearts”
[Mt 18.32-35]. This is the bond that the Lord has made with us:
“Forgive, and you will be forgiven” [Mt 6.14]; otherwise, he will

14. Cf. Thomas’s discussion of this verse in ST II— II 91,1,1.

15. St. Gregory: Moralia in Job 18,8,15.

16. Cf. ST II— II 83,16 (esp. arg./ad 3, where he discusses Sir 28.2 and Mt
6.12).


SERMON 10


137


not forgive you. Thus one says in vain in the Lord’s Prayer: “For-
give us (our debts as we forgive our debtors)” [Mt 6.12].

(6) The sixth hindrance is due to the harshness towards
the neighbor: there are many rich people who have so many of
the goods of this world but do not want to come to the aid of
the poor of Christ at all. Because such people do not practice
mercy for the poor, they will not find mercy from God in the
future, just like the rich gourmand in hell who did not obtain
one drop of water, because he had denied one crumb of bread
to the poor Lazarus [Lk i6.tg-26].

(7) The seventh and last hindrance is due to contempt of
the divine Law and disobedience. In Sirach we read: “Someone
who closes his ear in order not to hear the Law, his prayer will
be detestable” [Prv 28.9], 17 meaning: it will not be heard in the
chapel of the heavenly court, just as a servant of someone who
is excommunicated may not be heard in the court of one or an-
other worldly judge.

On top of these seven, note that in order to obtain, it is im-
portant for man above all to remember how fragile he is him-
self and to consider how good God is. Thus Isidore says: “When
we stand before God to pray, we ought to mourn and shed tears,
calling to mind how many and serious the sins are that we have
committed, how cruel the tortures of hell are that we fear, and
how incomparable the joys in heaven are to which we look for-
ward.” Robbers and plague-sufferers teach us how to pray. 18
The robber who saw what he had done and the torture that was
prepared for him asked in between these two with many tears
for mercy [Lk 23.42]. Plague-sufferers show the weaker and un-
sightly members of their body to others and hide the healthy
ones, in order to move others to compassionate devotion and
the giving of alms.

Likewise, let us show to God in the present our weaknesses
and our sins, so that he may hear us in the present through his
grace and bring us eternal life in the future. Amen.

17. Cf. ST II— II 83,16 (esp. arg./ad 1).

18. These examples are from William of Alvernia’s Rhetorica divina , chapter


32 -


SERMON 11

EMITTE SPIRITUM

Sermon on Pentecost


Psalm 104.30: Send out your Spirit, and they will be created,
and you will renew the face of the earth.


part 1 : Prothema

end out your Spirit, and they will be created, and you
will renew the face of the earth” [Ps 104.30]. On this
Psalm. We must speak about him without whom no
one can speak what is right and who can make or makes eve-
ryone speak abundantly. Indeed, without him we cannot cor-
rectly speak. So it is not surprising that it is said in Wis 9.17:
“Who could have known the sense,” of God’s truth, “unless he
had sent his Spirit from on high?” Without a sense of the truth
no one could speak what is true. 1 Again, the Holy Spirit ena-
bles all to speak abundantly [cf. 1 Cor 12.3]. Therefore, Grego-
ry says: “He makes wise those whom he has filled.” Today this is
evident, as the apostles “were filled with the Holy Spirit and be-
gan to speak in various tongues” [Acts 2.4]. Therefore, we will
ask this One, who even makes the mute speak abundantly [cf. Is
35.6; Mt g.32-33], that he may give me to speak, et cetera.


part 2 : Sermo

“Send out your Spirit, and they will be created” [Ps 104.30],
et cetera. Today Holy Mother Church solemnly celebrates

1 . In order to know the truth concerning natural things, grace is not neces-
sary, but it is concerning things that exceed nature: ST I— II 109,1.


138


SERMON 11


139


the mission of the Holy Spirit that occurred among the apos-
tles, the mission that was besought in a prophetic spirit by the
Prophet, saying: “Send out your Spirit, and they will be cre-
ated,” et cetera. We can consider four things in these words,
namely, (1) the property of the Holy Spirit, (2) his mission, (3)
the strength of the One sent, and (4) the receptive materia of
this strength. For it says: “Send out” — behold, the mission (2);
“your Spirit” — see, the Person sent (1); “and they will be creat-
ed, and you will renew” — lo, the effect of the One sent (3); “the
face of the earth” — see, the receptive materia of this effect (4). 2

(1.) First, I say, the property of the Holy Spirit is mentioned
when he says: “your Spirit.” Here we must notice that the name
“spirit” seems to imply four things: (1.1) the fineness of sub-
stance, (1.2) the perfection of life, (1.3) the incitement of a
movement, and (1.4) his hidden origin.

(1.1) First, I say that the name “spirit” seems to imply the
fineness of substance. 3 4 5 For we usually call substances without a
body “spirits.” Likewise, we call fine bodies, like air and fire,
“spirits.” Hence [the risen Christ] says, in the last chapter of
Luke: “Touch and see,” because “a spirit does not have flesh
and bones” [Lk 24.39]. 4 And in this way a spirit is distinct from
things that have a coarse materia, those that are composed of
flesh and a body.

(1.2) Second, the name “spirit” seems to imply the perfection
of life. Because as long as animated creatures have a spirit, they
live, but when their spirit recedes, they perish. D As the Psalmist
says: “You will take away their spirit, and they will cease to be”
[Ps 146.4], et cetera. And in Genesis: he called forth “the spirit
of life (in) all the flesh.” 6

2. Thus the structure of the sermon is that of Aristotle’s four causes: respec-
tively, the formal (who the Spirit is), the final (why he acts), the effective (that
he acts), and the material (the object).

3. Or: the word “spirit” signifies an essential fineness; cf. ST I 3,5,1; also On
the Metaphysica of Aristotle, Book VII, lectio II (nn. 1 270-1 305) .

4. The resurrected Christ had a true body: ST III 54,1.

5. The animais the life-giving principle of the body: ST I 18,3,2, 70,3,2.

6. This quotation is from a liturgical book called Historia de Noe, “The Histo-
ry of Noah,” from the section on Gn 7.4-8.


140


THOMAS AQUINAS


(1.3) Third, the name “spirit” seems to imply the incitement
of a movement. 7 In this way we call the winds “spirits” [cf. Acts
2.2]. And concerning this it is said in Ps 107.25: “He spoke, and
a spirit of a storm came about”; [Ps 10.7 (Vg)] “a spirit of storms
(will be) the portion of their cup.” We also say that people act
in a spirit when they do something impulsively, as Is 25.4 does:
“The spirit of the strong is like a hurricane that pushes over a
wall.” 8

(1.4) Fourth, the name “spirit” usually means a hidden ori-
gin, just as it is attributed to a spirit when someone is disturbed
but does not know what is disturbing him. Thus we read in Jn
3.8: “The Spirit (is like the wind: it) blows where it wills and you
hear its sound, but you do not know (where it is coming from).”

Let us inquire, with regard to these four [implications of his
name], about the properties of the Holy Spirit, in reverse order:
he is called Holy Spirit because of his hidden origin, the incite-
ment of the movement, the holiness of life, and the fineness of
substance.

(ad 1.4) First, I say that a property of the Holy Spirit is his
hidden origin. Faith teaches and reason argues that all visi-
ble and changeable things have a hidden cause [cf. Col 1.15-
16, Heb 11.3]. What is that cause? That cause is God. Thus the
Apostle says: “The one who has created all things is God” [Eph
3.9]. It is certain that everything that is not God is created by
God. 9

But how has God created all things? I say that he did not do
it by reason of a natural necessity, just as fire completely con-
sumes, but that he has brought forth all things of his own free
will, as the Psalmist says: “All things he has made, whatever he
willed” [Ps 115.3]. 10 A house-builder builds a house because he
wants to and yet at the same time because necessity or utility
urges him, for instance, in order to make money or to live in

7. Cf. ST I 27,4, 36,1.

8. As in English: “He burst in,” and, “In a burst of anger she told him what
was bothering her/she hit him,” etc.

g. ST I 44: God is the first cause of all that is.

1 o. Cf Rv 4. 1 1 ; there is no necessity in God: ST I 19,3.


SERMON 11


141


the house. God truly did not make the world because he want-
ed to gain something, since he is not in need of our goods. 11
Why then did he make the world? Certainly out of his loving
will, not out of cupidity. We have an example of this: a house-
builder who would know how to design a house while he does
not stand in need of it but loves ( amo ) 12 the beauty of a house —
that love {amor) of the house-builder would bring the house
into being.

But what, then, is the cause and the root of bringing forth
hidden things? For sure, it is love {amor). Thus it says in Wis
11.24: “You love ( diligo ) all things that are, and you hate noth-
ing of the things which you have made.” And St. Dionysius says
that “divine love {amor) has not sent forth itself in order to be
without offspring.” Love {amor) is the Holy Spirit. 13 Hence it is
said at the beginning of creation in Genesis that “the Spirit of
the Lord glided over the waters” [Gn 1.2], namely, in order to
make the materia and to bring things forth into being.

We celebrate now the feast of the Holy Spirit, and the Spirit
is the principle of being in all things. Thus the Spirit has a hid-
den origin, the property of which is love {amor).

(ad 1.3) Second, “Holy Spirit” implies the incitement of a
movement. For we see in the world different movements, nat-
ural and voluntary ones, in people and in angels. Where do
these different movements come from? They must come front
one hrst mover, 14 evidently from God. The Psalmist says: “You
will change them, and they will be changed” [Ps 102.27]. And
God moves by his will.

But what is the hrst movement of the will? For certain it is
love {amor ). 15 And what is the operation of love {amor)? I say:
someone who is moved by love {amor) rejoices through the love
{amor) for a loved {amatus) thing and is saddened about what

1 1 . Deus uero fecit mundum non uoluntate cupiditatis quia bonis nostris non eget
Ex 9.29, 19.5; Dt 10.14 (in ST I 61,4); 2 Sm 7.5, 1 1; Jb 41.2, Vg (in SCG II 28);
Ps 50.8-13, 89.12; 1 Cor 10.26.

12. For Thomas’s terminology, see Sermon 01 Veniet desideratus, note 39.

13. Love is the proper name of the Spirit (appropriation): ST I 37,1; also
74,3,3; RII 70,3; II— II 14,1.

14. Because no thing moves by itself: ST I 2,3 ( prima via).

15. In God as well as in creatures: ST I 20,1; I— II 25,2.


142


THOMAS AQUINAS


is contrary to it. Thus we read in the prophet Ezekiel, the first
chapter: “Where the incitement of the Spirit was,” that is, the
inclination of divine love (amor), “that is whither they will be
brought” [Ezek 1.12]. Yes, in ajust way all things that are in the
world are moved by the Holy Spirit, which is indicated by Est
13.9 (Vg), where it says: “There is no one who could resist (his)
win ”i6 This Holy Spirit, whose feast we celebrate now, is the
principle of the movement of all things. 17

Nevertheless, some things are moved in the world by them-
selves, and others by others. They who have life are moved by
themselves, whereas the things that lack life are moved by oth-
ers. The principle of the movement of all things is alive. Even
more: it is life. 18 Hence, the Holy Spirit is life, insofar as he is
the principle of the movement of all things. As the Psalmist
says: “With you is the fountain of life” [Ps 36.10]. And since he
is life, he is, therefore, the Giver of life. 19

Great is the Holy Spirit, therefore, by whom all things that
exist are moved and live. Thus we read in Acts 17.28: “In him
we live and move and are.” So all things have their movement
and being from the Holy Spirit.

(ad 1.1) Third, if we consider, concerning the Holy Spirit,
the fineness ( subtilitas ) of substance, we will see that the Holy
Spirit is love (amor). And whose? It is the love of God and of the
One who loves (diligo) God. 20 On the basis of this understand-
ing of love (amor), the Holy Spirit has a fineness of substance.

And from the angle of the beloved, he is the love through
which God loves God and the Father loves the Son. 21 Hence we
read in Wis 7.22: “For in her,” that is, God’s wisdom, “is the spir-
it of understanding,” which makes people understand. 22

16. Not because we are forced, but because we are inspired: ST II— II 24,2; our
natural inclination towards what is good is strengthened by (the movement of)
the Spirit: ST I 83,1 and the Scriptural references there; also I 105,4; I“H 9,6.

17. ST I-II 109,9,2; II-II 1,8,5.

18. ST I 10,1 and 18,3-4.

19. As we profess in the Creed: vivificantem, the Giver of life; cf. the quota-
tion from Ps 143.10-1 1, just before section (2).

20. An obvious circumscription of Jesus Christ; cf. Jn 14.31.

21. Amatus, amor, amo; on the relations in divinis: ST I 28.

22. Cf. ST I 14,4. Just as love is appropriated to the Spirit, knowledge and


SERMON 11


143


In Greek the word “holy” [Wis 7.22] signifies cleanness. 23 It is
true that the love (amor) through which a person loves ( diligo )
corporeal things is unclean or foul: for through love (amor) the
lover (amans) is united with the beloved thing (arnatus), and
the more the lover is mingled with the beloved thing, the more
he collects foulness. Just as silver, if it is mixed with something
impure, collects foulness [cf. Prv 25.4], so your mind [is de-
filed] if it is mixed with love (amor) for lower things. But when
it is connected with the highest thing, it is called holy love. 24

There are some who want to be dedicated to God and who
pay no heed to the salvation of their neighbors. 25 But the Holy
Spirit is not like that [Wis 7.23]. The Apostle Paul was serious-
ly concerned about the salvation of his neighbors, whence he
said: “I have been made all things for all people in order to en-
lighten all” [1 Cor g.22].

Furthermore, some others are many-sided yet deceitful. The
Holy Spirit is not like that. He is multiple [Jb 11.6, Wis 7.22] in
such away that he who is one [Wis 7.22] shows himself to differ-
ent people.

Furthermore, he is fine 26 [Wis 7.22], because he makes a
person draw back from coarse things and cling to God, as the
Psalmist says: “One thing I have desired of the Lord” [Ps 27.4]
and elsewhere: “Yet clinging to God is my good” [Ps 73.28].

(ad 1.2) Fourth, this Holy Spirit not only gives us that we are,
live, and move, but even more: he makes us holy [Wis 7.24-27].
Therefore, the Apostle says in Rom 1.4: “God has predestined
in strength according to the Spirit of sanctification.” No one is
holy unless the Holy Spirit sanctifies him. 27

understanding are appropriated to the Son: ST I 34,1,2, 39,7; the Spirit pro-
ceeds from the Father and the Son: ST I 36,2.

23. ayioc; [ hagios ]: consecrated, cleansed, clean, holy, reverent, etc.

24. Amor sanctus. Thus this love is called “holy” in an analogical way: ST I
1 3,5-6; the highest thing is the Holy One.

25. Cf. ST II— II 167,2,3; The love for our neighbors is founded in God; Tho-
mas underlines the necessity for those who love God of being in solidarity with
their fellow human beings: ST II— II 19,6, 32,3, 44,2, 105,2 (cf. Mt 22.39), an d
18.43.

26. Or “subde”; Lat., subtilis.

27. ST I 36,1,1, 43,3; III 2,10, 62,6,2.


144


THOMAS AQUINAS


And how does he sanctify? I say that he makes every single
thing mentioned appear in those whom he sanctifies, 28 because
he turns the ones he sanctifies into refined people and makes
them despise temporal things. Thus it says in John: “Do not love
( diligo ) the world nor the things that are in the world. If some-
one loves ( diligo ) the world, the love ( caritas ) of the Father is not
in him” [1 Jn 2.15].

Furthermore, he bestows the spiritual life on the ones whom
he sanctifies. Thus we read in Ezek 37.5: “Behold, I will send
the Spirit into you and you will live.” Spiritual life is life through
the Floly Spirit. 29 The Apostle [impresses on us]: “If you live
by the Spirit, walk also by the Spirit” [Gal 5.25].

Again, the Holy Spirit moves those whom he sanctifies
through his incitement to do good. 30 Isaiah testifies: “Because
he comes like a wild river, driven by the Spirit of the Lord [Is
59 - 19 ]-

Others are lazy; 31 they do not seem to be set in motion by the
Holy Spirit. Thus a gloss on Acts 2.2: “Suddenly a sound came
from heaven,” et cetera, says: “The grace of the Holy Spirit does
not know late undertakings.”

And the Holy Spirit sanctifies you: he leads us back to the hid-
den origin, that we may be united with God. Therefore, Isaiah
says: “The Spirit of the Lord will carry you off to a place you do
not know,” 32 meaning: to the heavenly inheritance. The Psalmist
says: “Your good Spirit will lead me away (in a land with straight
paths; because of your name you will give me life; in your justice
you will lead me away from my fear)” [Ps 143.10-11].

Now it is clear that this is the property of the Holy Spirit and
that he is the origin of living, being, and moving [cf. Acts 17.28].


28. Gal 5.22-23: the fruits of the Spirit; ST I— II 70, esp. 70,3,1.

29. SCG IV 20-22.

30. By inspiration, not by coercion: ST I 83,1,3.

3 1 . Which is a kind of fear that paralyzes, ST I— II 44,4,3 (cf. the quotation of
Ps 143.10-1 1 at the end of this section of the text); Thomas connects it with the
attitude of negligence in II— II 54,2,1.

32. It is in fact King Ahab’s vizier Obadiah who speaks these words to the
prophet Elijah, in 1 Kgs 18.12.


SERMON 11


145


(2) Let us look at the second aspect: the mission of the Holy
Spirit, which is wondrous and unknown to us, because the Holy
Spirit is sent (2.1) without a need for his part, (2.2) without a
change in him, (2.3) without subjection, and (2.4) without sepa-
ration.

(2.1) First, I say: the Holy Spirit was sent while there was no
necessity for him [to be sent] . When someone is sent to a cer-
tain place so that some things happen which cannot happen
unless he is sent, it is a mission out of necessity. But there is no
necessity in the mission of the Holy Spirit, as we read in Wis
7.23: “He has every strength, oversees all things.”

What then is the reason for the mission of the Holy Spirit?
I say: our want. 33 The necessity of this want is partly because of
the dignity of our human nature and partly because of the de-
fect of it. For the rational creature surpasses the other creatures
because it can stretch out to the enjoyment of God, something
no other creature is capable of. 34 Thus we read in Lam 3.24:
‘“My portion,’ he has said, ‘is the Lord of my soul.’” Some seek
their portion in the world, like honors, esteem. But the Psalm-
ist says: “Clinging to God is my good” [Ps 73.28].

You should realize that it is necessary that all things that are
moved to a certain end have something that moves them to that
end. The things that are moved to a natural end are moved by
something in nature, whereas things that are moved to a super-
natural end, namely, the enjoyment of God, must have a super-
natural mover. 35 Well, nothing can lead us to this but two, for
by these two things a person is led to this end: by knowledge
and by love. 36

Such a knowledge is supernatural. Thus we read in 1 Cor 2.9:
“Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor did it come up in the
heart of man (what God has prepared for those who love [dili-
go | him).” 37 And in Is 64.3: “Never have they heard, neither did

33. Cf. ST I 43,3 and I— II 111,1; also 113.

34. Cf. ST I-II 1 ,2ff. 35. Cf. ST I-II 5,5 and 1 1 2, 1 .

36. Amor; see note 2 1 .

37. St. Paul says this in the context of the mystery of Christ’s life and death
(1 Cor 1.18-2.8); he continues saying that it is revealed to us through the Spirit
(1 Cor 2.10-13); cf. ST I 12,13 and II— II 45.


146


THOMAS AQUINAS


they perceive it with their ears, nor has an eye seen without
you, God, the things you have prepared for those who await-
ed (them).” 38 Everything man knows he knows either because
he finds out or because he learns it. For sight serves the find-
ing, and hearing serves the learning. Because of this it is said
that “eye has not seen and ear has not heard,” by showing that
it transcends human knowledge. It even exceeds the human de-
sire, and that is why it is said: “Nor did it come up in the heart
of man.” 39

So how is man led into the knowledge of him? It could not be
otherwise than that the heavenly secrets were made known to
man, that is, that the Holy Spirit would be sent visibly 40 in order
to move our affections so as to direct them toward those [heav-
enly secrets]. Therefore, it says: “Eye has not seen.” So, how do
we know? “God has revealed them to us through his Spirit. For
the Spirit examines everything thoroughly, even the profound
things of God” [1 Cor 2.10]. Hence we read in Wis 9.17: “Who
will be able to know your thoughts unless you gave wisdom and
sent the Holy Spirit from the highest heavens?”

Thus the Holy Spirit is not sent because of necessity on his
part, but for our benefit.

(2.2) Furthermore, this mission happens without a change in
him. 41 When a messenger is sent from place to place, it is with
a change. But the Holy Spirit is sent without a change of place,
since he is the true God and unchangeable. 42 Thus it is said in
Wis 7.27: “Remaining in himself, he renews all things.”

How, then, is he sent? He draws us to himself, and this is
called being sent only in the sense in which we say that the sun
is sent to someone when that person stands in the sunlight.

38. Hence it is necessary to have another doctrine than philosophy for the
sake of our salvation: ST I 1,1.

39. We cannot desire what we do not know at all: ST I 27,3,3, 36,2, 75,6; I— II
27,4,2 (cf. I 20,1); quoting Augustine: Nihil amatum nisi cognitum, in: ST I 60,1;
I— II 3,4,4, 27,2; II— II 27,4,1.

40. Visibiliter (Kwasniewski, however, reads inuisibiliter: “in an invisible way”);
this happens when Christ is baptized: Mt 3.16 (cf. ST I 43,7); and at Pentecost:
Acts 2.3 (ST III 66,3,1).

4 1 - ST I 43,1.

42. ST I 9, because God is one (ST I 3) and eternal (ST I 10,1-4).


SERMON 11


147


Thus it is with the Holy Spirit. 43 So it is said concerning uncre-
ated wisdom, in Wis g.io: “Send her out from the heavens and
from the throne of your greatness, so that she may be with me
(and work with me and so that I may know what is pleasing to
you).” Likewise, in Gal 4.6: “He sent his Spirit, who calls: ‘Abba,
Father.’”

These missions spread throughout all nations and enter holy
souls [cf. Wis 7.27]. When the fullness of time had come, the
Son of God was sent into the flesh, 44 and thus it was right that
also the Holy Spirit would be sent visibly, not, however, that he
would be received in the unity of a person 45 as the Son in the
human nature.

(2.3) Furthermore, the Holy Spirit is sent although he is not
subjected. 46 Slaves and servants are sent by their masters, since
they are subjected to them. Hence some heretics believed that
the Son and the Holy Spirit would be lesser than the Father,
since they are sent by the Father. This, however, is not true. The
Holy Spirit sets people free [cf. Gal 4.5]; hence he is not a serv-
ant; he is sent out by reason of his own decision, for “the Spirit
blows where he wills” [Jn 3.8]; and the term “being sent” is used
merely because the Father is the originator ( auctoritas ). 47

We find places where it says that the Holy Spirit is sent by
the Father, while elsewhere it says that he is sent by the Son.
But the Greeks 48 oppose strongly in this matter, for they hold
that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father only, not from
the Son, and they argue in an unrefined way. Unrefined, for
where the Son speaks about the mission of the Holy Spirit, he
connects the Son with the Father or the Father with the Son:
for instance, in John 15, he says: “The Paraclete, whom the Fa-

43. ST I 9,1,2. Hence we share, participate, in it, but do not have it to the
full, as the one who has it by essence: I 44, 1 , 84,4, 1 .

44. As Paul says in Gal 4.4; cf. ST I 43,5 (on the invisible mission of the
Son).

45. But in our heart: cf. Gal 4.6.

46. ST I 43,1,1; cf. SCG IV 16-18 and 24-25.

47. The word “father” implies origin; therefore, we never read that the Fa-
ther was sent; cf. ST I 43,4.

48. Thomas refers to the Orthodox Church: this issue (the Filioque contro-
versy) was a reason for the Eastern Schism in the year 1054.


148


THOMAS AQUINAS


ther will send in my name” [Jn 14.26] and in another place:
“When the Paraclete comes, whom I will send to you from the
Father” [Jn 15.26]. Thus the origination of the source comes
from the Father. 49

(2.4) Furthermore, the Holy Spirit is sent without separation, 50
since the Spirit of unity is [naturally] opposed to separation.
Hence the Apostle says: “Exert yourselves to serve the unity of
the Spirit in a bond of peace” [Eph 4.3]. The Holy Spirit gathers
together according to Ephesians 4. Thus also Jn 17.22 says: “That
they may be one” in us, through the unity of the Holy Spirit,
“just as we, too, are one.” 51

This union is begun in our time through grace, and will be
completed in the future through glory,
to which may he lead us, et cetera.


part 3: Collatio in sero

“Send out your Spirit” [Ps 104.30], et cetera. Early in the
morning today we have said some things in keeping with the
measure of our understanding about the property of the Holy
Spirit and his mission. Now it remains to speak about (3) the ef-
fects of the Holy Spirit and (4) whom or what it befits to receive
these effects.

(3) In the words cited above we are given to understand the
twofold effect of the Holy Spirit, namely, (3.1) creation and
(3.2) renewal, where it says, “and they will be created and you
will renew.”

(3.1) If we truly want to accept these words in the sense that
creation means bringing forth things into the existence of
nature, 52 the Spirit is indeed the Creator of all things, in keep-
ing with what is touched upon in Jdt 16.14: “You sent your Spir-
it, and they were created.”

49. For Thomas Scripture is the key to a solution in this matter. The Son is
the origo de origine (cf. the Creed: Deum de Deo, Lumen de Lumine, Deum verum de
Deo vero); cf. ST I 32,3, 33,1, 36,2-4.

50. ST I 43,1,2.

52. ST I 45, 46,2,2.


51. ST II— II 183,2,3.


SERMON 11


149


Let us speak now of another creation. It is commonly un-
derstood nowadays that those who are promoted to a high-
er state, such as the episcopate or another dignity, are said to
be “created.” 53 In the same way all those who are promoted
and made sons and daughters of God are said to be created,
as if they were promoted, as St. James says: “(By his free will
he brought us forth,) so that we may be the beginning of his
creation” [Jas 1.18]. The Lord willed to establish a new crea-
tion, as we also read in Wis 1.14: God “created so that all things
would be,” namely, in the existence of nature; and he willed to
re-create them, namely, so that they would be in the existence
of grace. The apostles were the first-fruits of this re-creation.
We read about this creation in Gal 6.15: In Christ Jesus “neither
circumcision nor the foreskin is of value, but the new creation.”
What does this saying mean? Previously there were gentiles,
and with reference to this it says “foreskin.” Later on the Jews
were circumcised. Still this situation of being circumcised was
of no value unless they would be re-created through the grace
of Christ. 54 This re-creation is an effect of the Holy Spirit.

You should know that this re-creation consists in phases:
(3.1.1) first, concerning the grace of love ( caritas ); (3.1.2) sec-
ond, it is extended as far as the wisdom of knowledge; (3.1.3)
third, peaceful harmony; and (3.1.4) fourth, the constancy of
strength (firmitas ).

(3.1.1) Just as when you see that, when people are brought
into being or existence, the first thing they obtain is that they
live, so it should be when we are in grace. But what is it that
makes a man live when he is in grace? Certainly it is love ( cari-
tas ). 55 Thus John says: “We know that we are brought over from
death to life, because we love ( diligo ) our brothers and sisters”
[1 Jn 3.14]. Whoever does not love ( diligo ) his brother and sis-
ter — whatever good works he may do — he is dead [cf. 1 Cor
13. 1-3 1 . Love ( caritas ) gives life to the soul, for just as the body
lives through the soul, so the soul lives through God, and God

53. Also in English: “He was created a bishop” means that he became a bish-
op.

54. In view of the sacrament of baptism: ST III 70,1.

55. ST I 43,5,2; II— II 1,8,5; c f- II— H 23,2,2.


150


THOMAS AQUINAS


dwells in us through love ( caritas ). Hence John says: “Someone
who remains in love (caritas) remains in God” [1 Jn 4.16], et ce-
tera. And in today’s Gospel [we heard]: “If someone loves ( dil -
igo ) me, (he will keep my word, and my Father will love [dili-
go | him, and we will come, and) we will make (our dwelling in
him) [Jn 14. 23]. 56 Now, someone who does not do the will of
God does not love ( diligo ) him [cf. Jn 14.24] in a perfect way, for
“it is proper to friends that their willing and disdaining corre-
spond.” 57

Gregory says in a homily on Pentecost: “Proof of love ( dilec-
tio) is the production of the work.” 58 But you will say: “I cannot
fulfill the commandments of God.” I say that you cannot fulfill
them through your own strength, but that you can do it well by
means of the grace of God. 59 Hence [Christ] adds: “My Father
will love ( diligo ) him,” so he will not fail him, “and we will come
to him” [Jn 14.23], meaning: We will be with him and give him
the strength (vires) to fulfill the commandments of God. Con-
cerning this love (caritas) for fulfilling God’s commandments, it
is said in Eph 2.10: “We are his makings, created in Christ Jesus
for good works.”

From where is this love (caritas) in us? From the Holy Spirit,
as the Apostle says: “The love (caritas) of God is spread in our
hearts through the Holy Spirit, who is given to us” [Rom 5.5]. 60
Someone who imparts light has it from the sun. Likewise some-
one who has love (caritas) has it from the Holy Spirit. There-
fore, “send out your Spirit and they will be created,” namely,
into the existence of a life of grace through love (caritas).

(3.1.2) You see that when people are made more loving (di-
lectio), they get to know the will of God better. Thus we read
in Proverbs: “It is proper to friends to be of one heart.” 61 Well,


56. The Latin text refers to this verse as follows: Si quis diligit me, etc., usque ibi:
faciemus.

57. From St. Jerome: “Concord of will is proper to friends, whose willing and
disdaining correspond,” cited also in SCG III 95.

58. Cf. ST I— II 105,2,1 (answer is found in the corpus ).

59. Cf. ST I— II 109,4 an d 10.

60. Cf. ST I 43,3,2; I-II 109,3,1; II-II 24,2sc.

61. This saying is not from Scripture. It seems to be based on what for in-


SERMON 11


151


God reveals his secrets to his friends [cf. 1 Jn 3.2]. And this is
the second stage of the creation that is from the Holy Spirit:
that through Wisdom they get to know God. Thus we read in Jn
15.15: “Yet I have called you friends, because everything I have
heard (from my Father I have made known to you).” Hence also
the understanding of the truth is from the Holy Spirit. 62

In the Gospel [Christ says]: “The Paraclete, the Holy Spir-
it, whom the Father will send (in my name, he will teach you
everything)” [Jn 14.26]. Yet no matter how much a person may
teach outwardly, it is no good unless the grace of the Holy Spir-
it is within him. Thus it is said in the Gospel: “The anointing
will teach you about all things” [1 Jn 2.27].

And he does not only teach, but together with this he re-
minds us [Jn 14.26]. I can teach you, but you do not believe it
or do not want to put it into practice. Now the one who makes
you believe and put into practice what you hear, that is the one
who reminds (you). This is what the Holy Spirit does, for he
bends the heart, so that it agrees and follows what it hears. 63
Therefore, the Lord says: “Everyone who will have heard and
will have learned from the Father will come to me” [Jn 6.37; cf.
Mt 11.25, 28].

(3.1.3) The third stage of the creation is directed towards
a peaceful harmony. James distinguishes in his letter between
earthly wisdom and wisdom from above, and, as he discuss-
es the property of the wisdom from above, he says: “The wis-
dom that is from above is indeed first of all chaste, then peace-
making, modest, gentle” [Jas 3.17], et cetera.

Yet earthly wisdom is not chaste, for it corrupts the affection
through love (amor) of earthly things. Thus we also read in a


stance Aristotle says in VIII Ethics'. “It is proper to friendship that it is made
through concord.” In his commentary ( reportatio ) on Paul’s letter to Philemon,
pr. ( proemium ), he writes similarly: “For this is proper to friends, that they are
one in soul as for what they do not want and want,” upon which he quotes Acts
4.32.

62. Without grace we can know natural things: ST I— II 109,1; but supernatu-
ral truth, like God himself (ST I 16,5), can be known only through grace: ST I
12,13.

63. Phil 2.13; cf. ST I 83,1,3, 105,4.


152


THOMAS AQUINAS


Letter [of the New Testament]: “They are corrupted in all the
things that they know” [Jude to]. Furthermore, it makes peo-
ple divided and full of strife, whereas the wisdom from above
consists in attracting us to God, for it is “peace-making, mod-
est,” et cetera. Quarrels arise from three things: first, when
someone is not modest. Hence it says in Prv 28.25: “Someone
who boasts in himself and aggrandizes himself” before others
“stirs up quarrels.” 64 Furthermore, some are stubborn in their
manner of thinking, so that they do not allow anything to per-
suade them but stay with what they have in their head. 65 Yet this
wisdom [from above] is “amenable.” Furthermore, the wisdom
of the world does not allow its wise to agree with others, where-
as this wisdom is agreeing with good people and hence “peace-
making.”

But who makes the peace? The Holy Spirit, “for he is not
the God of dissension, but of peace” [1 Cor 14.33]. 66 Thus we
read in Eph 4.3: “Exert yourselves to preserve the unity of the
Spirit in a bond of peace.” The Lord exhorts us to preserve this
peace in today’s Gospel, saying: “Peace I leave you; my peace I
give to you; not as the world gives, I give it to you” [Jn 14.27].

Peace is twofold: one is in the present, in which we live peace-
fully, in such a way, however, that we still struggle against vices.
This peace is left to us by God [cf. Jn 14.27a, 20.21, 26]. The
other one is the peace which we will have in the future, without
struggle. And about this peace he says: “Not as the world gives,
I give it to you” [Jn 14.27b]. Some want peace in order to en-
joy goods, whence Wis 14.22 says: “Although they live in a great
war of ignorance, they consider so many and such great evils
peace.” 67

Which peace, then, is true peace? Augustine says: “Peace is
security of mind, quietness of soul, 68 simplicity of heart, a bond
of love (amor), and the company of love ( caritas ).” True peace is

64. Iurgia is a serious sin: ST II— II 1 12,2,1.

65. Which is opposite to the virtue of perseverance: ST II— II 138,2.

66. Peace is an effect of love (caritas): ST II— II 29,3.

67. Some pursue what they consider peace but is not peace: ST II— II 29,2,
esp. 29,2,3.

68. The term used is animus (not anima ): the power of feeling, the sensibil-
ity, the heart, the feelings, inclination, passions.


SERMON 11


153


threefold: in relation to yourself, to your neighbor, and to God.
As for peace with yourself, it is required that your reason not be
infected by errors or obscured by passions. And in view of this
he says: “Peace is security of mind.” There also needs to be qui-
etness in one’s affection, and in view of this he says: “quietness
of soul.” Furthermore, there ought to be simplicity in one’s in-
tention, and in view of this he says: “simplicity of heart.” Peace
with your neighbor is “a bond of love (amor),” and the peace
through which we have a bond with God is “the company of
love (caritas) ” 69

Is peace, then, very necessary for us? It certainly is. The Lord
gave witness of peace, and those who do not want to preserve
this testimony cannot receive the inheritance; in the same way,
those who do not want to preserve peace cannot arrive at the
heavenly inheritance. Now, someone will say: “I want to have
peace with God but not with my neighbor.” This, however, can-
not be, 70 as a certain saint has said: “No one can have peace
with Christ who is at odds with a Christian.” 71

Hence, the third stage of the creation is being of one heart
in peace, as Isaiah puts it: “I have created peace as the fruit of
my lips” [Is 57. 19].

(3.1.4) The fourth stage is the constancy of strength, 72 and
this comes from the Holy Spirit. Thus the Apostle writes in Eph
3.16: “May he give you strength through the Holy Spirit to make
you strong,” et cetera. And in Ezek 2.2 we read: “The Spirit en-
tered me, and I stood on my feet.” And in the Gospel: “Let not
your heart be disturbed, and do not be frightened” [Jn 14.27c],
et cetera. And in Wis 2.23 we read: “God has created human-
kind imperishable.”

Therefore, the first effect of the Holy Spirit is that he creates.

(3.2) The second effect is renewal, which consists in four
things: in accordance with (3.2.1) cleansing grace, with (3.2.2)

69. Cf. ST II-II 29,1.

70. 1 Jn 4.20; cf. ST II-II 26,2,1, 44,7.

71. Augustine (in conformity with Mt 5.24). Thomas cites this text in the
Catena Aurea on John 14, at the end of lectio 7.

72. The virtue of constancy is connected with the virtue of perseverance,
which is reckoned as a part of strength: ST II-II 137,3; strength, firmitas or forti-
tudo, is the third cardinal virtue: ST II-II 1 23-140.


154


THOMAS AQUINAS


progressing justice, with (3.2.3) illuminating wisdom, and with
(3.2.4) the glory that makes complete.

(3.2.1) First, I say that the renewal through the Holy Spirit
consists in cleansing grace. Sin is something that has been in
the soul for a long time, 73 and man [homo; humankind] is not
liberated from it but by justifying grace, through which man is
removed from sin. 74 Thus the Apostle says: “Just as Christ rose
from the dead, so let us, too, walk in the newness of life” [Rom
6.4]. From where does this newness come? From the Holy Spir-
it, as the Apostle says in Ti 3.5: “He has saved us not by rea-
son of the works of justice that we did but according to his mer-
cy through the bath of regeneration and renewal (through the
Holy Spirit).” 75 Through this bath all sins are forgiven, and in
this way man is renewed.

(3.2.2) Second, this renewal consists in progressing justice. 76
If someone walks and gets tired and becomes weak [and subse-
quently rests], his strength seems to be renewed. And when a
person works with a great concentration, he is renewed when
his strength is deployed in work of a different kind. Jb 29.20
says about this renewal: “My glory will be renewed, and the bow
in my hand will be restored.” The glory of the saints is the testi-
mony of conscience. A person is renewed when he is prepared
to struggle against vices. Is 40.31 says: “(Those who hope in the
Lord renew their strength); they will take wings like wings of
an eagle; they will fly and not cease,” 77 meaning: they will not
cease to run “on the way of God’s commandments” [Ps 119.32].
But who causes them to run? The Holy Spirit, as we read in Is
63.13-14.: “He has led us through the depths like a horse in the

73. Original sin: ST I— II 81-83; the sin of the first human being: ST II— II
163-165.

74. ST I— II 1 13,1-2, referring to Rom 8.30 and 3.24.

75. The sacraments are important in this new, spiritual life: ST III 62,1, 65,1,
esp. baptism, 6g,4sc, and confession, 84,10,1.

76. Not only justice towards the neighbor, but also towards God, which con-
sists of religiosity: devotion, prayer, adoration, sacrifices, praise, etc.; ST II— II
81-91.

77. In the last articulus of ST II— II, i.e., 189,10, Thomas uses this image for
the one who enters religious life without extensive deliberation, trusting in
God’s help instead of his own strength/virtue.


SERMON 11


155


desert that does not stumble; the Spirit of the Lord led him.”

(3.2.3) Third, the renewal comes by means of illuminating
wisdom. When a person from the beginning gets to know more
about the goods of God, he is renewed. In Colossians 3 it is said
about this renewal: “Clothe yourselves with the new man who
is created according to God” [Epli 4.24]. Christ is called the
“new man,” for his conception is new: “not from the seed of a
man” [cf. Jn 1.13, 1 Pt 1.23], et cetera. Also, his birth is new,
since his mother remained a virgin after birth. 78 It is a new suf-
fering, since it is without guilt. 79 It is a new resurrection, since it
is quick and renewing: quick, because he also rose in glory. 80 It
is a new ascension, since he went up by his own strength, not by
someone else’s like Enoch and Elijah. 81 Thus it says in Sir 36.6:
“Renew the signs and change the wondrous deeds.” 82 And be-
cause through Christ all things are renewed, we use new vest-
ments on solemn feast days in the Church, so that we “sing a
new song to the Lord” 83 — as if we say that someone who puts
on a new garment by means of an exterior cleanness renews the
mind internally through grace. The Apostle says in Col 3.9b-
10: “Take off the old man,” that is, the habit of the sinners with
their deeds, “and clothe yourselves with” the habit of virtue
which is not without deeds, 84 “the new man,” a rational mind,
that is. This new man “is renewed in the knowledge of God,”
et cetera. He continues: “Clothe yourselves with the new man”
[Col 3.12], as I said above. In Rom 13.14 we read: “Be clothed
with the Lord Jesus Christ.”

And from where is this wisdom? From the Holy Spirit. Jb

78. ST III 28,2-3.

79. Our suffering is a consequence of guilt: cf. ST I 95,2; I— II 79,3,3; not
Christ’s: cf. ST III 47.

80. ST 11154,2.

81. ST III 57,3. See Gn 5.24 and 2 Kgs 2.

82. And yet it is not totally new; the whole of salvation history is already pre-
figured in the six days of creation; cf. ST I 73,1,3 .

83. Ps 96.1, 98.1, 149.1. These Psalms are sung on solemn feasts during the
Eucharist, and during evening and morning prayer.

84. These virtues are mentioned in Col 3.12-17 (cf. ST II— II 4,7,4, 30,48c,
i6i,5sc), which lead to a perfect life if they come from love ( caritas ): ST II— II
184,1.


156


THOMAS AQUINAS


32.8: “As I see it, the Spirit is in people, and the inspiration of
the Almighty gives (understanding).” 85

(3.2.4) Fourth, the renewal is through glory that makes com-
plete, namely, when the body will be renewed, away from the
old punishment and the old guilt. In Is 65.17 it says about this:
“Behold, I create new heavens and a new earth.” 86 And from
where does this renewal come? From the Holy Spirit; he him-
self is the pledge of our inheritance, 87 and he leads us to the
heavenly inheritance.

Someone who longs to be created and renewed will obtain it
from the Holy Spirit.

(4) But who receives that renewal? “The face of the earth”
[Ps 104.30], that is, the whole world, which once was full of
idolatry. But on this day the Lord has bestowed the gifts of the
“charismata” [cf. 1 Cor 12.31] on the apostles. Is 27.6 (Vg) says
about this: “Those who enter with incitement,” of the Holy Spir-
it, “will fill the face of the earth with the seed from Jacob.” The
face of the earth is also the human mind, for just as we see with
our face in a corporeal way, so we see with the mind in a spir-
itual way. Hence it says in Gn 2.7: “God created man from the
clay of the earth and blew the breath of life into his face.” 88

Well, in order to receive this renewal, the human mind ought
to have four [characteristics]: it should be (4.1) clean, (4.2) un-
covered, (4.3) directed, and (4.4) stable and firm.

(4.1) In Mt 6.17 it says about the first: “When you fast, howev-
er, anoint your head and wash your face,” meaning: with tears of
a moved heart, 89 and then you will be able to receive the renewal
of the Holy Spirit. The Psalmist says: “Create a clean heart in me,
God, (renew my spirit; make it righteous within me)” [Ps 51.12].

85. Cf. ST II— II 171,1,4 on prophecy.

86. See SCG IV 83; cf. 79-85.

87. Eph 1.13-14. “Pledge” ( pignus ) means either that one day it must be giv-
en back, or, as in this case, that one day it will be made complete, full, fulfilled.

88. Cf. ST I 94,2.

89. The term compunctio cordis is a medieval term that signifies a heart deep-
ly touched or moved. It could be brought on by beauty in appearance, music,
or poetry, but here it is used in terms of contrition. Cf. Acts 2.37; also ST I— II
79 ’ 4 > 3 -


SERMON 11


157


(4.2) Second, the face of the mind ought to be unveiled and
uncovered. The Prophet says: “Thickness has concealed his
face” [Jb 15.27]. Some have the face of their mind covered by
a mist of ignorance. Jb 23.17 reads: “Mist has not concealed
my face.” And the Apostle says: “Yet we who behold the glory
of God with an unveiled face” — meaning: free from attraction
to earthly things — “are transformed into the same image from
clarity (into clarity, as through the Spirit of the Lord)” [2 Cor
3. 18]. 90

(4.3) Third, the face of the mind ought to be directed to-
wards God. Thus we read in Tb 3.12: “Now I turn my face to you,
and I direct my eyes to you.” How do we turn our face to God?
Through an upright intention, and thus we obtain the renewal
of the Holy Spirit, 91 whence it is said in the Gospel according to
Luke 11.13: “He will give the good Spirit to those who beseech
him.” 92

Furthermore, if you are converted through obedience, 93 he
will give the Holy Spirit to those who obey him [cf. Acts 5.32].

Furthermore, we ought to turn our face to our neighbor as
well, as we read in Tb 4.7: “Do not turn away your face from
your neighbor (for then, likewise, the face of the Lord will not
be turned away from you).” Therefore, the apostles received the
Holy Spirit while they were together [cf. Acts 2.1].

(4.4) Fourth, the face of the mind ought to be firm. We read
about Anna, the mother of Samuel: “She did not look in differ-
ent directions any more” [1 Sm 1.18; cf. Ps 121.1]. And there-
fore she received the Holy Spirit [cf. 1 Sm 1.19, 2.1-10]. Jb 11.15
reads: “Then you will be able to lift up your face.” To those peo-
ple the Holy Spirit is given, as we read in the Gospel: “While
meeting with them, he instructed them not to leave Jerusalem,
but to await the promise (of the Father ‘about which you have
heard through my mouth; for John baptized with water, yet you


90. Therefore, there could not have been ignorance in Christ: ST III 15,3.

91. Through grace we know and love God and turn to him again: ST I 8,3,4,
43,5,2; i-ii 113,8.

92. For this beseeching we need God’s help; cf. ST I-II 109,6 esp. ad 2.

93. A central Christian virtue, esp. in religious life: ST II— II 104, respective-
ly, 186,5-8.


158


THOMAS AQUINAS


will be baptized with the Holy Spirit’)” [Acts 1.4-5]. If they had
left, they would not have received the Holy Spirit. Thus we read
in Mt 24.13: “Someone who perseveres (till the end) will be
saved.” 94

We will ask the Lord, et cetera.

94. As if Thomas is saying to his audience: “Keep your vows”; cf. ST II— II
88,3, 189,3.


SERMON 12
SERAPHIM STABANT


Sermon on the Feast of the Trinity 1

Isaiah 6.2-3: Seraphim stood over it:
the one had six wings and the other had six wings;
with two they covered their face and with two their feet
and with two they flew and they cried to one another:
“Holy, holy, holy Lord God of the hosts; and the whole
earth, is full of his glory. ”


Sermo

mong all religions and sects the Christian faith re-
joices in this privilege that it contains very much that
surpasses the natural and the rational, that is, what is
beyond reason, more than other religions. The reason for this
is that in this faith some most excellent things have been prom-
ised which exceed not only our understanding, but even the
very desire of a rational creature. Hence the Apostle says that
“eye has not seen, and ear has not heard, neither did it come up
in the heart of a man, (what God has prepared for those who
love [diligo\ him)” [1 Cor 2. g]. 2 And therefore, in accordance
with the fitness of what has been promised, the excellence of
the things to be believed is in the Christian faith.

Whereas in the Old Law earthly and carnal things are prom-
ised, as we read in Is 1.19: “If you are willing and listen to me,
(you will eat the goods of the earth).” And because of this it
was not necessary that in the Old Law the revelation of things

1. Probably from the first Parisian period (1252-1256).

2. Cf. ST I— II 5,5 (happiness) and 62,3 (theological virtues of faith, hope,
and love), 114,2 (eternal life).


159


160


THOMAS AQUINAS


that exceed the reason be revealed explicitly, although implic-
itly and in a certain hidden way many things that exceed the
reason were handed down in it. 3 And this is what the Lord says
in today’s Gospel: “When I spoke to you about earthly things,
you have not believed me, how then (would you believe me)
if I spoke to you (about heavenly things)?” [Jn 3.12] Hence, if
they do not believe Christ when he spoke to them about earthly
things through the prophets — because he himself is the Word
by which every word spoken to the prophets is said 4 — how can
they believe him if he spoke of heavenly things? Yet we cannot
know those things that are above the reason, but we are to be-
lieve them, for knowing is proper to reason, whereas believing
is proper to the will. 5 And so it was becoming that the author-
ity of the ones who reveal and of the things that are revealed
would be above all others, and in particular about the things
that belong to the Holy Trinity. 6

(1) Now, the Prophet makes the authority of those reveal-
ing the mystery of the Holy Trinity known for our day and age
based on three things: (1.1) the task, (1.2) the dignity, and (1.3)
the unanimity.

(1.1) So, based on the task, because he says “seraphim,” that
is, those who glow and set on fire, 7 by whom the order of the
apostles is implied. For, just as seraphs 8 excel among all the
orders of the heavenly spirits, so also the apostles are exalted
above all the other saints in grace as well as in glory. 9 2 Thes

3. Even the Incarnation; cf. ST I 73,1,3.

4. Cf. Ps 68.1 1. The triune God speaks his Word through the prophets: ST I
43,3 and 5; I— II 102,2.

5. Cf. ST I— II 62,2 (citing Augustine); I— II 1 10,3,1.

6. Seraphim are characterized by an excellent love: ST I 108,5,5. Love is,
just like the other theological virtues of faith and hope, connected with the will
(note 4). We can know about the Trinity only through our faith: ST II— II 2,8,
171,3. Prophets excel through the grace they received: ST I— II 111,4; °L II— II
171,4 and 6 and Isaiah in particular because he had a vision; cf. ST II— II 174,2.

7. ST I 108,5,5: Thomas explains the name “seraph” etymologically as fire/
glow/heat (ardor) setting on fire ( incendo ), for instance, the lips of the prophet
Isaiah: Is 6.7; cf. ST I 1 12,2,2.

8. Seraphim is Hebrew plural and used as such by Thomas; seraphin is Latin
plural and therefore translated as “seraphs.”

9. ST I 43,7,6; I— II 106,4; HI 72,2,1.


SERMON 12


161


2.13 reads: “God has chosen” us “as the first fruits for salvation,
for the sanctification of the Spirit and belief in the truth.” For
they are the ones who have the first fruits of the Holy Spirit, as
the Apostle says to the Romans [Rom 8.23]. Thus the apostles,
set on fire by the fire of the Holy Spirit [Acts 2.3], were the right
and suitable 10 ones to hand down the mystery of the Holy Trini-
ty. 11

Well, since it is becoming that something that comes from
something else makes known the thing from which it comes,
the Son, who comes from the Father, makes the Father known.
Thus we read in Jn 17.6: Father, “I have made your name
known.” [Likewise,] the Holy Spirit, who comes from the Fa-
ther and the Son makes known the Father and the Son, as it is
said in Jn 16.14: “He will proclaim me, (for he will receive from
what is mine and announce it to you).”

Therefore, it was becoming that the mystery of the Trinity
was revealed to us by seraphim, that is, through the apostles,
who were taught by the Son and set on fire by the Holy Spirit. 12
The Apostle says: “Yet to us (God) has revealed it (by means of
his Spirit, for his Spirit fathoms all things, even the profundi-
ties of God)” [1 Cor 2.10]. And it is for this reason that after the
feast of the Holy Spirit the feast of the Trinity is celebrated.

(1.2) Based on the dignity, for they were “above it,” meaning:
above the temple. By this their primacy and the source of their
authority are made known. The Psalmist says: “You will appoint
them as princes” [Ps 45. 17]. 13 But concerning this we must no-
tice that it is said of the seraphim that “with two wings they cov-
ered their head, and with two wings they covered their feet, and
they flew with two wings.” By this their authority obtained from
God is expressed, for it is granted to them to reveal some things
and to keep other things hidden for the people. Just as the Apos-
tle says that he has heard “secret things that no people ought to

10. They received the graces of the Holy Spirit, so that they could do the
work of the Holy Spirit: ST III 42,1,2.

11. Which the prophets before them could not do; cf. ST I 57,5,3; I— II
106,4,2; II— II 176,1,1.

12. ST II-II 2,8,2.

13. Therefore, only bishops and priests can administer the sacraments; cf.
ST III 67,2,2.


162


THOMAS AQUINAS


speak of” [2 Cor 12.4], as he also says somewhere else: “As with
little children in Christ, I gave you milk as food, not solid food”
[1 Cor 3.1-2]; for he is “the debtor to the wise and to the igno-
rant” [Rom 1.14]. Thus they flew by teaching, but by hiding they
covered the head, since the first principle of all things itself can-
not be examined; and since the very principle is also the end,
as it is said in Rv 1.8 and 22.13, they covered their feet as well.
The things in the middle were indeed not covered, because the
things that are from the beginning to the end, namely, the di-
vine effects, are manifest to us. 14 And therefore it is said in the
Gospel: “The Spirit blows where it wills, and you hear its sound,
but you do not know where it is coming from or where it is going
to” [Jn 3.8]. So we only hear its sound, that is, the effects of the
Spirit of the Lord, but they are known insofar as it is possible to
know them; but we do not know “where it is coming from,” and
this is the meaning of them covering their head, “or where it is
going to,” to which the covering of the feet refers. 15

(1.3) Third, the source of the authority of the apostles is
called to mind on the ground of their unanimity, since all, and
not one or two or three, have handed down unanimously, ex-
plicitly, and clearly the mystery of the Trinity. The Apostle says:
“Whether I or they, that is not the point; (this is what we preach
and this is what you have believed)” [1 Cor 15.1 1]. And therefore
it is said about the seraphim that they “cried to one another.”

Thus the source of the authority of the ones who reveal the
mystery of the Trinity is clear.

(2) Now it remains to look at what they revealed when they
said: “Holy, holy, holy,” et cetera. In these words they make
known three things to us: (2.1) first, the mystery of the sacred
Trinity; (2.2) second, the image of the Trinity itself impressed
upon rational creatures; (2.3) third, a trace of the same Trinity
that is reflected in all other creatures. 16

14. Cf. Rom 1.20; cf. ST I 2,2.

15. Cf. ST I 1 ,6,2: we receive knowledge through natural things (ST I 14,8,3,
16,2); therefore, we cannot know by our own effort our principle and our end
itself, i.e., the triune God, who is of the highest dignity (ST I 42,4,2).

16. Cf. ST III 83,4 and Rigans monies, Thomas’s inaugural lecture, where he


SERMON 12


163


(2.1) So they make the mystery of the Trinity manifest to
us, when they say: “Holy, holy, holy.” 17 Concerning this we must
know that, as Dionysius says, no way is as successful for getting
to know God as the way of removal. 18 For then God is perfect-
ly known, when we know that he is above every thing that can
be thought of. Hence we read about Moses, who was very fa-
miliar with God according to what is granted to a human be-
ing in this life, that he approached God in a cloud and a thick
mist, meaning: by getting to know what God is not, he arrived
at knowledge of God. 19 Well, this way of removal is understood
by the term “holiness,” for, in general, according to all teachers,
“holy” is the same as what is pure, and “pure” is what is separat-
ed from other things. 20

For the evidence of this we must know that we find in crea-
tures three most excellent things: (2.1.1) essence, (2.1.2) knowl-
edge, and (2.1.3) affection. 21 But still they differ a lot; yes, they
can in no way touch upon purity in the way that these are in
God.

(2.1.1) Now, in the essences of created things we find a three-
fold defect that keeps them completely remote from God. 22

(a) The first defect is the weakness of corruption, and this is


explains these words, used in the Eucharistic prayer, as referring to the divinity
of Christ. He interprets “Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord” as
referring to Christ’s humanity.

17. This manifestation is a prophetic act: ST II— II 171,3.

18. Via remotionis — which is a part of the via negativa — i.e., saying what God
is not, rather than what he is; cf. ST I 13,2: the things that do not belong to God
are removed, like a body, imperfection, change, ignorance, powerlessness, and
all things incompatible with divinity (cf. ST I 3-1 1). This method is applied by
Thomas in this section of the sermon, 2.1.

19. ST I 12,1 1; I— II 98,3,2. In II— II 174,5,1, however, Thomas says that Mo-
ses did see the divine essence, although posthaste and by way of a passion, not
remaining and by way of happiness.

20. Cf. ST II— II 81,8: in people holiness is also being directed towards the
Holy One and so in humanis holiness is a synonym for religiosity.

21. These three correspond with respectively the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit.

22. God and God alone is essentially perfect: ST I 4. God’s perfections are
perfect as such, whereas they are in us as created; cf. Thomas on analogy in ST
1 13,5-6.


164


THOMAS AQUINAS


found in all corruptible creatures. 23 Is 24.4 reads: “The earth
has slid down and is weakened.”

(b) The second defect is the defect of composition. This de-
fect is in heavenly bodies, which, although they are free from
corruption and from transitoriness, 24 nevertheless still do not
come near the purity of the divine essence at all, because they
are composite. 28 It is said injb 15.15: “(Behold, among his saints
no one is immutable, and) even the heavens are not clean be-
fore him.”

(c) The third defect is mutability. This defect is in the an-
gels, who, although they are free from corruption 26 and free
of composition, 27 are still found changeable, as we read in Jb
4.18: “Behold, the ones who serve him are not steadfast.” And
the reason for this is that “in his angels he has found badness”
[ibid.]. 28 And if some are found immutable, this is not because
of their nature, but because of the grace of God. 29

Hence the first principle is above this: incorruptible, simple,
and immovable. 30 And this holiness is the holiness of God the
Father, who is the principle of the whole Divinity. 31 The Psalm-
ist says: “Let them acknowledge your (great) name (for it is ter-
rifying and holy)” [Ps 99.3].

And therefore, three names are attributed to the Father, in

23. Hence God is not cormptible (ST I 9,2). Also angels and the human
soul cannot be corrupted: ST I 50,5 and 76,6. Yet the human body is corrupt-
ible: ST I 102,2.

24. The materia in celestial bodies is without potentia passiva. The only change
in them is of place: ST I 66,2.

25. Composition does not refer to different material parts made one (physi-
cal level), but to the ten categories of Aristotle: on a meta-physical level all crea-
tures are composed of substance (e.g., man) and quality (e.g., black), relations
(e.g., taller than someone else) and quantity (e.g., weight), time (e.g., now) and
place (e.g., here), position (e.g., standing), state (e.g., dressed, drunk), potentia
(e.g., being touched, moved) and actus, (e.g., to touch, to move). Only God is
not composed; his being is his essence, etc.; cf. ST I 3,2-8.

26. ST I 50,5. 27. ST I 50,2.

28. ST I 63.

29. Angels do not have bliss ( beatitudo ) from the beginning: ST I 62,1. When
God grants angels this ultimate happiness, they cannot sin any more: ST I 62,8.

30. Respectively, ST I 4, 3 and 9.

31. ST I 27,1, 42,3.


SERMON 12


165


order to exclude the defects mentioned: (ad a) Power, in order
to exclude the weakness of corruption; the Psalmist says: “Lord,
you are powerful” [Ps 8g.g]. 32 (ad b) Unity, a name given by Au-
gustine, in order to exclude composition excluded. 33 (ad c) Eter-
nity, a name given by Hilary, in order to exclude mutability; the
Psalmist says: “You yourself, however, are the same (and your
years do not decrease)” [Ps 102. 28]. 34

(2.1.2) Also, in knowledge we find a threefold defect, accord-
ing to which the knowledge of creatures falls short in three
ways.

(a) The first defect is of the knowledge of material and sin-
gular things. This is the knowledge through touching and be-
ing touched. In the senseless creatures this is the only knowl-
edge. 39

(b) The second defect of knowledge is the one that we have
through appearances. For, although we have knowledge of gen-
eral things, it is still obscure, because “now we see in a mirror,
(enigmatically)” [1 Cor 13.12] — and we know insofar as sensible
things appear to us. 36

(c) The third defect of knowledge is insofar as it is dimin-
ished. This defect is in the angels; although they have a clear
knowledge since they do not receive knowledge through sens-
es — and as a sign of this they appeared before prophets with
sparkling eyes [cf. Dn 12.3] — still their knowledge is dimin-
ished, because on the basis of their natural powers they cannot
see God in his essence, for no created intellect can see the es-
sence of God unless through grace. 37 The Apostle says: “God’s
grace is eternal life” [Rom 6. 23]. 38 What’s more, it is dimin-
ished because, although they see the essence of God through
grace, they do not understand it, nevertheless. 39 Therefore, it

32. ST I 25, 32,1,1; cf. 39,8,3 (with a reference to Augustine): the name
“Powerful” signifies God as cause.

33. ST I 1 1; cf. ST 39,8,2: this name signifies God as for his unity.

34. ST I 10; cf. 39,8,1: this name signifies God as such.

35. Someone knows in accordance with his/her nature; cf. ST I 12,1 1.

36. ST I 1,9, 12,12. This defect is in all human beings.

37. ST I 56,3. 38. Cf. ST I 18,1-3.

39. ST I 62,2 and 56,3,1.


166


THOMAS AQUINAS


is said that, when the voice sounded in the firmament, the an-
gels “lowered their wings” [Ezek 1.25]. Chrysostom says about
this that even these heavenly essences could never see God’s es-
sence as it is.

So above the knowledge of these [three] is the knowledge of
the Word of God; it contains all things, knows all things [Wis
1.7]. And so the Arians, who separated the Word from God,
were foolish, because, if they had been right, God would not
have known himself. 40 And therefore is this holiness the ho-
liness of God’s Word. The Psalmist says: “Yet you dwell in the
Holy One, Praise of Israel” [Ps 22. 4], 41 for this is the praise of
the ones who see God, that they may dwell in the Holy One,
meaning: participate in the knowledge of God’s Word.

And since the Word of God is clear of these defects, three
things are attributed to him: (ad a) wisdom, to exclude singu-
lar knowledge; 42 (ad b) Hilary attributes beauty to him, namely,
splendor, 43 to exclude obscure knowledge; (ad c) Augustine at-
tributes equality to him, in order to exclude diminishment. 44

(2.1.3) In the affection we find in a similar way a threefold
defect of holiness.

(a) The first defect is when our affection is deprived. For, a
nature degenerates when it makes itself equal to an inferior na-
ture. Well, other creatures, those without reason, have an affec-
tion aimed at one single good: the preservation of themselves.
And thus, when someone has a deprived affection, he falls away
from his honor. The Apostle says: “All who seek their own inter-
est (do not belong to Christjesus)” [Phil 2. 21]. 45

40. ST I 14,2 and 34,2 (“Word” signifies an efflux of the intellect).

41. ‘You,” “the Praise of Israel,” is identified as the eternal Word of God: a
Christological reading of the Psalms.

42. In ST I 39,8,3 (with reference to Augustine): this name signifies God
as cause. “Wisdom” includes all knowledge, knowledge as such; it is not about
knowledge of this and that.

43. ST I 39,8,1: this name signifies God as such.

44. ST I 39,8,2; also 47,2,2 and III 58,2,3. This name signifies God as for
his unity.

45. Someone who becomes like an inferior, irrational creature by becoming
self-centered is not a disciple and/or a friend of Jesus Christ. Self-preservation
is not the highest good; Thomas even considers it illicit to kill someone who at-
tacks you in order to defend yourself; cf. ST II— II 64,7.


SERMON 12


167


(b) The second defect is when our affection is held back and
closed. This is caused by the first defect. For it is for this reason
that people do not share their goods: because they love ( diligo ) 46
themselves. These people are rebuked by St. John: “Some-
one who sees his brother in need (and closes his heart against
him — how can the love ( caritas ) of God remain in him?)” [1 Jn

3 - 171- 47

(c) The third defect is when our affection is disquieted, and
this occurs when the affection is not at peace in view of the ul-
timate end. 48 Augustine says [in Confessions ]: “Disquieted is our
heart until it finds peace in you.”

So holy affection is above these affections; it is the divine
love (amor divinus) that is not deprived since it loves ( diligo ) “all
things that are,” as it is said in Wis 11.25, <an d (you hate) noth-
ing (of the things you made).” It is not closed, because “when
you open your hand (everything will be filled with goodness),”
as the Psalmist says [Ps 104.28]. It is not disquieted, since it is
the love (amor) of the ultimate end which loves (diligo) itself and
all things because of itself; and thus it is everlasting: in everlast-
ing love (caritas)” [Jergi^]. 49

And therefore three things are attributed to him: 50 (ad a)
Union, 51 so that it may be clear that he is not lacking anything,
for deprived love (amor) causes discord. 52 But the Holy Spirit
is proper to the highest good, and therefore it is the One who
binds together (nexus), (ad b) Goodness, so that it may be clear


46. For Thomas’s terminology, see Sermon 01 Veniet desideratus, note 39.

47. Sharing and giving away what you have are good acts (ST I 5,4,2, 106,4;
III 1,1), acts of love: ST II— II 32,1 and 10.

48. Cf. Ps 42.6 (perturbatus) ; Mt 2.3, 16 (Herod, turbatus, and so much that
he had all boys killed who could have been the rival king). On the other hand,
Mary, turbata (Lk 1.29), found peace again as soon as she heard of the final end
(Lk 1.32-33, 37 and 38).

49. The love of the Eternal One is not selfish love, as also the second part of
this verse shows: “I have loved you and therefore I drew you towards me in my
mercy”; cf. ST I 20,1,3: “Love is a unifying force.”

50. I.e., the Holy Spirit.

51. Connexio. ST I 39,8,2 (with reference to Augustine): unanimity ( concor -
did) or the connection/bond between the equal Father and the equal Son; cf.
also I 37,2. The name Unio signifies God as for his unity. See note 44.

52. ST II— II 37,1.


168


THOMAS AQUINAS


that [the Holy Spirit] is not closed, “for a good spreads itself”; 53
Wis 12.1 (Vg) says: “O, how good is the Spirit.” (ad c) Use, so
that it may be clear that he is peaceful and that he concerns the
end. 54 Also, Augustine points out that he is use, that is, enjoy-
ment, since God enjoys himself with divine love (amor divinus)
and loves ( diligo ) the Son with the love (amor) of enjoyment. 55

But are these three holinesses? No. For in us, being, willing,
and understanding are three different things; thus the holi-
ness of being is different from the holiness of will and of un-
derstanding. But in God, being, understanding, and willing are
the same; 56 and so the holiness of these three is the same. 57 But
it is repeated thrice [in Is 6.3], not in order to show a triple ho-
liness, but the holiness of three.

(2.2) He shows that the image of the Holy Trinity is im-
pressed upon rational creatures, when he says: “Lord, God of
the hosts.” Regarding this we must know that the resemblance
to him is the more explicit in things the nearer they are to God
and the closer they are to him. 58 Well, such are the rational
creatures, and hence the resemblance to the Trinity is reflected
more in them. This resemblance is shown in three respects:

(2.2.1) First, in respect of a special providence that God has
for the rational creature, by punishing, by instructing, and by
rewarding him. 59 And therefore it says: “Lord.”

(2.2.2) Second, because in a special way he is the end and
the reward of a rational creature, while, in general, he is the

53. ST I 5,4, 39,8,3 (with reference to Augustine). This name signifies God
as cause ( causa finalis).

54. ST I 39,8,1 (with reference to Hilary). This name signifies God as such.

55. Cf. ST I 37,2. Thus Thomas explains the paradox of Hilary’s Usus as a
name of God and Augustine’s distinction between uti (towards things) and frui
(towards God only); cf. ST I— II 1 1, 12,2,3 an d 34 > 4 -

56. But we must distinguish them according to our understanding: ST I
1 3 ’ 4 -

57. ST I 42,2-6.

58. Cf. ST I 4,3.

59. Respectively, Prv 3.1 1-12 (cf. ST III 59,1); Heb 12.5-7; Gn 1.28-30 (cf.
ST I 96,2); Ps 8.6 (cf. ST I 20,4,2); Lk 6.35; Heb 10.35-38, 1 1.6, 26.


SERMON 12


169


end of the whole of creation. 60 Therefore, it says: “God.” In Heb
11.16 it says: “He is not ashamed to be called their God, (for he
has built a city for them)”; and in Gn 15.1: “I am (your protec-
tor, and) your reward (will be very big).”

(2.2.3) Third, in respect of freedom. For the other creatures
lead their lives, yet they do not lead themselves to their actions
and thus they are like slaves, in particular because they exist
for the sake of other things. A rational creature, however, leads
himself, because he is free and lord over his own actions. 61 And
therefore they are soldiers, whence it says: “of the hosts,” mean-
ing: of the angels — about which Jb 25.3 says: “Is there a number
of his soldiers?” — and of the people, asjb 14.14 reads: “All the
days that I have served now as a soldier.” 62 In this host the im-
age of the Trinity is reflected: in the angel, namely, because
he is “the seal of resemblance” [Ezek 28.1 2] ; 63 in humankind
through memory, intellect, and will. 64

♦♦♦

(2.3) Furthermore, he makes known a trace that is reflected 65
within other creatures, when he says: “Full is the 66 earth,” et ce-
tera. And this is clear in the first establishment of the things.

For, there [that is, in the first establishment of things] we
find the power of the God who creates, so that the Father would
be recognized: “In the beginning God has created heaven and
earth” [Gn 1.1], et cetera. And when we read that “the earth
was waste and empty” [Gn 1.2], we understand this [as waste


60. Cf. also Rom 1 1.36, 1 Cor 8.6, and Heb 2.10. Theses texts underlie the
exitus-reditus scheme of the ST, although Thomas never refers to these texts ex-
plicitly.

61. Cf. ST I 83 (free will); I— II 6,8 and 76 (ignorance) and 80 (the devil).

62. Only, however, if he is obedient will he win the battle; cf. ST III 47,2 (cit-
ing Prv 21.28), aiming at Christ, esp. in the Passion.

63. Curiously enough, these words in Ezek 28.12 refer to a human being {fil-
ms hominis, namely, the prophet Ezekiel) , not to angels.

64. As Augustine says. Memoria refers to the Father, since it retains what it
knows (the Word, the Son) as well as love (the Holy Spirit); cf. ST I 93,7,3. In-
tellect and will obviously refer respectively to the Son and the Spirit.

65. ST 1 45,7, 93,2.

66. The text leaves out omnis, “the whole,” from Is 6.3, which would strength-
en Thomas’s interpretation.


170


THOMAS AQUINAS


and empty] if it is considered in itself, because its fulfillment
comes from the glory of God. 67

There we find the art of the God who forms all the things, 68
so that the Son would be recognized. For just as an artist by
means of his art renders form to the matter, so God has given
to all things their proper form by means of his Word, who is
“the full art of living rational beings.” 69 Hence it is said: “And
God said: ‘Let there be light’” [Gn 1.3], meaning: he brought
forth the Word, in whom was [the power] to bring them into
being.

There we find the pleasure of the God who approves, so that
the Holy Spirit would be recognized. Thus it is said: “God saw
all the things that he had made (and that they were very good)”
[Gn 1.31], meaning: he approved of them. 70

There we also find a trace insofar as the property [of each
of the three Persons] is concerned. For every creature whatso-
ever remains through the power of the Father, has an appear-
ance because it is formed by the Word of God, and is ordered
through the love {amor) of the Holy Spirit towards [its] end.

67. ST I 65,2; I— II 1 14,1,2: God’s glory is the manifestation of his goodness,
as in Ps 19.2; cf. ST I 44,1-2, 45,1: “and God saw it was good.”

68. ST I 44,3.

69. A quotation from Augustine, also used in his Commentary on the Gospel ac-
cording to John, c.i ( lectiones 2 and 4) and SN II 1 1,2, 2, 3.

70. ST I 47,2, 65,1,2, 74,3,3.


SERMON 13

HOMO QUID AM FECIT CENAM MAGNAM

Sermon on the Second Sunday after the Feast of the Trinity 1


Luke 14.16: Someone made a great dinner and invited many.


part 1: Prothema

t seems that there is a difference between physical
and spiritual pleasures, for physical pleasures are man-
ifest to people who have surrendered to the senses,
: spiritual pleasures are hidden to them, whereas the lat-
ter are manifest to spiritual men. Hence it says in Rv 2.17: “To
the one who gains the victory 1 shall give the hidden manna.” 2
And since this homily is about our spiritual refreshment, let us
ask the generous distributor of this delight that he may give me
something to say in praise, et cetera.


part 2: Sermo

“Someone made a (great) dinner” [Lk 14.16], et cetera. Just
as the body cannot be maintained without physical refresh-
ment, so also the soul is in need of spiritual refreshment for its
maintenance. About this spiritual refreshment Ps 23.2-3 says:
“He has led me out unto the water of refreshment. (He refresh-
es my soul.)” Conspicuously it says “unto the water of refresh-


1. This sermon dates from the second Parisian period: 1268-1272.

2. In ST I— II 112,5, Thomas uses this text to explain that through signs or
experiences someone can know whether he/she has grace, although this knowl-
edge is not as certain as knowledge through revelation.


171


172


THOMAS AQUINAS


ment,” for just as physical refreshment is necessary against a to-
tal destruction brought about by taking in natural heat, so the
soul is in need of spiritual refreshment because of the heat of
concupiscence, which harms us and which hinders the salva-
tion of our souls. Thus spiritual water is necessary because it
extinguishes this heat. Physical water cools, but does not nour-
ish [cf. Jn 4.13]; spiritual water, however, cools and nourishes.
About this water it is said in Jn 4.14: “In someone who drinks
from this water, a fountain shall well up of water that is salutary
unto eternal life.” 3

Concerning this spiritual refreshment the Lord makes a
comparison in today’s Gospel. We can see two things: first [in
the Sermo], the preparation of this refreshment, where he says,
“Someone made a great dinner”; second [in the Collatio in sero],
the announcement of the feast when it was prepared, where it
says, “and he invited many.”

Regarding the preparation there are three aspects that must
be considered: (1) first, who this man is who made the dinner;
(2) second, what kind of dinner it is; and (3) third, how big it
is.


(1) As for the first aspect, I say: we must take a look at who
that man is. I say that this man is the Son of God, who is truly a
man in view of the truth of the assumed human nature. 4 Thus
the Apostle says in Phil 2.6-7: “Who, although he was in the
form of God, emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, be-
came like the people, and through his way of life was found a
man.” Jer 17.9 reads: He is a man and “who will know him?”

Jesus says in Lk 14.16: “Someone” or “a certain man,” as if he
says: Some particular things are in him that are not in others.
For he is a distinct man, since he has (1.1) the fullness of divin-

3. In ST II— II 25,5 Thomas advocates that we must take good care of our
body, but that the care for the soul is more important, since the soul does not
die.

4. Thomas identifies the inviting man with Jesus Christ on account of his hu-
manity; the Latin text reads Homo quidam, that is, “someone,” “a certain human
being” or “man.”


SERMON 13


173


ity, (1.2) the fullness of truth, and (1.3) the fullness of grace. 5

(1.1) First, I say: [the man] Christ had the fullness of divin-
ity. 6 Other people are called gods, but only in the sense that
they take part; 7 this man, however, is the true God. 8

(1.2) Furthermore, other people know a little about the
truth, but this man had the fullest knowledge, not only accord-
ing to his divinity, but according to his humanity [as well]. 9 “For
in him are all hidden treasures of wisdom and knowledge” [Col
2.3].

(1.3) Moreover, others had some grace — some the grace of
eloquence, others the grace of wisdom, because “there are va-
rieties of graces” [1 Cor 12.4] — but Christ had the fullness of
grace. Therefore, the Apostle says in Col 1.19: “It was pleasing
that in him all fullness dwelt .” Jn 1.14 speaks about the fullness
of divinity, of truth, and of grace that was in Christ: “We have
seen his glory, a glory as of the Father’s only Son” in view of the
fullness of divinity; it says “full of grace” 10 in view of the fullness
of grace; “and of truth” is added, referring to the fullness of
truth that was in Christ. 11

Now it is clear who that man is.

♦J.

(2) As for the second aspect, we must look at what kind of
dinner it is that this man has prepared. I say that he has made
a triple spiritual refreshment: (2.1) one has to do with the sac-


5. Christ was a true man, but because of the hypostatic union he had certain
qualities which other people do not have; cf. ST III 7.

6. Jn 1.14; cf. ST III 7,9-10; from the very beginning of his conception: ST
hi 7,12, 34,1.

7. In Ps 82.6; cf. ST II— II 85,2,1; III 16,1, as it is said in Jn 1.16.

8. ST III 16,2.

9. ST III 9-12, esp. 9,1-4.

10. Scripture also speaks of John the Baptist (Lk 1.15), Mary (Lk 1.28),
Stephen (Acts 6.8), and the addressees in Eph 3.19 as being full of grace. But
they have it because they have received it at a certain point in their lives, from
the fullness of Christ (Jn 1.16, Eph 4.7; cf. ST III 7,10); participatiue, as Thomas
says in 1.1. Thus only Jesus Christ has the fullness of grace for as full as grace is:
his grace has no end (ST III 7,1 1), whereas others are full of grace, or rather,
filled with grace insofar as a limited human being can contain it.

11. For all truth is from God: ST I 16,5; cf. Jn 14.6.


174 THOMAS AQUINAS

rament, (2.2) another with the intellect, and (2.3) a third with
our affection.

(2.1) First, I say: that a man “made a dinner” refers to the sac-
rament. 12 We understand what is said in Sir 29.26 as concerning
this sacramental refreshment: “Come over, stranger, and set the
table and give what you have in your hand to the others to eat.”
Christ is a stranger in the world: “though the world was made
through him” [Jn 1.3], “still it has not known him” [Jn 1.10]. He
came into the world as if he were a foreigner [cf. Jn 1.26, 9.29].
He has set the sacramental table, and what he had in his hand,
that is, in accordance with the power that was given to him by
the Father [cf. Mt 28.18], he has given to the others to eat [cf.
Is 58.7], namely, to the believers. Christ has established this re-
freshment insofar as he had the fullness of grace.

This refreshment contains the early meal as well as the din-
ner; the early meal is the sacramental refreshment in the Old
Testament; 13 dinner, the one in the New Testament.

We understand that the Gospel speaks about the sacramen-
tal refreshment of the early meal as referring to the Old Testa-
ment: “Behold, my early meal is ready; bulls and the fattened
animals are slaughtered” [Mt 22.4]. After all, in the Old Tes-
tament slaughtered bulls were offered, according to the letter.
The early meal takes place in the first part of the day; likewise,
in the Old Testament the feast of the sacramental refreshment
took place under the First Law, as bulls and fattened animals
were killed and offered to the Lord. 14

Since an early meal was made, it was becoming 15 that also a
dinner would be made. We read about this meal in Mt 26.26:
“While the disciples were eating, 16 the Lord took bread and
broke it and gave it to his disciples and said: ‘Eat and drink;

12. For the Eucharist as a spiritual refreshment: ST III 84,6.

13. ST I— II 102,5.

14. The Old Testament sacrifices are prefigurations of the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ: ST III 75,1. For the four senses of Scripture texts (literal, spiritual, alle-
gorical, anagogical), see ST I 1,10.

15. Decens indicates beauty, harmony, and order. See n. 14 on Sermon 18
Germinet terra.

16. In the evening; cf. Mt 26.20; so the Eucharist is the dinner, the evening
meal.


SERMON 13


175


this is my body.’” To an early meal people from outside are very
welcome, but only relatives and close friends and the people
with whom one lives [cf. Eph 2.ig] come to a dinner. Jb 31.31
reads: “If the men of my tent never said: ‘Who shall give us of
his meats, that we may be sated?’” as if he says: only relatives
and close friends are admitted.

(2.1: 3) See that this dinner was great and in what way it was
great. 17 1 say that the dinner is called “great” because of (3.1) the
magnificent provision, because of (3.2) the greatness of the de-
light in taste, and (3.3) because it results in a great virtue. These
characteristics were in that refreshment. Hence it was great.

(2.1: 3.1) If you seek what the provision of this dinner was,
you would find out that it was a magnificent provision. Ps 78.24:
“He has given them bread prepared from heaven; a man has
eaten angels’ bread.” If someone wants to praise a meal well,
he praises it in two ways: by reason of the place where it comes
from, and by reason of the dignity of the ones who eat it. By
reason of the place when it is said: “This wine comes from such-
and-such a place,” namely, where usually precious grapes grow.
In the same way a wine is praised for the dignity of the con-
sumers when it is said: “This is the wine of which a king drinks.”
Because of this the Psalmist, intending to describe the great
provision of the dinner, first describes it in view of its place
[of origin] when he says: “He has given them bread from heav-
en” [Ps 78.24]. Where did it come from? From heaven. Believe
the Bread, who says: “I am the living bread that came down
from heaven,” [Jn 6. 41], 18 that is: by taking on our weakness ac-
cording to his divinity, not by abandoning the height of heav-


17. Thomas announced the greatness ( magnitudo ) of the meal as a separate
point, but he discusses it as an aspect of 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3: the sacramental, intel-
lectual, and affectionate meal are all great in their own way.

18. Thus Thomas follows a sacramental rather than a Christological interpre-
tation here. He does so throughout this homily. This is also how John 6 functions
in ST III on the Eucharist (especially in 79-80).

19. Coming down from heaven means neither that he is not in heaven any
more nor that he was not on earth before; cf. ST I 43,1.


176


THOMAS AQUINAS


Likewise, that food is described as being precious by reason
of the dignity of the consumers, because the greatest are re-
freshed by it, namely, the angels who are refreshed by the Word
of God. This food is set out before you in the dinner.

So the dinner is great because of the magnificent provision.

(2.1: 3.2) But if expensive foods are placed in front of you
that are not pleasant to eat, they are not considered great. Be-
cause of this, the dinner is described subsequently as great be-
cause of its greatly delightful taste. As it says in the Book of Wis-
dom 16.20: “You have bestowed on them bread prepared from
heaven; it contains every delight and sweetness of taste.” Delight
is caused by three things: (3.2.1) by the memory of things past,
(3.2.2) by the hope of future things, and (3.2.3) by the experi-
ence of things present. Well, all three delights are in this din-
ner.

(2.1: 3.2. 1) If you consider things past, the memory of them
is delightful. What is more delightful than to call to mind that
man is redeemed by the blood of Christ? 20 In Leviticus we read:
“Remember my poverty,” et cetera [Lam 3.19]. And in the Gos-
pel: “Do this in memory of me” [Lk 22.19]. And the Apostle
calls to mind: “Whenever you do this, you proclaim 21 the death
of the Lord” [1 Cor 11.25].

(2.1: 3.2.2) Moreover, in this dinner is a great delight because
of the hope of things to come. 22 For this sacramental refresh-
ment is a sign that announces things to come, 23 and it gives
us hope of future happiness. 24 Therefore, we read in the Gos-
pel: “Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man (and drink his
blood, there is no life in you)” [Jn 6.54].

(2.1: 3.2.3) Even more, this refreshment is the greatest de-

20. Cf. 1 Pt 1.19. The memory of a fact or event in the past can as such al-
ready be consoling. But here Thomas points to an event in the past that is pro-
lific for us for the present and the future: thus we can live as free human beings
now and we will enjoy eternal happiness in the hereafter; cf. ST I— II 32,3.

21. That is: call to mind, remember ( recordor , memoror), for yourself and for
others.

22. Hope, like memory, generates delight; cf. ST I— II 32,3.

23. It is a sign and more than a sign; cf. ST III 75,1.

24. Hope can be one of the principal passions of the soul (ST I— II 25,3-4,
40) and a theological virtue (ST I— II 62; II— II 17-22).


SERMON 13


177


light if you focus your attention on what is present: the thing
signified that is contained [in it] and the thing signified that is
not contained [in it]. The thing signified that is contained [in
it] is the body of Christ. 25 Man truly ought to boast of having
the body of Christ in him, for “there is no other nation so great
that has gods who are so close as our God is close to us” [Dt
4.7]. 26 Just as delightful is the thing signified that is present and
is not contained [in it]: the unity of the Church. What is more
joyful than this unity? Ps 133.1: “Behold how good and howjoy-
ful (it is for brothers to dwell together in unity).” 27

Thus this dinner has the greatest delight whether you focus
on the past or the present or the future.

(2.1: 3.3) Third, this dinner is great because it results in a
great virtue [or strength], for it unites us with God and makes
us live in God. Thus it says in Jn 6.55: “Someone who eats my
flesh and drinks my blood,” et cetera [6.57], “remains in me,”
that is, through faith and love ( caritas ), 28 “and I in him,” name-
ly, through grace and the sacrament. 29

But if God is in us and we are in him, we ought not fear an-
ything. 30 As we read in Jb 17.3: “Place me next to you, and let
anyone’s hand fight against me.” And in Ps 23.5: “You have pre-
pared a table for me (in the sight of my enemies).” Now some-
thing is made one out of two: a less noble thing follows the
movement of a predominant thing. So it is necessary that the
soul that is united with God follow God [cf. Eph 5.1]. There-
fore, it must not fear anything, since God is in us through the

25. Thomas speaks of the praesentia realis in the sacrament of the Eucharist;
cf. ST III 75-76. Since this bread and wine contain Christ realiter, we should eat
and drink them with joy: Eccl 9.7.

26. Also through baptism: Gal 2.20; cf. ST III 69,5.

27. An implicit reference to the corpus mysticum Christi. 1 Cor 12.27: “You are
the body of Christ and each one of you is a member of it” (cf. ST III 8,1, 49,1).
This body is one: unitas, which is stronger than unio (ST II— II 25,4): 1 Cor 10.17
(cf. ST III 67,2, 73,2).

28. Cf. ST III 75,1.

29. As in 1 Jn 2.14; cf. ST III 62 and 79,1.

30. Here is meant fear ( timor ) as one of the principal passions of the soul
(ST I— II 25,4: 41-45), which is a sign of a lack of faith and trust. For fear as a vir-
tue, fear of the Lord, see: ST II— II 7,1 and 19.


178


THOMAS AQUINAS


sacrament. 31 In the strength of this food Elijah walked to the
mountain of the Lord, Horeb [1 Kgs ig.8] .

If we are worthy of this food, it will lead us to eternal life.
Happy, therefore, those who are worthy to taste this food, but
unhappy those who taste of it although they are not worthy of
it, for “they eat judgment on themselves” [1 Cor 11.29].

This, then, is the sacramental refreshment.

(2.2) Another refreshment is the intellectual one, which per-
tains to the intellect. This refreshment is prepared for us by
Christ insofar as it is full of truth. 32 Hence the uncreated Wis-
dom says in Prv 9.2: “Wisdom has mixed the wine and prepared
a table,” and has sent out an invitation saying: ‘Come and eat
my bread and drink the wine that I have mixed for you; (leave
your foolishness and live, and walk in the ways of prudence)’”
[Prv 9.5-6]. The Wisdom of God is Christ [cf. 1 Cor 1.24]. He
has “mixed” the “wine,” that is, the dogma 33 of the spiritual wis-
dom: that wine was so strong that man could not tolerate it un-
less it were mixed, and so he has mitigated it when he put out
the spiritual dogmas. 34 “He has placed a table,” meaning: the
whole creation. The dogma of wisdom is called bread and wine:
bread so that we may keep our footing, and wine which makes
joyful [Ps 104.15] and sets ablaze [cf. Acts 2. 13]. 35

In this refreshment we find the early meal and the dinner.
The early meal consists of the teaching of the philosophers.

31. In ST III 63,1-3 Thomas speaks of a sacramental character which pro-
vides the recipient with spiritual power. It brings the recipient to a virtuous way
of life through which he/ she honors God.

32. Cf. ST III 78,5.

33. Thomas uses the term dogma here ( dogma sapientiae spiritualis, spiritualia
dogmata, dogma sapientiae) in contrast with the term doctrina, used in the next
paragraph for the teachings of the philosophers ( doctrina philosophorum) . A dog-
ma is in the usual sense of the word an infallible teaching of the Church as the
formulation of revealed truth.

34. In ST III 42,3 Thomas expounds that Christ used parables for those who
could not understand his spiritual teachings (cf. Mt 13.10-1 1). Thomas refers
in this context to Nm 4.5, where the Levites cover the Ark when the Israelites
break the camp.

35. Bread belongs to our daily food, that we may live (cf. ST III 74,1 Primo );
joy belongs to a Christian life (ST II— II 28) and is one of the effects of devotion
( 11 - 1182 , 4 ).


SERMON 13


179


This is pointed out in the prophet Habakkuk where we read
that he made a meal for the reapers in the held [Dn 14.33].
The reapers are the philosophers who gather the crops from
the held, that is: the truths from creation. Hence we read in
Rom 1.20: “God’s invisible (eternal power and divinity have
been understood through the things that were made).”

The dinner is the refreshment of Sacred Scripture. Thus it
says in Rv 3.20: “If someone opens for me, I will enter his house
and have dinner with him.” This is the difference between the
teaching of Sacred Scripture and that of philosophy: the teach-
ing of philosophy is from creation, but the teaching of Sacred
Scripture is from inspiration. 36 Therefore, he says: “If someone
opens for me, I will enter his house,” namely, through the inspi-
ration of the Holy Spirit. Thus we read in Jn 16.12: “When he
comes, that Spirit of truth, he will teach you every truth.” Sa-
cred Scripture is called a “dinner,” because it is given for rela-
tives [cf. 1 Jn 3.1] and close friends [cf. Jn 15.15]. Hence it says
in Prv 31.15, concerning the wife: “She gives game to the ones
who live in the house and ordinary food to her servants.”

(2.2: 3) This dinner is great since it has three characteristics,
mentioned above.

(2.2: 3.1) First, it is great because of the greatness of the
splendor of the provision, for it is taken from the best things
[cf. Is 25.6]. Hence Wisdom says: “Hear me, for I will speak
about great things” [Prv 8.6] . They are great, because they ex-
ceed every sense. As we read in Sir 3.25: “Many things that are
above the senses of people have been shown to you.” 37 These are

36. So both are about the truth, but philosophy is about a lower truth, and
thus it is a lower science. In his days there was a fierce debate between theolo-
gians and some philosophers who were influenced by the thoughts of Averroes
(1 126-1 198). The latter came to the conclusion that faith and reason were in-
compatible. These philosophers taught things that were incompatible with as-
pects of the Catholic faith (e.g., creation as an event “in the beginning” [ inprin -
cipio\ and “from nothing” [ex nihilo ] [ST I 44 and 46], and the resurrection of
the body [ST III 53-54; SCG IV 79-89] ) . We see this discussion reflected, for
instance, in ST I 1,1, and II— II 1,1: The first truth from which all other truths
are derived can only be known in faith through revelation.

37. This text is cited in the opening question of the first part of the ST:


180


THOMAS AQUINAS


useful things, as the Lord says in Exodus: “I am the Lord, who
teaches you useful things, leading you in the way in which you
walk” [Is 48.17]. Other sciences do not lead you on the way. 38

(2.2: 3.2) Likewise, this dinner is great because of the great-
ness of the delight in taste. After all, there is sweetness to the
highest extent in the words of Sacred Scripture, as Ps ng.103
says: “How sweet to my throat is what you say, (sweeter than hon-
ey in my mouth).” Its sweetness is above the sweetness of eve-
ry other science. For a consideration is called delightful in two
ways: either because of the thing considered or because of the
consideration itself. A demonstration concerning a triangle 39
is not delightful because of the thing demonstrated — since no
one really cares about a triangle — but it is delightful because of
the consideration itself, which befits the intellect. But when the
consideration is about a thing that is loved ( amatus ), and with
this also the consideration itself is delightful, then it is perfectly
delightful. This is the case in Sacred Scripture, since in it there
is not only delight about getting to know the truth, but it even
concerns beloved ( amatus ) things. 40 Thus Augustine says in
Confessions: “Other writings do not have the features of this de-
votion, the tears of confession, the pledge 41 of the Holy Spirit,”


“Whether it is necessary to have another doctrine than the philosophical disci-
plines” (ST I 1,1,1); likewise in the context of our salvation: “Whether believing
something beyond natural reason is necessary for salvation” (ST II— II 2,3,3).

38. Other sciences, practical as well as speculative, are by no means use-
less according to Thomas, but in view of the ultimate end of our life they can-
not compete with the science which we receive from God through revelation:
Scripture and tradition, which contain the Sacra Doctrina (cf. ST I 1,1-3 an d 5 )-
Therefore, these other sciences must be seen and practiced in the light of the
highest science.

39. It seems that Thomas refers to Euclid’s Elements (around 300 BCE), in
which Euclid formulates a comprehensive mathematical theory (which never
lost its significance until today) .

40. Thus Sacred Doctrine must not only be a matter of the intellect; a theo-
logian must be involved, heart and soul; a theologian must be someone of faith,
for theology is not without engagement; cf. ST I 1,4,1 where Thomas cites James
1.22 (“Be doers of the word, not only listeners”). See also paragraph 2.3.

41. There are two words for “pledge” in Latin: one is pignus, which is given
for an entrusted thing; when it is returned, the state of pledge is abolished. The
other term, arra, which Augustine uses here, is something given in confidence,


SERMON 13


181


and other things that he mentions there. So the refreshment of
Sacred Scripture is great because of the greatness of the abun-
dance in provision and because of the greatness of the delight
in taste.

(2.2: 3.3) Third, because of the greatness in effect. What is
the effect of it? I say that it gives life, as Saint Peter says: “Lord,
to whom shall we go? You have the words of everlasting life”
[Jn 6.68]. By means of words people are brought to the faith,
through which they live and are incited to love ( caritas) [cf. Lk
10.28]. Hence it says in Sir 15.3: “She [Wisdom] fed him with
the bread of life and of understanding (and made him drink
the water of the wisdom of salvation and took him up to her
close relatives).”

(2.3) Third, Christ prepared for us a refreshment that per-
tains to our affection. Thus we read in Song 5.1: “Eat, my
friends!” that is, here and now, through grace, “and get drunk,
my dear!” that is, in the future, through glory. 42 Christ makes
this refreshment for us insofar as he has the fullness of divinity,
as Ps 84.12 reads: “The Lord will give grace and glory.” 43

In this refreshment is the early meal of grace, namely, in the
present. The Lord calls us to this early meal in Jn 21.12, where
he says: “Come and take breakfast.” 44

We expect the dinner of this refreshment in the future,
which will be in glory. Therefore, it says in Rv 19.9: “Happy
those who are called to the wedding feast of the Lamb.” This is
the dinner to which no one is called unless he is a worthy mem-
ber of the household. Thus we read in Is 65.13: “My servants
will eat, but you will be hungry.” 45


first in part, so that may be made full or given to the full in the future (although
in Eph 1.14 pignus is used in the meaning of arra ) .

42. In ST III 79,1,2 Thomas uses this verse to speak about the Eucharist as a
spiritual refreshment for the soul.

43. Cited in this context in ST I— II 7,1 and 62,1,3 (necessity of the sacra-
ments); cf. ST I— II 108,1; II— II 183,2; III 19,4,2 and 26,2,1. This leads to happi-
ness, according to Ps 84.13.

44. Prandeo: this meal takes place in the morning; cf. Jn 21.4.

45. It may seem that Thomas is excluding people here. But in the Collatio in


182


THOMAS AQUINAS


(2.3: 3) This dinner is greater than other ones because of
the three characteristics already mentioned.

(2.3: 3.1) First, because of the great splendor of the provision.
The greatness of the provision is found in the fact that man
would sit at the table of God. Someone who sits at the king’s ta-
ble has a splendid provision. In Lk 22.29-30 it is said: “I have
given you a place,” et cetera, “so that you may eat and drink at
my table,” et cetera. Does he have a tangible table then? Cer-
tainly not! God’s refreshment is joy [cf. Ps 43.4] . But about what
does Christ rejoice? Surely about himself, for he would not be
happy unless he would rejoice about himself. 46 Then he will
bring to pass that they see him by essence [1 Jn 3.2] and thus
they will rejoice in him. Jb 22.26 reads: “Then you will be full
of delights because of the Almighty.” 47 Which food is more pre-
cious than God? Surely none. 48

(2.3: 3.2) If someone tries to find out how great the delight in
taste is, his seeking is redundant. For everything (of this meal)
is delightful. Something is delightful insofar as it is good or in-
sofar as it appears to be good. 49 But if minor good things or
things that participate in the good are already delightful, then
how great a delight is caused by that thing whose goodness is
infinite. 50 As we read in Ps 16.11: “The delights in your right


sero he will point out how everybody ought to be made worthy, in accordance
with Lk 14.21-23.

46. Our ultimate happiness is found in God (cf. ST I— II 2,8, 3,1). Since Christ
as a human being is full of God, and as God is the fullness of God, he there-
fore rejoices in himself. The image of indulgence in navel-gazing is not what is
meant; Thomas tries to formulate the mystery of the fullness of Christ’s happi-
ness and joy.

47. In ST I 42,6 Thomas speaks of the almightiness of the divine Son (here
he shows the consequences of the steps taken in the preceding articuli) \ in ST
III 13 he contemplates the almightiness of the Son’s human soul (where he
shows the consequences in regard to this subject of the faith in the true human-
ity of Christ) .

48. Cf. Jn 4.34 (in ST I— II 69,2,3). Also: Wis 7.9 (in ST I— II 2,6); Prv 3.15 (in
ST II-II 100,1).

49. Cf. ST I 5,6.

50. Which is God; cf. ST I 6,2-3 an< ^ 7 >L f rom whom all good things come.
Everything that is, participates insofar as it is good in God’s infinite goodness;
cf. ST I 6,4 and 7,1.


SERMON 13


183


hand are till the end,” and Ps 31.20: “How great the multitude
of your sweetness, Lord.”

(2.3: 3.3) Third, this dinner is great because of the great-
ness of the virtue [or strength] in its effect, 51 for it contains the
eternity of life [cf. Jn 6.50-51]; the rejoicing saints will never be
deficient in it. Ps 22.27a reads: “The poor will eat and be sat-
isfied,” et cetera. “The poor will eat” — and who are the poor?
Surely the poor in spirit, since we read in Mt 5.3: “Happy are
the poor in spirit (for the Kingdom of heaven is theirs).” Or the
poor are the humble, or the poor in will [cf. Ps 40.9], namely,
those who have riches but despise them. These come to the din-
ner, whereas the ones whose mind is set on temporal things do
not come [cf. Lk 14.18-20]. Thus we read in the Gospel: “Hap-
py those who hunger and thirst for justice, for they will be satis-
fied” [Mt 5.6].

And [the Psalm continues] : “They who seek him will praise
the Lord” [Ps 22.27b]. Augustine says: “We will see, we will
love ( amo ), and we will praise. Their hearts will live forever and
ever” — not just a physical life, but a life of the soul, a life that is
united with God. 52

May we be found worthy of this by him who with the Father,
et cetera.


part 3: Collatio in sero

“Someone” [Lk 14.16], et cetera. Today we have spoken about
the preparation of this dinner; now we must speak about its an-
nouncement. For the “someone” [in this biblical story] certain-
ly has not prepared the dinner for no one to sit at the table,
but in order to make it known to others. See that this dinner is
not made known to anyone but to one who is called to it. One


5 1 . The Latin text used reads affectu; but in the context of the sermon (see
the parallel paragraphs 3.3 above, in 2.1 and 2.2) it is obvious it should be ef-
fectu.

52. Vita anime Deo coniuncta. Cf. ST I i2,4sc and 6sc on eternal life (which
consists in the vision of the divine essence); cf. ST I— II 1 1 and 104,4, on the en-
joyment of God; and ST I— II 5,4 on the difference between imperfect happiness
in this life and perfect, eternal happiness after life on earth.


184


THOMAS AQUINAS


who is not called can approach the things that he knows and
desires, but he cannot approach what exceeds our desire un-
less he is called. 53 Such is this dinner. Hence the Apostle says in
1 Cor 2.9-10 and in Is 64.3: “Eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
and in the heart of a man it did not (come up: the things that
God has prepared for them who love \diligo\ him. Yet he has re-
vealed it to us through the Holy Spirit).” And therefore some-
one does not come to this dinner unless he is called, whence
Rom 8.30 reads: “the ones he has called he has also justified,
(and the ones he justified he has also glorified).”

We must note that there are two kinds of vocation [or call-
ing]: (1) one interior, (2) the other from outside.

❖

(I) The interior vocation, through which the Lord addresses
man internally, is never in vain, since a human being does not
reject it. Jb 14.15: “You will call me and I will respond to you.”
Augustine says in his book On Predestination: “The grace which
is infused in human hearts by the divine abundance is not re-
pelled by any hard heart; therefore, we say in this case that rath-
er the hardness of the heart is repelled.” Hence the Lord’s inte-
rior calling is not in vain. 54 Thus we read in Jn 6.45: “Everyone
who hears and learns from my Father comes to me.” 55

(II) The other vocation, which occurs through an angel or a
human being,

53. In general in ST I 12,13,4, in respect of our happiness in I— II 5,5, and in
respect of the resurrection in III 55,1.

54. Thomas uses the term vocatio (vocation, calling) for God’s calling as an
execution of what he has predestined; cf. ST I 23,2.

God’s calling from within is never in vain, Thomas says: all people are nat-
urally created towards God; God made us as beings who naturally will what is
good. Through sin, however, this will is disordered; sinning goes against our
will. So if we are inspired by God himself to do what we are naturally inclined
to do, we would not refuse but would do it, happily and voluntarily. The work-
ing of inspiration is in our soul from the inside out, instead of the less effective,
indirect calling of God, which comes from outside us, through angels or fellow-
human beings. Cf. ST I 105,4 and 5; I— II 6,4, 9,6 (where he cites Phil 2.13: “It is
God who works in you both to will and to do in order to realize what is good in
his eyes”) and 113,1,3.

55. ST I 43,5,2; cf. Ill 69,5,2.


SERMON 13


185


(1) 56 is not as effective as the one that is directly from God;
indeed, often it is in vain, and many reject it. Hence 57 we read
in Prv 1.24: “1 have called and you have rejected.” And Mt
20.16: “For many are called, but few elected.” Concerning this
vocation the Lord speaks here, as he says, “he called many” [Lk
14.16]. And it shows that he speaks of this vocation, because
this is done by a servant [Lk 14.17]. Therefore: “At the time of
the dinner he sent his servant to say to the ones who were invit-
ed: ‘Come!’”

(2) But who is the servant? The Apostle Paul and the other
preachers, prelates, and teachers; all such people who remind
us of the good [that God has done for us] are called servants of
God.

Here two things that must be considered come up, namely,

(3) who are called and (4) how they are called. 38

(3) In this multitude of people called we find a threefold
distinction, as the Gospel clearly shows: (3.1) some of the ones
called are those who were invited to the dinner, (3.2) others
were the downtrodden citizens, and (3.3) yet others were stran-
gers.

(3.1) Now who were the ones who were invited? I say that
those properly invited were those who received the privilege
of a divine office, for the invitation is sent out to relatives and
close friends. If someone is a religious, a cleric, or if someone
happens to have the gift of wisdom or something the like, that
is the invitation. 59 In Est 1.7 it is said that “the ones who were

56. The structure of section II on the calling from outside is: (1) its effective-
ness, (2) its subject (who are calling), (3) its object (who are called), and (4)
the way in which the dinner is announced.

57. The Latin text used reads undo, but obviously it should be unde.

58. Thus the emphasis of this part of the sermon is on the practical.

59. So Thomas makes the preachers-to-be and the teachers-to-be aware that
they themselves are called and need to respond. The invitation is a gift: becom-
ing a religious, a priest, et cetera, is not something you do, but something God
is doing to you (cf. Heb 5.4), and you are the one to respond to it by realizing
what you are called to do or to become. Likewise, talents are gifts, and someone


186


THOMAS AQUINAS


invited to the feast drank from golden cups.” The golden cups
are God’s precious gifts.

The ones invited were to come to the wedding, but did not
come because of a triple hindrance, which is mentioned in 1
Jn 2.15: “Do not love ( diligo ) the world nor the things that are
in the world. If someone loves ( diligo ) the world, the love (cari-
tas) of God is not in him.” What is it that hinders the ones who
were invited from coming to the wedding? Certainly, that a hu-
man being clings to the world. And how does someone cling to
the world? Certainly, by pursuing things that are in the world.
And which are the things that are in the world? The concupis-
cence of the flesh or the concupiscence of the eye or the pride
of life, as it is said in 1 Jn 2. 16. 60 Thus in three ways people are
hindered from coming to the dinner, even though they are in-
vited, namely, (3.1.1) because of pride, (3.1.2) because of the
concupiscence of the eye or (3.1.3) that of the flesh. 61

(3.1.1) First, I say, someone is hindered from coming to the
dinner because of pride. 62 It happens that some people have
received many good spiritual and temporal things from God,
and although they ought to subject themselves to God because
of those things, they become proud because of these things.
Hence we read in Ezek 28.17: “Exalted is your heart because of
your ornament.” And in Jer 5.5: “You will speak to their aristo-
crats, and, behold, they have broken the yoke of the counsels
and have torn the bonds,” that is, the bonds of the Command-
ments. And these are signified by him who has said: “I have
bought a house, and I am going to see it” [cf. Lk 14.18]. Augus-
tine says that “house” is understood as absolute dominion, that
with the word “absolute dominion” pride is expressed, 63 where-

who receives such a gift is therefore called to live according to it; cf. Mt 25.14-
30. See also ST II— II 24,3, 62,4,3.

60. The formation of our judgment is hindered because it is connected with
our senses: ST I 84,8; I— II 33,3.

61. Cf. ST I-II 77,5.

62. ST II— II 162-165: it is willed and contrary to good reason. Cf. Sermon
08 Puer Jesus, Collatio in sero, paragraph 4.3.

63. The Latin word for house is domus. Because dominatio (absolute dominion)
belongs to the Dominus (the Lord) alone, therefore not acknowledging God as
the Lord, turning away from God, and taking the Lord’s place are characteristic of


SERMON 13


187


as the dinner is proper to the humble. Note also that he says:
“I have bought a house and I need to see it” [Lk 14.18]. Often
those who are proud of the gifts given to them by God think
of the gifts, not of the One from whom the gifts came. Against
such a man it is said in 1 Cor 4.7: “What do you have that you
have not received?”

Imagine, you are a highly placed man ( prelatus ) or a scholar.
You ought to ponder from where you have it: you do not have
it from yourself, but from God, so that you may subject your-
self to him. And this realization not only takes away pride, but
even brings on humility. 64 For as the gifts increase, the reasons
for giving honor increase; 65 the more goods you have, the more
obliged you are to God. But someone who does not know 66 that
the goods he has come from God, cannot thank God. Because
of this [I say]: think this over, that whatever you have, you have
from God [cf. alsojn 3.27], and that you are bound to give him
thanks [cf. Eph 5.20, Col 3.15, et alibi ] or, better, give to him
thanks in return. 67 Then those gifts will not lead to pride.

(3.1.2) Others look down on going to the dinner, even
though they have been invited, and this because of the con-
cupiscence of the eyes. It is understood that Hos 2.8 says about
them: “I have multiplied for them silver and gold which they
have made into a Baal.” By “gold” wisdom is meant; 68 by “silver”
eloquence; 69 some have obtained the grace of eloquence or the
gift of wisdom, and hence they ought to serve God. Those who
turn these gifts around and use them for concupiscence and
the acquisition of earthly things serve the devil. He says that


pride. In this respect pride is the beginning of every sin; cf. ST I— II 84,2; II— II
162,6-7.

64. Humility is the opposite of pride: ST II— II 161.

65. Cf. ST II— II 106,1 and 3.

66. Ignoro: Thomas distinguishes between ignoro ( ignorantia as a result of ne-
glect; people who do not make an effort to find the truth) and nescio ( nescientia ,
not knowing as such), ST I— II 76,2.

67. Gratias agere, gratias reddere: ST II— II 58,1 1. Therefore, gratitude is a vir-
tue of justice: ST II— II 80, 81-91.

68. Sir 6.18-37 (especially verse 30); cf.Jb 23.10, Ps 18.31, Wis 3.6-9.

69. Prv 10.20; cf. Sir 28.246-253. Thus we still say that an eloquent person
has “a silver tongue.”


188


THOMAS AQUINAS


“they have made a Baal,” because avarice is slavery of idols. 70
These are signified by the one who was invited and said, “I
have bought five yoke of oxen, and I am going to try them out”
[Lk 14.19]. By the five yoke the five senses are signified, which
completely enslave someone to sensory things. He says: “1 have
bought five yoke of oxen, (and I am going to try them out).”
Here not only cupidity but also curiosity 71 is repudiated. Some
are very curious about external things and about what others
do, so that they try to find out what others do and neglect their
own deeds. Such people are like an eye which sees another eye,
but it does not see itself. For some do not want to believe any-
thing except what they see. 72

(3.1.3) Third, the ones invited are hindered from coming
to the dinner because of the concupiscence of the flesh. For
some turn themselves to pleasures when they have been exalt-
ed through the gifts of God. Hence we read in Ezek 16.15: “You
trust in your ornament; you have committed fornication.” 73
Is 22.12: “On that day the Lord will call you to weeping and
mourning,” namely, when he has said in the Gospel, “Hap-
py those who lament (for they will be comforted)” [Mt 5.4].
And [Isaiah continues]: “Behold, their joy, their killing of the
calves.” The condemned say: “Let us eat and drink, for tomor-
row we will die” [Is 22.13]. They are referred to by the one who
married a wife and therefore could not come to the dinner
[Lk 14.20]. By the wife the concupiscence of the flesh is signi-
fied. Only this one and not anyone else said: “I cannot come.”

70. Desire ( cupiditas ) is the root of every sin in respect of our turning to-
wards a created good (instead of towards God); cf. ST I— II 84,1-2. Contrary to
slavery in the general sense of the word, this slavery not only concerns the body,
the exterior life (ST II— II 104,6,1), but even the soul, the interior life: ST II— II
122,4,3.

71. ST II-II 167.

72. Cf. Jn 4.48, 20.29. Faith is about things that we cannot see: Heb 1 1.1; cf.
ST II-II 1,4. Since Jn 20.29 (“Happy those who have not seen and yet believe”)
is said in the context of the Resurrection, it seems that Thomas echoes the cri-
tique that he had voiced earlier, in the Sermo, against the philosophers who deny
the resurrection of the body.

73. This can even be because of a spiritual beauty, if someone is proud of it:
ST II-II 145,2,3.


SERMON 13


189


For because of the enticement of the flesh he could not come.

There is a difference between the sin of pride and of
cupidity, 74 on the one hand, and lustfulness, 75 on the other. For
the proud and the ones who desire ( cupidus ) commit a sin in-
tentionally and do not want to come to the dinner. 76 But those
who sin through the sin of the flesh, sin because of weakness
and incapability. These have the intention of going to the din-
ner but are hindered by the concupiscence of the flesh. 77 Flence
the Apostle says: “The flesh desires ( concupisco ) against the spir-
it, the spirit against the flesh, so that you do not do everything
you want” [Gal 5.17].

These, although they were invited, have not come to the din-
ner either because of pride or because of cupidity or because
of the concupiscence of the flesh. But it is written that “a serv-
ant who knows the will of his lord and does not do it, will be
flogged with many lashes” [Lk 12.47]. So, the more important
you are, if you act against the will (of the Lord), you are worthy
of a heavier punishment. 78

And the paterfamilias was furious when he heard that the
ones invited did not want to come [Lk 14.21]. By the anger
God’s wrath 79 is signified. 80 So the first that are called to the
meal are the ones who are invited.

(3.2) Another category of those who were called to the din-


74. For the difference between these two, see ST I— II 84,2.

75. Luxuria is a collective term for all kinds of sexual activity which are
against the virtue of temperance: ST II— II 153-154.

76. On intention: ST I 79,10,3; I— II 12; cf. 19,7-8.

77. Thus the first two were hypocrites because they said, “Please, accept my
regrets,” while they did not regret it at all (ST II— II 1 1 1,1—3), whereas the third
man spoke the truth; he could not come. Furthermore, the first two did not
even have the intention of coming, Thomas says; they sinned consciously, where-
as the third man sinned because of weakness, namely, passion: ST I— II 77,2-3
and 6-8.

78. Cf. ST 1-1173,9.

79. Since God is not composite, his wrath and anger must be understood as
metaphors; cf. ST I 3,2,2.

80. Thomas has identified the one who made the dinner as Jesus Christ be-
cause of the word homo — a man, a human being — in the text. Here Thomas
reads the parallel text of Mt 22.2-10 into Luke’s version; in Matthew it is a king
who invites people to the wedding feast of his son.


190


THOMAS AQUINAS


ner are the downtrodden citizens, as it says in the Gospel: “Go
to the streets and the broad ways of the city, and call the weak,
the blind, and the lame” [Lk 14.21], et cetera. And see: the
last are made the first [cf. Mt 19.30, 20.16]. For the great do
not arrive at that dinner, neither do the mighty, but the weak
and the poor do. We have the example in Lazarus and the rich
man [Lk 16.19-26]. The ill are often converted, whence Am-
brose says: “Weakness of the body excludes no one from the
Kingdom, and sometimes [this weakness] is even absent from
someone who is not allured by sin.” The Apostle explains why:
“God has chosen those who are the weak of the world to shame
whatever is strong” [1 Cor 1.28]. You must understand this in
a spiritual way, that the poor in temporal things who are, how-
ever, rich in spiritual things are chosen; these are in the streets
and the broad ways; whence the Prophet says: “Scattered are
the stones of the sanctuary on the corner of all the broad ways”
[Lam 4.1]. 81

But concerning the man who is rich in temporal things but
poor in spiritual things, Rv 3.17 says: “You say that I am rich
and do not need anything, whilst you do not know that you are
wretched, (miserable, poor, blind, and naked),” for “sin makes
peoples wretched” [Prv 14.34].

But from which defect of riches do sinners suffer? I say that
they fail (3.2.1) in knowledge, (3.2.2) in strength, and (3.2.3) in
rectitude. 82

(3.2.1) First, I say that those blinded through sin suffer from
a defect in knowledge, namely, because they disdain what is
good and choose what is evil. 83 Thus the Apostle says in 2 Tm
3.4: “The ones who love ( amator ) pleasures more than God are
swollen (with passionate excitement) and blind.” It is on the
ground of this blindness that rich people despise divine things
and would rather have temporal things.

(3.2.2) Others fail in strength of the mind and virtue 84

81. Citing this verse here seems to be an implicit reference to 1 Pt 2.5: “Let
yourselves, like living stones, be built into a spiritual house,” et cetera.

82. Cf. ST II-II 15,1.

83. ST I-II 76,1; cf. I-II 100,1 and II-II 173,2.

84. ST I-II 85,1-4. Thomas’s formulation is: in fortitudine animi et virtute; the


SERMON 13


191


through sin. Hence it says in Neh 4.10: “Weak is the virtue 85 of
the one who carries (heavy loads),” of whom it is said: “My vir-
tue 86 was for nothing” [Jb 30.2], and these are the weak.

(3.2.3) Others who are blinded through sin fail in recti-
tude, 87 that is, in their intention. Hence it says in Mi 7.2: “The
saint has disappeared front the earth, and a righteous man is
not found among the people.” These are the lame; from the
outside they seem to follow the Lord, but if anyone sees their
intention, it becomes clear they are lame. About this lameness
Elijah says: “How long will you be lame, in two minds?” [1 Kgs
18.21] Whenever the poor are enriched, the blind illuminated,
the weak strengthened, and the lame cured, 88 “then,” says Is
35.6, “the lame will leap like a deer.”

(3.3) See that when the servant had led those people in, he
said to his lord: “There is still room” [Lk 14.22], by which pre-
destination 89 is indicated: for not only the great and the faithful
are called. Therefore, the Lord says: “I have other sheep, which
are not from this flock (and I must lead those to me, and it will
be one flock, one shepherd)” [Jn 10.16]. Because the Lord has
other sheep, he calls people who are outside the flock. There-
fore, it says in the Gospel: “Go out into the roads and hedges,
and compel (them to come in, that my house may be filled)”
[Lk 14.23 (Vg)]. By the people who are outside, the unbeliev-
ers are signified. Now, we find a triple distinction within the
unbelievers: 90

(3.3.1) The first are the Gentiles and the pagans who do
not at all share in the faith; the light of faith does not shine for

word virtus means “virtue” as well as “effort” and “strength”; fortitudo also means
“strength,” but not “virtue.” In the verses quoted from Nehemiah and Job the
term virtus is used.

85. Or “strength.”

86. Or “effort.”

87. ST I— II 75,4; II— II 15,3; sin makes the will turn to what is evil (contrary to
rectitude) and causes (a greater) blindness of the intellect, and such blindness
leads to (more) sinning.

88. In the prayer before receiving holy Communion attributed to Thomas,
Omnipotens sempiterne Deus ecce accedo ad sacramentum unigeniti Filii tui, we find a
remarkable parallel with these pairs of words.

89. ST I 23-24; also SCG III 163.

90. Cf. ST II— II 10—11, esp. 10,5 and 6.


192


THOMAS AQUINAS


them. These are in dark roads. Hence it says: “The roads of the
godless are dark roads” [Prv 4.19].

(3.3.2) Other unbelievers are the Jews, who share something
with us, namely, the sacred doctrine of the Old Testament. Of
them it is said: “There is still a little light in you” [Jn 12.35].
These are signified by the scattered roads, in Is 33.8: “Scattered
are the roads.” The figurative observances have passed away;
they have become scattered roads, because since the truth has
come, the prefiguration has passed. Thus someone who pre-
served the figurative observances would sin. Hence the Apostle
says: “If you let yourselves be circumcised, Christ will bring you
nothing” [Gal 5. 2]. 91

(3.3.3) The third group of unbelievers are the heretics in the
hedges [Lk 14.23 (Vg)]. Hedges are conceived as making divi-
sions. Heretics do not serve for anything; the only thing they
do is making a division. Heretics are thorns because they sting,
and hedges because they divide. 92

These three categories of people are pointed out to us, in or-
der to show that the Gospel was preached first to princes and
priests who refused to come [Mt 2.1-8, 16]; then Peter preached
to the lower people of the Jews and converted 3,000 of them
[Acts 2.41]; subsequently preachers went into the hedges and
the broad ways in order to proclaim the Gospel, 93 and all were
brought to the faith. Hence the Church prays not only for high-
ly placed people ( prelatus ), but also for the weakened and the
unbelievers. 94 So these are the ones who are called.

91. So as for the Jews, infideles, “unbelievers,” is said in view of the faith in
Christ and so in the Trinity, not in the sense that they do not believe at all; cf.
ST 104,2.

92. Schismatic groups like the Cathari were a serious threat to the unity of
the Church (and of the secular society) and could, therefore, eventually not be
tolerated: ST II— II 1 1,3, 39.

93. In the first two instances Thomas uses the verb praedico + the dative case:
the Gospel was preached for the benefit of the addressees. When he speaks of
the heretics, he says that the Gospel “was preached into the hedges and the
broad ways,” praedico in + the accusative case. Thus he points out to his audi-
ence, preachers-to-be, that they should (not preach from afar, but) actually go
into the places where these heretics live and preach, and proclaim the Gospel
from within these communities.

94. ST II-II 83,7-8.


SERMON 13


193


(4) But how are they called? A triple way of vocation is pre-
sented.

(4.1) The ones who are invited must be called by a simple
summons, as it happens in the Gospel: “He sent his servant at
the time of the dinner to say to the ones invited that they come”
[Lk 14.18]. Neither being loud nor being rough is better. Thus
we read: “Do not chide an old man, but honor him as your fa-
ther” [1 Tm 5.1] and elsewhere: “Give honor to the wise man”
[Sir 10.31 (Vg)]. 95

(4.2) Furthermore, the poor and the downtrodden must
be led inside. Some have taken up the plan to come to God
in baptism; they have renounced the devil and his whole train.
Now they need someone who instructs them and leads them in
and makes them acquainted with the King. Hence it says in Ex
23.20: “Behold, I will send my angel to go before your face so as
to protect you as well as to lead you into the place.”

(4.3) Third, the unbelievers and the heretics must be com-
pelled to come to the dinner, as we read in the Gospel: “Go
out in the streets and hedges, and compel them to enter” [Lk
14.23 (Vg)]. Those who are in the hedges must be compelled in
two ways. “Signs are not given to believers, but to unbelievers”
[cf. Mt 12.39, 16.4]. Hence heretics are compelled to enter on
the ground of the evidence of miracles. 96 Likewise, to the letter,
they must be compelled by giving them a hard time ( per vexa-
cionem). Thus we read in Ps 32.9: “(Be not senseless like horses
or mules:) jaws in bridle and bit, (that is how their temper must
be curbed.)” Heretics say that no one must be urged to come to
faith by means of punishment. On the contrary rather, whence
it says in Is 28. ig: “Only distress ( vexacio ) will give understand-
ing to the hearing.” 97

We do not read that they who were on the roads and in the

95. Neither force nor threats must be used, Thomas impresses upon his au-
dience: converting someone must be done with respect; cf. ST II— II 10,1 1-12.

96. As in Mt 2.1-1 1 and 27.45, 54 (the star an d the darkness and the confes-
sion of the centurion; cf. ST III 44,2) and as Christ did during his life on earth
(cf. ST III 44 . 3 - 4 )-

97. Cf. ST II— II n,3co, ad 3: excommunication and the death penalty are
the ultimate measures.


194


THOMAS AQUINAS


hedges have excused themselves; only those who were invit-
ed did. In this it is pointed out that cold sinners are converted
more quickly than the ones who stray from the way on which
they were going. 98 Hence we read in Hos 8.5-6: “He cannot
thoroughly be cleansed, because he is from Israel.”

We will ask, et cetera.


98. Decidere a statu viae, which is apostasia : once they were viatores, pilgrims on
the way to the patria. Cf. ST I— II 84,2,2; II — II 12,1.


SERMON 14
ATTENDITE A FALSIS

Sermon on the Third Sunday after the Feast of the
Apostles Peter and Paul * 1


Matthew 7.15-16: Beware of the false prophets
who come to you in clothes of sheep; inside they are grasping wolves.
You will know them by their fruits.


part 1 : Prothema


he apostle demonstrates in the following words that
there are two things that are contrary to one another.

“The spirit,” he says, “desires ( concupisco ) against the
flesh and the flesh against the spirit” [Gal 5 . 17 ]. And yet it hap-
pens that sin comes forth from both; sometimes sin comes
forth from the weakness of the flesh, sometimes from the ig-
norance of the spirit. 2 Thus the Apostle says in 2 Cor 7 . 1 : “Let
us cleanse ourselves from every impurity of the flesh and of the
spirit.” And just as the sin of the flesh comes forth from the
weakness of the flesh — as it is said in Mt 26 . 41 : “the spirit is will-
ing indeed, yet the flesh is weak” — so the sin of the spirit comes
forth from ignorance of the spirit, namely, when the spirit is de-
ceived. 3 And therefore we are strengthened in this Sunday read-
ing against both sins. We are strengthened against the sin that


1 . Or the 7th Sunday after the Feast of the Trinity, as the Niirnberg text says.
This sermon was given on the 14th of July 1269.

2. ST I— II 77,1-3, and I— II 76,1, respectively. In this sermon the focus is on
the latter, as Thomas indicates in this Prothema.

3. Other internal causes are our passions and our misery (ST I— II 77-78). In
I— II 79-81 Thomas examines the external causes: the roles of God, of the devil,
and of human beings themselves.


195


196


THOMAS AQUINAS


occurs by reason of the weakness of the flesh by the Apostle in
the Epistle reading that says: “We are indebted to the flesh not
to live according to the flesh” [Rom 8.12]. We are strengthened
against the sin that occurs by reason of the deception of the
spirit, where it says in the Gospel reading: “Beware of the false
prophets, (who come to you in clothes of sheep; inside they are
grasping wolves. You will know them by their fruits).”

Let us ask the Savior, who wanted us to be careful of both
sins, that he may grant that I say something that is to his praise,
et cetera.


part 2: Sermo

“Beware” [Mt 7.15], et cetera. It belongs to the task of a good
commander that he advises his soldiers to be careful of ambush-
es [cf. 2 Kgs 6.8-10] . It is true that we have a cunning and wily
enemy. Hence we read in Sir 11.29: “Many are the ambushes of a
wily man.” The Psalmist says: “He sits in ambushes with the rich”
[Ps 10.8], that is: with the proud. The Apostle explains what
these ambushes are, when he says that “Satan transfigures him-
self into the Angel of light, and his servants (transfigure them-
selves) into the servants of righteousness” [cf. 2 Cor 11.14-15].

Against Satan’s servants the Lord advises us in the words
mentioned above to be careful. In these words he teaches us
four things: [ Sermo] (1) First, he teaches of what kind the ene-
mies are, where he says: “Beware of the false prophets.” \Collatio
in sero\ (2) Second, he teaches what ambushes they make, where
he says: “They come to you in clothes of sheep. (3) The third
thing is that it threatens to damage us, where he says: “Inside
they are grasping wolves.” (4) Fourth, he teaches how to recog-
nize them, where he says: “You will know them by their fruits.”

These enemies are false prophets, and they are very danger-
ous, and therefore we must watch out for them, for they are as
dangerous for us as good angels are necessary and useful for
us. Hence we read in Prv 29.18: “When prophecy ceases, the
population will be scattered.” 4 About the false prophets it says

4. They can enlighten, guide, and protect us; cf. ST I 1 1 1 and 113. In ST II-
II 172,1,4 Thomas argues, referring to this verse, that prophecy is necessary for


SERMON 14


197


in Jer 23.15: “From the prophets of Jerusalem defilement has
spread over the land.”

(1) And in order to see who the false prophets are, (1.1) let
us first see what the definition is of a prophet and then (1.2)
why someone happens to be a false prophet.

(1.1) I say that four things belong to the definition of a
prophet.

(1.1.1) The first is divine revelation. * 3 * 5 Hence it says in Am 3.7:
“The Lord God will not speak a word without revealing his se-
cret to his servants, the prophets.” 6

(1.1.2) At times some things are divinely revealed to a per-
son, but he does not understand it, as when Nebuchadnezzar
saw a statue [cf. Dn 2.31]; and when something was announced
to the Pharaoh — he saw spikes of grain and cattle — but he did
not understand it [cf. Gn 41. 2-7]. 7 8 For this, understanding is re-
quired 6 — a second characteristic of a prophet. Thus we read in
Dn 10.1: “A word was revealed to Daniel and he understood the
message.” So, “understanding is needed with visions” [ibid.].

(1.1.3) ^ a person had a revelation from God and, although
he understood it, kept it to himself, it would be of no avail. Be-
cause of this it is required in the third place that the things
that are revealed to a man and that he understands, are made
known by him to others. Is 21.10 reads: “I have made known to
you the things which I have heard from the Lord of hosts, the
God of Israel.”

(1.1.4) Some things that are revealed and made known from
God are above human perception. But people do not believe


the guidance of people, in particular in view of the way in which we ought to

serve God. What has been revealed to the prophets has been revealed to angels

in a more excellent way: ST I 57,5,3.

5. ST II— II 172,1: prophecy is something supernatural. For the other three
characteristics mentioned in 1.1.2 - 1.1.4 see a ^ so ST II— II 171,1.

6. I.e., insofar as they are necessary for the instruction of a faithful people;
cf. ST II-II 171,4,1.

7. Therefore, it is clear that prophecies can be given to people who do not
believe or do not live an exemplary life; cf. ST II-II 172,4.

8. I.e., understanding of the prophecy itself, not necessarily of the ultimate
end and how we attain it; cf. ST II-II 8,5,2, 173,2,2.


198


THOMAS AQUINAS


unless things are proven, and this proof is the working of mira-
cles. 9 And this is signified in 2 Kgs 5.8, where we read that when
Naaman the Syrian had come to the king of Israel to be cured
of leprosy, Elisha said: “Send him to me, so that he knows that
there is a prophet in Israel.”

So, along the line of what has been said above, I come to the
conclusion that the name “prophet” can be interpreted in four
ways.

(ad 1.1.1) At times someone who receives a divine revela-
tion is called a prophet, as we read in Nm 12.6: “If someone
among you were a prophet of the Lord, I could speak to him in
a dream.” 10

(ad 1.1.2) Yet sometimes we call someone a prophet although
he has not received a divine revelation, but because it is given
to him to understand the things revealed. Thus we read in 1
Cor 14. 29: “Let two or three prophets speak, and let others de-
termine.” In the same letter [the Apostle] calls teachers and
preachers prophets [cf. 1 Cor 12.8-10], in accordance with Sir
24.33: “Still” all teachers “will pour out the teaching as a proph-
ecy.”

(ad 1.1.3) Sometimes we call people prophets who recite the
revealed things, as it is said in 2 Chr 35.15: “The sons of Asaph
and of Idithun” prophesied.

(ad 1.1.4) Sometimes those who work miracles are called
prophets. Hence it is said in Sir 48.14 that “the dead body” of
Elisha “prophesied,” meaning: he has worked a prophetic mira-
cle. 11 In 2 Kgs 13.21 it is told that some robbers were terrified:
they threw the dead body of someone who was killed into the
grave of Elisha, and that that man lived again. And likewise it is

9. ST I 105,7: Things done by God which are beyond our knowledge of the
natural causes are called miracles. To some people the grace of working mira-
cles is given in order to confirm what is being preached or to underline some-
one’s holiness; cf. ST II— II 178. At the very end of Sermon 13 Homo quidam (in
4.3) Thomas points out that signs and miracles are for unbelievers.

10. Dreams, however, can also be deceptive; cf. ST II— II 95,6. Like visions,
they are enigmatic: ST III 7,8,1.

1 1 . It is a prophetic miracle because it is a pre figuration of what Christ did
to Lazarus (Jn 1 1.34-44) and does to all who believe in him (Jn 1 1.25-26): ST
II— II 1,6,1; cf. also I— II 1 1 1,4; II— II 95,2,3.


SERMON 14


199


said in the Gospel that, when Christ worked miracles, the Jews
said: “A great prophet has arisen among us” [Lk 7.16]. 12

Therefore, he says: “Beware,” et cetera.

But how is “prophet” conceived here and now? Chrysostom
says that those who prophesy about Christ are not called proph-
ets nowadays, but those who interpret a prophecy about Christ,
since no one can interpret the prophetic meanings unless
through the Holy Spirit [cf. 1 Cor 12.3]. 13

♦♦♦

(1.2) Let us see who are called false prophets. In four ways a
prophet can be false: (1.2.1) first, because of the falseness of the
teaching; (1.2.2) second, because of the falseness of the inspira-
tion; (1.2.3) third, because of the falseness of the intention; and
(1.2.4) fourth, because of the falseness of life.

(1.2.1) First, some are called false prophets on the basis of
the falseness of the teaching, as when they preach and teach
false things. It belongs to the task of a prophet that he preach-
es and teaches true things. 14 Hence we read in Dn 10.1: “a word
is revealed to Daniel and the word is true”; and the Lord says:
If anyone makes my words known, “let him speak in truth” [Jer
23.28]. But many preach in a false way. Thus it says in a Letter
[of the New Testament]: “There will be pseudo-prophets among
the people; yes, also among you there will be deceitful magistri’
[1 Jn 4.1] who do not hesitate to induce a direction that leads to
doom. Arius 15 was a liar — was he not? — as well as the ones like

12. Still, the working of miracles can also deceive us; demons are capable of
performing works that look very much like true miracles; cf. ST 1 14,4.

13. Cf. ST I 43,3,4. Thus Thomas has formulated a definition distilled from
Scripture; he surveyed those whom we in our faithful speech in fact call proph-
ets. For the role of the Holy Spirit and of the angels, see: II— II 172,1-2.

14. A prophet worships God by preaching what is true. False teachings may
contain some truth. Because of this they are more plausible and acceptable for
the listeners and so more dangerous too; cf. ST II— II 172,6.

15. Arianism, based on the teachings of the Libyan priest Arius (256-336),
was a popular heresy in the early Church. Arius denied the eternity of the Son:
Christ is not God. The Ecumenical Council of Nicea was called together in 325
by the emperor, upon whom Arius had called as he was condemned by his own
bishop, Alexander of Alexandria, in 3 1 1 . The homoousion (“one in being with the
Father”) was formulated by this council as an answer to Arian teaching. The con-


200


THOMAS AQUINAS


him, who wanted to “correct” the doctrine of Christ. Hence we
read in Lam 2.14: “Your prophets have seen false and stupid
things.”

But which things are stupid? Someone who freely says things
to please the people is someone who speaks false things. 16 Is
30.10: “Speak things that are pleasing to us, see errors for us.”
Jeremiah, being asked what false prophets see, says: “They did
not reveal your iniquity, in order to call you to repent” [Lam
2.14].

If some call “good” what is evil, and “evil” what is good, they
are false prophets. Jer says [in Lam 2.14]: “They have false as-
sumptions and make false statements.” What is accepted is ele-
vated, and what is dismissed is condemned. So when the things
that must be lifted up are pressed down, and the things that
must be pressed down are lifted up, you have false assumptions.
Through the teaching of the Lord it is clear what must be lift-
ed up and what must be pressed down. Profane language and
a worldly life must be pressed down. If someone says that it is
better to fast without a vow than with a vow, and pulls others
back from the religious life where people fast with a vow, and
persuades [them] to fast in the world without a vow, he teaches
falsely. The Prophet says: “Make vows and render (to him)” [Ps
76.12]. He says this because it is better to fast with a vow than
without avow; otherwise he would just have said: “Do it.” 17

In his book On the Parables Anselm gives an example, say-
ing that someone who gives a tree with fruits gives more than


troversy even led to a schism: the schism of Alexandria, in 330. After the death
of Emperor Constantine, Arianism grew in popularity again and remained very
much alive, especially outside the Roman Empire, until the 7th century. The dis-
cussion on who Christ is and how we are to formulate this has never disappeared
from the theological agenda. Arius’s heresy is very much present in ST III where
Thomas discusses the mystery of the Incarnation.

16. This was part of the popularity of Arianism: a mystery (e.g., that Christ is
a human being as well as God) is more difficult to accept than something that
can be fully understood (e.g., that Christ is a human being and not God). Pleas-
ing others is in itself not bad; it can even be virtuous, but it is bad when the
truth is neglected; cf. ST II— II 1 15,1,1.

17. Cf. ST II— II 88,4. This example reflects a discussion between the regular
and the secular in Paris in Thomas’s days; cf. ST II— II 88,6 and 186,6.


SERMON 14


201


someone who only gives the fruit. Likewise, someone who takes
a vow and renders it does better than someone who does good
without a vow. 18 “Still it is better not to vow than not to render
what is promised” [Eccl 5.4]. 19

(1.2.2) Furthermore, prophets are called “false” because of
the falseness of inspiration. So whence are true prophets in-
spired? Certainly from God and the Holy Spirit, as it is said in
the Letter of Peter: “A prophecy was never proclaimed to the
people through the human will, but holy people of God spoke,
inspired by the Holy Spirit” [2 Pt 1.21]. Someone can be falsely
inspired by the devil, and even by his own spirit; 20 we find both
cases in Holy Scripture.

First, I say, someone can be inspired falsely by the devil.
As we read in Jer 2.8: “His prophets prophesied in Baal.” “To
prophesy in Baal,” which means “in the devil,” is to say occult
things. Those who practice black magic, who seek truth about
secret matters through inspiration by the devil, prophesy “in
Baal.” And this is the worst among the sins as well as the worst
type of idolatry. 21 And it is not excused on the ground of what
they say, that they do it for a good purpose, because evil should
not be done for good. 22 Thus the Apostle says of those who say:
“Let us do evil things, so that good things may come about,”
that “the condemnation of them [that reason like this] is just”
[Rom 3.8].

Others are inspired in a false way by their own spirit. Thus
we read in Ezek 13.3: “Thus says the Lord: ‘Woe to the unwise
prophets, who follow their own spirit and do not see anything.’”
Jer 23.16: “They speak of the vision of their own heart; they do
not speak from the Lord’s mouth.” They who follow human rea-
soning speak from their own spirit. 23 Such are they who speak

18. The same example is given in ST II— II 88,6.

19. Because a vow obliges to the highest extent: ST II— II 88,3.

20. Cf. ST II— II 94,4 vs. 172,1.

21. Cf. ST II— II 95 esp. 95,4. Idolatry is considered a very grave sin, in par-
ticular for those who have taken on the faith: ST II— II 94,3.

22. Cf. Rom 12.21; cf. ST I— II 79,4sc; II— II 98,4,4 (which is Thomas’s answer
to the sed contra ); III 68,1 1,3. That God can bring something good out of evil (I
2,3,1) does not make evil itself good.

23. Is 55.8; cf. ST II— II 171,1,3.


202


THOMAS AQUINAS


according to Platonic ways of thinking, which cannot arrive at
truth. For instance, those who say that the world is eternal. 24

We find some people who study philosophy and say some
things that are not true according to the faith. And when
someone tells them that this is opposed to the faith, they an-
swer that the Philosopher [namely, Aristotle] says this, but that
they themselves do not maintain this; yes, that they only repeat
the words of the Philosopher. Such is a false prophet, or a false
teacher, because causing doubt and not solving it is the same as
giving way to it. This is signified in Ex 21.33-34, where it says
that “if someone digs a pit and opens the cistern without cov-
ering it over,” and a cow belonging to his neighbor comes and
falls into the cistern, he who left the cistern open is bound to
pay him restitution. Someone who causes doubt about these
things that regard the faith, opens the cistern. Someone who
does not solve the doubt, although he has a sound and bright
intellect and is not deceived, is the one who does not cover over
the cistern. Still, someone else, who does not have such a bright
intellect, may well be deceived, and then the one who caused
the doubt is bound to restitution, since because of him that
person fell into the pit. 25

See, my dearest brethren, 26 there have been many philoso-
phers and they have said many things that pertain to the faith,
and yet you will scarcely find two of them who harmonize in
one conclusion. And any philosopher who has said something
that belongs to the truth has not said it without a mixture of
falseness. 27 Just one old woman knows more about these things
that pertain to the faith than heretofore all philosophers. 28 We

24. See Sermon 06 Celum et terra transibunt, note 7.

25. Because the person falling falls because of ignorance: ST I— II 76,2-4.
Here Thomas speaks of a sin against the neighbor; cf. ST I— II 72,4 ( peccare in
proximum ) .

26. Karissimi. This little inteijection reflects Thomas’s zeal and his passion-
ate concern with the well-being of his audience.

27. ST II— II 2,4: because the fullness of truth is God (ST I 16,5) and we know
it through faith insofar as he has revealed it (ST I 1,1 and II— II 1,1), whereas for
philosophers revelation is not a source of knowledge, and faith is not the gate
to it; cf. SCG III 154.

28. Vetula : see how Jesus, too, presents an old woman {vidua) as a great ex-
ample, in Lk 18.3-8 and 21.2-3 (cf. ST II— II 32,4,3; III 79,5).


SERMON 14


203


read that Pythagoras first was a boxer. He heard a magister dis-
puting on the immortality of the soul, arguing that the soul
would be immortal. And he was enticed so much that he left
everything and gave himself over to the study of philosophy.
But which old woman nowadays would not know that the soul
is immortal? 29 Faith is capable of much more than philosophy
is. Hence, if philosophy is contrary to faith, it must not be ac-
cepted. 30 Thus the Apostle says in Col 2.8, 18-19: “See that no
one deceive you by a false philosophy or seduce you, in his de-
sire for empty glory,” “someone who walks by things he does not
see, in vain with his spirit full of his flesh, and not holding on
to the head,” which is Christ. 31

(1.2.3) Others are false prophets because of a false intention.
But what is the true intention of a prophet? 32 Surely, the bene-
fit of the people. Hence the Apostle says in 1 Cor 14.13: “Some-
one who prophesies speaks to the people for the sake of their
advancement, exhortation, and consolation.” He speaks for the
sake of their advancement, so that he renders them devout [cf.
Ps 76.12]; for the sake of their exhortation, so that he renders
them ready and willing in good works; and for the sake of their
consolation, so that he renders them patient in adversities. If
anyone seeks from his teaching something else than the benefit
of the people, he is a false prophet.

Someone who is a bishop takes up the task of governing and
preaching and ought to seek the benefit of the people. If he ac-
tually seeks something else, like temporal gain or empty glory, 33

29. In other words: with faith, even if it is a little (or as litde as a mustard
seed), you know more than the great pagan philosophers; cf. ST I 44,2; II— II
1,8,1.

30. This is how Thomas uses Aristotle’s philosophical insights in his theol-
ogy: if Aristode says something which is incompatible with the Christian faith,
Thomas does not hesitate either to change (slightly) what Aristotle said in or-
der to make his point or to show his readers that Aristotle cannot be used for a
better understanding of a particular aspect of the Christian faith. E.g., in ST I
25 we see two examples of this: in 25,2,1 on a Christian understanding of infin-
ity and in 25,3,2 concerning the way Christians ascribe characteristics to crea-
tures and God.

31. Col 1.18. Cf. ST III 8,6sc. Otherwise, schisms occur: ST II— II 39,1.

32. Cf. ST I-II 19,7-10.

33 - Cf. II-II 1 3 2.


204


THOMAS AQUINAS


he is a false prophet, because he does not hold on to the right
intention. Therefore, Chrysostom says that many priests do not
care how the people live, but how much they give to the Church.
For this reason the Lord complains in Ezek 13.19: “They pro-
fane me with my people for a little bit of barley and a piece of
bread.” Against them the Apostle says: “We are not like the very
many who commit adultery with God’s word” [2 Cor 2.17]. Also,
Gregory says that someone is a prisoner of the thought of adul-
tery if he seeks to please the eyes of his wife by means of the
thing with which a husband conveys gifts to his wife. 34 An adul-
terer does not seek in a woman to generate offspring, but seeks
only temporal delight. In the same way does the one who does
not seek spiritual offspring, but only temporal gain or empty
glory, commit adultery against the word of the Lord.

(1.2.4) Furthermore, some are false prophets through a bad
life, such as when someone teaches one thing and lives anoth-
er [cf. Lk 11.46, versus 1 Tm 4.12, Ti 2.7-8]. Then his teaching
is not accepted. And because of this, Christ “began to do and
teach” [Acts 1.1]. And in Lk 1.70 it says: “As was said through
the mouth of the holy ones, who from centuries are his proph-
ets”; as if it says: the prophets through whom the Lord speaks
ought to be holy. 35 But about them the Lord complains through
Jer 23.11: “The priests and prophets have become filthy; in my
house I have seen their evil.” 36

We will ask the Lord, et cetera.


part 3: Collatio in sero

“Beware of the false prophets” [Lk 7.15-16], et cetera. To-
day we have spoken about the enemies of the Christian people,
namely, the false prophets.


34. “the thing with . . . his wife”: a rather cryptic description in order to
avoid the word “penis.” Adultery in the strict sense of the word: ST II— II 154,8;
the spirit of adultery is found in luxuria (lustfulness) in general: ST II— II 154,1.

35. Wis 11.1, Sir 48.23 (Vg; cf. Sir 48.22); cf. alsojn 13.15, in ST III 37,1,2.

36. Cf. ST II— II 186,10: the sins of the ones who are addressed are worse
since they are supposed to live an exemplary life.


SERMON 14


205


(2) Now we must see how they have made ambushes for us.
Well, the Apostle lays bare their ambushes in the Letter to
the Corinthians, 37 and likewise does the Lord in the Gospel
when he says: “Beware of the false prophets who come to you
in clothes of sheep,” et cetera. This is what we understand by
hypocrisy, 38 because the hiding place of false prophets is hy-
pocrisy. Hence the Apostle says in 1 Tm 4.1-2: “The Spirit ex-
plicitly says: ‘In the last days deceivers will come who abandon
the faith because they listen to spirits of error and to teachings
of demons who speak lies in hypocrisy.’” If someone considers
the life and manners, they who lead an austere life and abstain
from marriage and delicate foods 39 will seem good to him, but
they listen to the spirits of error and the teachings of demons. 40
Take heed to what it is that he says: “who come to you in clothes
of sheep.” “Sheep” are the Christians who obey Christ, as we
read injn 10.27: “My sheep listen to my voice.” The sheep’s pelts
are the imitations of Christ. In this way the Apostle says: “Be re-
newed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, who
is created after God in righteousness and holiness of truth”
[Eph 4.23-24].

Here he touches upon two things, for righteousness seems to
pertain to neighbors, outside ourselves, 41 and holiness of truth
to the interior disposition of the soul. 42 Thus that word in Prv
31.21 is fulfilled which says: “All the members of her household
are clothed with double (garments),” meaning: inside with the
virtues of the soul and outside with good works.

It is true that if the false prophets had both garments, they

37. It is in fact Eph 6.11.

38. Which is simulating, incompatible with truth: ST II— II 1 1 1,2-3.

39. Thomas is preaching for religious and students preparing for religious
life; religious do not marry (cf. ST II— II 152,4, 186,4), as a P art °f the vow of
chastity, and live a simple life (as part of the vow of poverty): ST II— II 186,3.
There were, however, in his days many sects and false prophets (heretics)
who went to extremes. Thomas warns his listeners not to judge by appearance
alone.

40. Cf. the vow of obedience: ST II— II 186,5.

41. ST 11-1158,2,80,1.

42. ST I— II 81,8; II— II 23,7; cf. Thomas’s explanation of Eph 4.23 in ST I— II
72,2,3.


206


THOMAS AQUINAS


would have been sheep of Christ. By means of exterior clothes
a man approaches men: and thus we understand what the Lord
says, “they come to you in clothes of sheep,” as that they take
up exterior works through which “they come to you” — since
through interior works [people] approach the Lord.

We must notice that the clothing of Christ’s sheep is four-
fold: namely, (2.1) worship, (2.2) righteousness, (2.3) penance,
and (2.4) innocence.

(2.1) The garment of worship is the garment of the worship
of God. The sheep of Christ wear it in the sense that they are
intent upon the worship of God. 43 The sheep of Christ receive
this garment in baptism, as the Apostle says in Gal 3.17: “All
you who are baptized in Christ have put on Christ.” The sheep
of Christ put on this garment when they are going to pray. Thus
we read in Sir 50.11: “By going up to the altar” of incense “he
gave glory to God.” 44

Hypocrites put on this garment [cf. Mt 15.7-9] for two rea-
sons: (2.1.1) for empty glory 45 and (2.1.2) for gain. 46

(2.1.1) They put it on for empty glory by praying in public
and out in the open. Thus we read in the Gospel: “who love
( amo ) to pray in the synagogues and on the corners of the
broad ways, so that they may be seen by the people” [Mt 6.4];
“in the synagogues,” that is: in public. 47

But is it bad, then, what is written: “Bless the Lord, all his
angels” [Ps 103.20-21]? Chrysostom says that this 48 does not so
much refer to a place as to the soul. The one who has his soul
not with the people, but with God, prays in a hidden place. If
someone prays alone in his room, but wants to be seen by the
people, he prays in public. 49 What, then, is forbidden? That
people have their soul aimed at being seen by the people as

43. Garments are external; Thomas counts worship among the exterior acts
of religion, like adoration, sacrifices, and tithing (ST II— II 84-91); interior acts
are devotion and prayer (ST II— II 82-83).

44. In Sir 50.5-1 1 the splendor of the vestments of the high priest Simon
are described.

45. Hypocrisy is one of the daughters of empty glory: ST II— II 132,5.

46. ST II-II 58,11,3.

47. A synagogue, like a church building, is a public space.

48. What is said in Mt 6.4.

49. Cf. Christ’s way of reasoning in Mt 5.2 1-48.


SERMON 14


207


they pray; this must be avoided by Christians. Hence Chrysos-
tom says: “Let the one who prays not do anything new, so that
he could not be seen by the people because of any shouting,
breast-beating, or raising hands.” But when you pray with oth-
ers, pray as the others, in secret. Seeking new gestures and ways
pertains to what [Christ] calls praying in the synagogues. A
man in his praying ought to be in conformity with others; 50 he
should not seek new ways as the hypocrites do, who pray in pub-
lic for empty glory.

(2.1.2) And the same applies to those who pray abundantly
for gain. Thus we read in the Gospel: “Woe to you, scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites, who devour houses of widows, while you
say long prayers” [Mt 23.14], because they pray in order to ac-
quire gain. Some seek in a most scandalous way gain from little
women: they say “long prayers,” in order to make them devout
and receive gifts from them.

But is it bad, then, to pray abundantly? Augustine answers,
saying: “Let much speech be absent from prayer, but let praying
much not be missing, if someone wishes to persevere in his in-
tention. For this labor is done much more by sighs than by spo-
ken words, 51 more by tears than by addressing.” 52

(2.2) Another garment of Christ’s sheep is that of righteous-
ness and mercy, 53 about which we read in Jb 29.14-16: “I am
clothed with righteousness as with a garment. I have been an
eye for the blind and a foot for the lame; I have been the fa-
ther of the poor.” Hypocrites always pretend to wear this gar-
ment. Therefore, it says in the Gospel: “Watch out that you do
not do your justice before the people, in order to be seen by
them; when you give alms, do not blow the trumpet, as the hyp-

50. Thomas says something similar in regard to fasting practices in Sermon
08 Puer Iesus, in 2.2 of the Sermo.

51. Cf. ST II-II 83,12.

52. With Augustine, Thomas advocates for praying from the heart, as an at-
titude; cf. ST II-II 83,14.

53. Iustitia et misericordia : cf. Mt 23.23. Righteousness, or justice, and mercy
are named in one and the same breath, as in ST I 2 1 ; one should not be with-
out the other. Righteousness is one of the cardinal virtues (ST II-II 57-122; ST
I— II 61); mercy is the greatest of the virtues that are directed towards the neigh-
bor (ST II-II 30,4) and pertains to the theological virtue of love ( caritas : ST II-
II 23-46; ST I-II 62).


208


THOMAS AQUINAS


ocrites do” [Mt 6.1]. Chrysostom says that the trumpet is every
act or spoken word through which one boasts of himself. For in-
stance, you give alms, but you would only give it to a more hon-
orable person, who can give you something in return: that is a
trumpet. Likewise, if you want to give alms in secret in order to
look more praiseworthy: that is a trumpet. 54

(2.3) The third garment of Christ’s sheep is penance, 55 about
which the Psalmist says: “I have made a sackcloth my clothing”
[Ps 6g.t 1] . These garments — that is to say, things that simulate
[penance and] an austere life — are employed by hypocrites.
Hence it says in the Gospel: “When you fast, do not become as
the hypocrites: sad. They neglect their face, so that it is seen by
the people that they fast” [Mt 6.16]. This is what they seek, and
this is what they long for: that it is seen by the people that they
fast.

Augustine says: “In this chapter we must notice that there
can be ostentation not only in the splendor of physical things
but even in vulgar things of filth, and that this is the more dan-
gerous because he [the hypocrite] deceives with an appeal to
the name of the Lord.” The Philosopher says that it can pertain
to [ostentation or] being boastful of oneself, if a person has a
poorer way of life than his position requires. These exterior
things are certain distinguished signs: in any army a battle-ar-
ray carries its sign; that is not presumptuous. In any state what-
soever a man ought to be content with moderate things and
not seek the low things too much. Hence Augustine says: “We
should neither use precious things too much nor poor things
too much.” And why? Because we can seek glory in these two.
About that poor garment we read in Zee 13.4: “They [that is,
the prophets] will not be covered with a sackcloth over their up-
per garment,” namely, in order to pretend. 56

54. The will to give alms with the intention to be praised for it by others can-
not be called a good will, although the act is good in itself; cf. ST I— II 19,7,2.

55. Both penance and innocence (in 2.4) are great gifts from God that ex-
cite us to being grateful to God while God loves those who are innocent and
penitent; cf. ST I 20,4,4 and II— II 106,2.

56. Thomas argues in favor of temperance (ST II— II 141-170), the fourth
cardinal virtue, as he does in II— II 141,6.


SERMON 14


209


(2.4) The fourth garment of the sheep of Christ is inno-
cence, 57 which is a bright and beautiful garment, as we read in
Prv 31.25: “Strength and elegance are her clothing.” 58 Hypo-
crites have put on this clothing, that is: the garment of simulat-
ed piety and cleanness. Therefore, it says in the Gospel: “Woe
to you hypocrites, who are like whitened graves” [Mt 23.27],
the things that seem whitened to the people, but “on the inside
they are full of bones of the dead and every foulness,” meaning:
plundering and uncleanness. And Chrysostom says: “Appearing
[to be a hypocrite] is shameful, but being [a hypocrite] is more
shameful; and what is beautiful in appearing is more beautiful
in being.” These are the ones who come in the clothes of sheep.

But we must notice that some come in clothes of sheep who
are not sheep, like those who seek temporal gain and their own
honors. Hence Augustine makes a distinction saying that there
is the figure of the thief, of the wolf, of the shepherd, and of
the hireling. For the shepherd intends the benefit of the sheep;
the wolf and the thief destroy the sheep; and the hireling seeks
his own gain from the sheep. Augustine continues: “The hire-
ling must be endured; the shepherd must be loved ( amo ); and
from the wolf one must flee.” And this is what is meant when it
says: “They come to you in the clothes of sheep, yet inside they
are grasping wolves.”

(3) We must also note that hypocrites are compared to
wolves because of four things: (3.1) because wolves grasp sheep,

(3.3) they do not spare them, (3.2) they disperse them, and

(3.4) they persevere in their malice.

(3.1) First, I say that hypocrites are compared to wolves be-
cause wolves grasp sheep, and hypocrites grasp the goods of
soul and body [cf. Mt 23.13-14]; they lead people to err [cf. Eph
4.14], and persecute them physically and rob them of things
[Mt 23. 25]. 59 Thus we read in Ezek 22.27: “Her princes in her


57. See note 55.

58. The word innocentia does not occur in Prv 31.10-31. Thomas has dis-
tilled this word from the description of the virtuous woman in this pericope.

59. Avarice: ST II— II 118.


210


THOMAS AQUINAS


midst are like wolves that take prey in order to pour blood, to
destroy souls, and to pursue gain greedily.”

(3.2) Second, hypocrites are compared to wolves because
wolves disperse sheep, as we read in the Gospel: “A wolf grasps
and disperses sheep” [Jn 10.12]. The Lord says: “Someone who
is not with me is against me,” so: “And someone who does not
gather with me” disperses [Mt 12.30]. But what is dispersing?
Certainly, someone is dispersed when he deviates from what
the Church teaches.

(3.3) Third, hypocrites are compared to wolves because they
do not spare in anyway. Hence the Apostle says in Acts 20.2g:
“1 know that after my departure grasping wolves will enter
among you, which do not spare the flock.” A person who would
kill someone and would not spare him unless one silver coin
could be gained, is called very cruel. Hypocrites act in such a
way. The life of the soul is better than that of the body [cf. Mt
20.28], and hypocrites seduce souls in order to have followers
and honors [cf. Mt 23.14].

(3.4) Fourth, hypocrites are compared to wolves because,
like wolves, they persevere in their malice. 60 Hence we read in
Zep 3.3: “His judges are wolves until the evening,” that is: until
the end.

So, because of the four reasons mentioned, false prophets
are like wolves of which we must beware.

❖

(4) But how are wolves detected? 61 It is shown when it is said:
“You will know them by their fruits” [Mt 7.16]. 62 Augustine says
that many are deceived because they mistake the clothes of a
sheep for the fruits. Some simple people see others doing good
exterior works: fasting as well as praying and the like, which are
the clothes of the sheep, but these are not their own clothes. Yet


60. Malice, which causes a person to sin: ST I— II 78.

61. It is not a sin to believe that a wicked messenger is a good one (because
this is a deception of the bodily senses and not of the mind); the danger is, how-
ever, to adhere subsequently to the evil one when he tries to allure you, which is
sinful: ST II-II 10,2,3.

62. Just as God can be known by his gifts; cf. Rom 1.20, in ST I 65,1,3; I— II
1 1 1,4; and II-II 9,2,3 among others.


SERMON 14


211


the sheep of Christ should not hate their own clothes if wolves
disguise themselves with these [cf. Eph 4.26-27].

What, then, are the fruits that sheep produce? We can prop-
erly say that there are four fruits that sheep produce, on the ba-
sis of which wolves or hypocrites can be detected. (4.1) The first
occurs in the affection, (4.2) the second in the speech, (4.3)
the third in the operation, and (4.4) the fourth occurs in times
of trouble. The first concerns the heart; the second, the mouth;
the third, the work; and the fourth, patience and strength. 63

(4.1) First, I say that the sheep of Christ, or the saints, have
their proper fruit of the heart, which is the love (amor) of God
and the neighbor. Thus the Apostle says in Gal 5.22: “The fruits
of the Spirit are joy, love ( caritas ), and peace.” But hypocrites
have another fruit, namely, ambition, 64 because they love hon-
ors, as we read in Is 10.12: “I will visit upon the fruit of the mag-
nificent heart of the king of Assyria.” 65 Hypocrites “love ( amo )
the first places at the dinners and the first seats in the syna-
gogues” [Mt 23.6]. If someone wants to be received with full
honors while he shows humility on the outside, the garment
does not correspond with the fruit.

(4.2) Another fruit that Christ’s sheep have is in speech,
since good people say good things and speak about good things
always. Hence the Apostle says in Heb 13.15: “Let us offer sacri-
fices through him, the fruit of the lips that” suit “his name.” If
someone says something that is not in tune with his works, he
does not have clothes that are like his fruit. Thus we read in Prv
18.20: “A man’s stomach will be filled by the fruit of his mouth.”
It is difficult for a heart full of jealousy not to utter something
of that once in awhile, since “out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks” [Mt 12.34]. 66 Therefore, Gregory says: “It is

63. These four themes (cf. Bach’s cantata 147, “Herz und Mund und Tat
und Leben”) are derived from the Magnificat (Lk 1.46-55), sung during Ves-
pers; the third part of the sermon is given during Vespers. Implicitly Mary is pre-
sented here as the example for all Christians.

64. Which is always ( semper ) a sin: ST II— II 131,1; it is opposite to humility
(ST II— II 162).

65. I.e., the fruit of his pride; cf. the themes in Is 10.1-13.

66. Cf. ST II-II 153,5,4.


212


THOMAS AQUINAS


very difficult for the vicious whenever they preach right things,
not to utter things from time to time that silently go round in
them.”

(4.3) The third fruit of Christ’s sheep on the basis of which
hypocrites can be detected, is the fruit of good operation, for
in good people there is good fruit. The Apostle says in Rom
6.22: “You have your fruit in sanctification.” Yet in evil people
the fruit is evil. Hence it says in Prv 10.16: “The fruit of a god-
less person leads to sin,” that is: to a sinful work. Augustine says
in one of his sermons: “When a professing Christian draws the
people’s attention to himself through an unusual foulness or
uncleanness, we can know when he does this voluntarily and
not because he has no choice; we can know from his other
works whether he does so out of contempt for a finer habit, or
whether he does so out of ambition.”

It can happen that at one time a person acquires a great hab-
it out of humility, yet at some other time out of ambition. 67 Take
a look at his other works: if you see in those a contempt of ambi-
tion, he is acting out of humility; if not, he says, you can know a
person by his works. Because those who, on the one hand, con-
vey a worthless habit, but, on the other hand, show signs of pen-
itence and gentleness, are his sheep. If not, they are pretend-
ers. “Therefore, hypocrites can be detected easily,” [Augustine]
says. “The road on which we are ordered to walk is laborious;
hypocrites do not choose to work hard.” 68

Furthermore, hypocrites show themselves moderate, but
when they have a chance to pursue their desires, they pursue
them to the highest extent. Hence Gregory says: “If any temp-
tation of faith comes up, the savage mind of the wolf would im-
mediately lay aside the habit of the sheepskin; then he shows
how much he would rage against the good ones.”

(4.4) The fourth sign by which hypocrites can be detect-
ed is found in time of trouble. Thus we read in Prv 15.6 (Vg):
“There will be disquiet for the fruits of the godless; the teach-
ing of a man is known through patience.” Augustine, comment-

67. E.g., when someone boasts of his humility; cf. ST II— II 38,2,3.

68. “Because those who on the one hand. . . . choose to work hard”: these
words echo Sir 7.15-17.


SERMON 14


213


ing on the Lord’s Sermon on the Mount, says about hypocrites:
“As soon as through some temptations they begin to withdraw
or negate the things that follow from that clothing or pursue
what they desire, it becomes necessarily clear whether it is a
wolf in a sheep skin or a sheep in its own skin.” Because of this,
James says in his letter: “If someone cleanses himself from these
things,” from sins, that is, “he will be a vessel prepared for hon-
or to the Lord .” 69

May he make us worthy to perform this, he who with the Fa-
ther, et cetera.

69. It is, in fact, 2 Tm 2.21.


SERMON 15

HOMO QUID AM ERAT DIVES

Sermon on the Ninth Sunday after the
Feast of the Trinity


Luke 16.1: There was a rich man who had a steward;
and he was discredited with him
because he had squandered his goods.


part 1 : Prothema


here was a rich man who had a steward; and he was
discredited with him because he had squandered his
goods” [Lk 16.1] . Every abundance of graces comes
forth from the fullness of the divine treasure, which is hidden
in the mystery of God’s riches; no one can know about it un-
less God reveals it. 1 Therefore, Moses asked for the revelation
of it, saying: “Reveal to me, O Lord, your treasure, the fountain
of living water” [Nm 20.6 (Vg); cf.Jn 7.38, Rv 21. 6], 2 Hence, be-
cause the words [of Christ in the Gospel] focus our attention
on the divine riches, let us take refuge with him in whom “all
hidden treasures of wisdom and knowledge are” [Col 2.3] and
let us ask, et cetera.


1. Hence St. Paul’s warning in Col 2.4 not to be deceived by specious argu-
ments. So we can only know about it through faith, not through philosophy: ST
I 1,1,1; II— II 2,3,3. $ ee also Sermon 13 Homo quidcim fecit, section 2.2.

2. We do not find this text in the standard version of the Vulgate. But Thom-
as’s version of the Vulgate reads: “clamaveruntque ad Dominum, atque dix-
erunt: Domine Deus, audi clamorem hujus populi, et aperi eis thesaurum tuum
fontem aquae vitae, ut satiati, cesset murmuratio eorum.”


214


SERMON 15


215


part 2: Sermo

“There was a (rich) man” [Lk 16.1], et cetera. It is most dan-
gerous for someone not to pay attention to his manner and his
measure, for this negligence is the reason why manner and
measure grow beyond themselves into pride; 3 they consider
themselves lords instead of the keepers of the things. 4 They say
what we read in Jb 21.15: “Who is the Almighty, that we would
serve him?” And likewise it is said in Jb 11.12: “An idle man
grows into pride, and like a young wild ass he thinks he is born
free.” A wild ass is a forest donkey that is not owned by anyone.
Some believe that they are without a yoke, and to them it seems
that whatever they like is allowed to them. 5 And in order to take
away this haughtiness from our heart, the parable about the
steward is presented to us.

Now two persons 6 are presented here: (1) the person of the
lord, where it says: “There was a rich man”; and next (2) the per-
son of the steward, where it says: “who had a steward.”

♦♦♦

(1) So, first the person of the lord is presented to us, where it
says: “There was a man,” et cetera. Three things are mentioned
concerning the person of the lord: (1.1) what he is, where it
says: “a man,” (1.2) his wealth, where it says that “he was rich,”
and (1.3) how he takes care of his wealth, where it says: “who
had a steward.”

(1.1) First, I say, the person of the lord is touched upon,
where it says “a man.” This man is God. Although God, insofar
as the [assumed] human nature is concerned, truly is a man, he

3. Modesty and humility (ST II— II 160-161, 166,2, 168-170), fruits of the
Holy Spirit (ST I— II 70,3), are opposite to pride (ST I— II 84,2; II— II 162).

4. See also how careful Thomas’s formulation of the right to possess things
is, in ST II— II 66,1-2. Also the introduction to the S ecunda Pars of the ST: “quasi'
liberum arbitrium habens et suorum operum potestatem.

5. In Jb 39.5 the wild ass ( onager ) is mentioned as one of the wild animals. In
Jb 24.5 it is the symbol of the godless who violate the Law and rob the poor, but
harvest from empty acres; cf. Is 32.i4,Jer 2.24, 14.6, Dn 5.21.

6. Here Thomas uses persona in the non-theological sense, as in Sermon 05
Ecce rex tuus, note 24.


216


THOMAS AQUINAS


cannot be defined or understood with respect to his divine na-
ture. 7 And yet he is called a man here insofar as his divine na-
ture is concerned 8 because of three things: (1.1.1) the similarity, 9
(1.1.2) the intimacy, and (1.1.3) what is proper [to man].

(1.1.1) First, I say that God insofar as the divine nature is
concerned is called a man by reason of the similarity [between
the two]. According to our ordinary way of speaking, things are
named by the names of their images, and images by the names
of things. 10 We read about this similarity of God with man in
Gn 1.26: “Let us make man to our likeness and image.” 11 Amidst
the other lower creatures, 12 man has this privilege that he is cre-
ated to God’s image: not of the body, but of the mind. 13 And be-
cause of this he is chosen above other creatures [cf. Gn 1.26, 28;
Ps 8.6-g]. The image of Hercules is called Hercules; he is called
Hercules through the name of his image — [in the same way]
God is called a man. 14 If man is created in the image of God, he
ought to be careful to keep himself uncorrupted and pure. 13

Behold, we have the image of God carved in wood. If some-
one threw mud at it or spat on it, would he not be called blas-
phemous? Much more so the one who corrupts the image that
is created in God’s likeness, because much more excellent is
the image of God in the soul than the image of Christ in wood.
Augustine says: “You are the image of God, which you corrupt
through fornication and revelling in lust, while you do not pay

7. Therefore, Thomas employs a negative theology, the basis of which is
found in ST I 1-13.

8. Hence it is a metaphor: ST I 1,9.

9. Which must be distinguished from the image: ST I 93,9.

10. Thomas refers to Aristode: when we perceive a thing through our senses,
we form an image of it in our intellect. Subsequently we give the image a name
as we understand it: we call a table “a table,” because the thing we want to name
matches the image in our mind of what a table is. Cf. ST I 13,1.

11. ST I 4,3.

12. Lower creatures are the creatures on earth; higher creatures are the an-
gels and the heavenly bodies (stars, planets) .

13. Cf. ST I 93,6. For God does not have a body (Jn 4.24; cf. ST I 3,1), but
God has an intellect (ST I 14). Cf. note 7.

14. ST III 16,1.

15. Purity ( mundicia ) is necessary for being focused on God: ST 81,8. The
pure of heart will see God: Mt 5.8; cf. ST II— II 8,7.


SERMON 15


217


attention to whose image you violate.” 16 If this image is corrupt-
ed through sin, man ought to take off all foulness and be re-
newed. Hence it says in Col 3.9-10: “As you take off the old man
with his actions, clothe yourself with the new man, who is re-
newed in the recognition of God, in accordance with the image
of him who created him.” We ought to take off everything that
has to do with sin and foulness in us, and we ought to clothe
ourselves with the new man, so that we may get to know him in
our mind and through our work. 17

(1.1.2) Second, God is called a man by reason of the intimacy.
If someone lived with the French, we could say: by contact with
the French he has become a Frenchman.” By a certain intimacy
and contact [with us] God can be called a man, 18 because it is de-
lightful for him to be with people, as we read in Prv 8.31: “It is
my delight to be with the people’s children.” 19 Yes, so great was
his delight to live with people, that it was not enough for him
to live with them in a spiritual way, but that he wanted to take
on our flesh, so that he could live with people in a physical way.
Thus we read in Bar 3.38: “After this he has been seen on earth,
and he has lived with the people.” “He has been seen on earth”:
in what way? Jn 1.14 says: “The Word has become flesh and dwelt
among us.” If God has proved himself so intimate with us, then
we also ought to prove to him that we are intimate with him. 20

Hence, someone who does not care about living with God
is ungrateful. 21 It would be very presumptuous if a king sought
friendship 22 with a poor man and the latter refused the king’s

16. Cf. spiritual fornication: ST II— II 151,2.

17. Thus getting to know God is not only a matter of meditation and think-
ing things through (cf. ST I 62,9,1, 88,2-3; II— II 5,1,1, 188,8,2), but also of
actively following in the footsteps of Jesus Christ (cf. ST I— II 52,2, 76,2,2; III

69.5)-

18. See note 13, above.

19. In order to be friends there must be a similarity, a connection (cf. ST II-
II 26,8); since human beings are created in his image, there was similarity (cf.
ST III 4,1) and even more so after the Incarnation.

20. By becoming like him: Eph 5.1; cf. ST I— II 24,3,2; II— II 132,1,1.

21. Cf. ST I— II 76,4,3; II— II 35,1,3; ingratitude in general: II— II 107.

22. For Thomas’s view of love and friendship, see: Sermon 01 Veniet desidera-
tus, note 39.


218


THOMAS AQUINAS


friendship. The almighty King seeks your friendship [cf. 2 Sm
3.12-13]. In what way? The Lord says in Rv 3.20: “I stand at the
door,” — that is: at [the door of] our affection, approaching
the heart through the will — “and I knock,” by making a good
proposal; “if someone opens for me, I will come in and share
a meal with him.” 23 When someone opens the affection of his
heart for Christ, God comes in [cf. Jn 14.23] and refreshes and
is refreshed; he rejoices in you, and he makes you rejoice [cf. Ps
16.11]. If God is so intimate with us, we ought to apply ourselves
to being intimate with him, in accordance with the Psalmist who
says: “One thing I have asked of the Lord, for this I long: (to live
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life)” [Ps 27.4]. “Liv-
ing with him 24 has no bitterness, and his 25 companionship no
weariness” [Wis 8.16]. There are some people whose social life
is bitter; they fight with others and make them sad. The social
life of others is weary because they say empty things or unpleas-
ant things. In God you will find nothing that is displeasing and
in all things you will not find anything but what delights [cf. Wis
8.18]. Every delight is nothing compared to a delight of God [cf.
Wis 7.14].

(1.1.3) Third, God is called a man because of what is prop-
erly human. What is proper to man? Being mild in nature,
since by nature man is a social being [cf. Gn 2.18]. Some liv-
ing creatures live separately: wild animals, lions and bears. Yet
this property is only natural to man, because kindness ( benig -
nitas) is called humanity. 26 If someone happens to be destruc-
tive and harmful, he is called inhumane, 27 as if he has taken on
the nature of a wild animal, like a lion or a bear. Hence we read

23. But people may refuse: Prv 1.24, Zee 7.11-12, Heb 12.25. Friendship
with the world, however, implies enmity with God: Jas 4.4.

24. Or “her”: that is, wisdom. Latin: (conversatio) eius.

25. Or “her”: that is, wisdom’s. Latin: illius.

26. For living together people must also trust one another: ST II— II 109,3,1;
cf. II— II 1 14,2. In Ti 3.2 Paul explains what benignitas is: slandering no one, be-
ing peaceable, considerate, exercising all graciousness towards everyone; cf. ST
I— II 70,3. Note how positive Thomas’s view of the human nature is (cf. also, e.g.,
ST I 75,6, 77,4 and 79,9).

27. Inhumanity is continually being and acting contrary to mercy and com-
passion: ST II— II 1 18,8,3.


SERMON 15


219


in Prv 28.15: “A roaring lion, a hungry bear, is a godless prince
over a poor people.” This property [of benignitas ] befits God to
the highest extent, because “his merciful deeds are over all his
works” [Ps 145.9]. Indeed, he is goodness and leniency itself.
Thus the Apostle says in Ti 3.4: “The kindness ( benignitas ) and
the humanity of our Savior have appeared; (he saved us not on
the basis of works of justice that we have done, but according to
his mercy).”

So, because of our similarity and intimacy with God and his
property, anyone ought to be uncorrupted, devoted to God, and
kind to his neighbor. It is clear now what kind of man the man
in this story is when Christ calls him “a man.”

♦♦♦

(1.2) Next we look at his wealth, which is mentioned when
he says “rich.” But of what kind was his wealth? I say that he
was rich in three respects: (1.2.1) first, in the sense of a per-
fect nature; (1.2.2) second, in the sense of an affluence of gifts;
and (1.2.3) third, in the sense of the multitude of things that he
possessed.

(1.2.1) First, I say, God is rich in the sense of a perfect na-
ture. 28 It happens that some are rich in things owned, but are
poor inside, like the stupid, who do not have wisdom. Someone
was to give his daughter in marriage. There were two men who
courted her: one was rich in possessions but poor in wisdom;
the other one was wise, but not rich. He went to a wise man and
asked him to whom he was to give his daughter. He answered:
“I prefer a man lacking riches over riches that lack a man.” But
God is rich in himself, for every good whatsoever that is found
in a creature comes from him. 29 If you seek knowledge or good-
ness, all of it is in the most excellent and original way in God. 30
These are the riches of which the Apostle says: “O the depth of
the riches of God’s knowledge and wisdom” [Rom 11.33]. 31 By
reason of this, that the endless highest riches are in him, we
ought to exert ourselves with the highest desire to hold on to

28. ST I 3,4, 4,1.

29. ST I 4,2, 47,1; on evil and its cause, resp. I 48 and 49.

30. Sir 1.5, Mt 19.17; cf. ST I 6,4, 15,1 and 3; cf. (on evil) I 48,1-3, 49,2.

31. Cf. ST I 14.


220


THOMAS AQUINAS


God [cf. Ps 63.9]. Someone who knows the location of a treas-
ure full of riches that he can obtain is stupid if he does not ap-
ply himself totally to acquiring that treasure. The treasure of
riches is in God, and you can obtain it. 32 Hence it says in the
Gospel: “The Kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hidden in a
held; when a man finds it, he goes and sells everything he has
and buys that held” [Mt 13.44]. If you have these riches that are
in God, you will not lack anything [cf. Prv 8.21, Wis 7.14]. Thus
we read in Wis 7.11: “With her all goods together came to me.”
And the Lord said to Abraham: “I will show you every good.” 33
God alone can fulfill our desire. 34

(1.2.2) Second, God is called “rich” according to an afflu-
ence and abundance of gifts. We are right in calling someone
rich who does not have many riches, but has much to give. God
“gives affluently” [Jas 1.5], and still his treasure is not dimin-
ished. 35 The Apostle says: “God who is rich in mercy,” that is,
who grants mercy abundantly; “for he is rich for all who call
upon him” [Eph 2.4].

If someone gives abundantly, many would thrust themselves
forward in order to receive [cf. Mk 1.33, 2.2]. But, if you want to
receive [from him] , God is ready to give to you. So you ought to
thrust yourself forward in order to receive. The Psalmist says:
“Approach him and you will be illuminated” [Ps 34.6]. And in
Rv 22.11 we read: “Let the holy one become even holier.”

Man always ought to long more and more for the possession
of spiritual things. The appetite for an end has neither man-
ner nor measure, 36 whereas the appetite for the things that are
for an end is regulated according to the measure of the end.
For instance, the end for which a doctor reaches is health; the
means to this end are the medicines. A doctor does not say: “I
want to cure this man but not completely,” but rather: “as well
as I can.” So, in respect of the end, he does not set a measure.

32. Namely, by contempt of worldly riches; cf. ST II— II 161,5,3, citing Mt
6.19-20.

33. It is in fact Moses who is addressed, in Ex 33.19.

34. Ps 63.6, 103.5; ST I — II 2,8 and II— II 28,3.

35. God’s goodness is without end: Psalm 136; cf. ST I 7.

36. Especially not if the ultimate end itself is concerned; cf. ST I— II 30,4.


SERMON 15


221


But if he said: “I will give him the strongest medicine I can
get,” he would make a mistake, because medicines are [not the
end, but only] for reaching the end. So for these there ought
to be a measure. The goods of the soul are an end; the goods
of the body are for an end. Hence concerning temporal goods
we ought to seek according to a measure, but concerning the
goods of the soul we ought to seek as much as we can. 37 Now,
some want to limit their virtue. 38 They say: “It is enough for me
to do this,” and do not want to limit their riches. Therefore, it
is not enough for them to give up one thing: they are to give
up all the many things they have as well as the many things for
which they strive. 39

Well, God is rich in mercy and in an affluence of gifts. Thus
we always ought to approach him for spiritual goods [cf. Heb
4.16]; and as for temporal goods, we ought to leave it up to him,
that he may give us from these in accordance with what seems
best to him. Thus we read in Mt 6.33: “First seek the Kingdom
of God, and all these things will be given to you with it.” 40

(1.2.3) Third, God is rich in possessions, because all things
are his. The Psalmist says: “The earth is the Lord’s, and its full-
ness, (the world and those who dwell in it)” [Ps 24.1]. 41 Further-
more: “Glory and riches are in his house” [Ps 112.3], cetera.
Moreover: “Although he was rich, he became indigent for our
sake” [2 Cor 8.g]. 42 And in view of this we should realize that we
should not put our trust in temporal [Ps 49.7, 146.3-4], but in
spiritual things [Ps 118.8-g]. If a man sees someone else’s serv-
ant, and if that servant promises to serve him, he must not trust
in that servant’s promise, because his lord could stop him. But

37. ST II— II 184,3.

38. Cf. ST I— II 64: the middle in virtue is not about a mediocrity but about
a balance. As Thomas shows in ST I 21: God is rich in mercy, but in such a way
that justice is not violated.

39. Cf. Mt 19.21: ST I— II 108,4,1; II— II 32,6 (that it is “necessary” to give
alms).

40. Cf. ST II— II 83,6: we should also ask for temporal things, at least insofar
as they help us to focus on eternal happiness.

41. Cf. ST II— II 66,1. See also how this verse functions in III 48,4 (on re-
demption). Possession of something implies dominion over it: II— II 136,2,2.

42. ST III 40,3.


222


THOMAS AQUINAS


if the lord of the servant promises that this servant will serve
this man, then he can trust him. Therefore, we ought to trust
in God, because he can give all things. 43 Hence the Apostle
says in 1 Tm 6.17: “Tell the rich of this age not to be wise in a
lofty way,” — that is: not to be proud of the things that belong
to God — “and not set their hope on the uncertain riches,” but
to hope in the living God, “who gives all things affluently” [Jas
1.5]. In him is the foundation of hope. 44

Thus God is rich in a threefold way. Now it is clear what this
man and his wealth are.

(1.3) Let us look at how he takes care of his wealth, which is
mentioned where it says: “who had a steward.” But who is this
steward? I say that the steward is the manager of the house. So
by means of his power God could do all things by himself, but
he did not want it:

(1.3.1) Indeed, he has commissioned some to be keepers,
whereas he reserved the governance for himself, 45 and he willed
that the beauty of the order and the perfection of the universe
be preserved. Imagine that we would not need one another;
this would not be the beauty of the universe; 46 as the Psalmist
says: “How magnified are your works, O Lord: you have made
all things in wisdom; the earth is filled with your possession”
[Ps 104.24].

(1.3.2) Furthermore, he wanted to govern all things by him-
self because of the usefulness, because he did not want any-
thing to be superfluous. 47 Hence, “although you are able to heal
all things,” in Wis 14.4, is followed by: “so that none of your

43. For he has the riches, the power, and the freedom to do so.

44. Because of God’s mercy and almightiness we should never despair; cf. ST
I— II 62,3,2, 64,4; II— II 14,2 and 14,3,1.

45. Cf. Wis 14.3; cf. ST I 22,1,2: God created good things and placed them
in a good order. The eternal idea of this order in God is called “providence”
(providentia)\ its execution in time is called “governance” ( gubernatio ): I 103-
119.

46. ST I 5,5, 47,3, 61,3 ( ordo rerum ad invicem est bonum universi) \ I— II 111,1
and II— II 81,2.

47. Everything has its place and function in the order of creation; that is
what makes it “very good” (Gn 1.31); cf. ST I 47,2.


SERMON 15


223


works would be superfluous, people entrust their lives to a little
piece of wood.” Why has God made the sun? So that we would
not lack its warmth and light. If it had no use, it would have
been superfluous. Also you are superfluous in the world if you
do not do something useful. Job reads: “Have you created the
children of the people in vain?” [Ps 89.48]. As if it says: “No.”
Well, the Lord judges that a “useless servant” is thrown out into
the “outer darkness” [Mt 25.30]. So what is there to say about
the servant who causes damage [in Lk 16.1]?

(1.3.3) Moreover, God willed to commission some to be man-
agers out of liberality. 48 God willed that the goodness of a thing
would go over onto other things. Dionysius says that nothing
is more divine than becoming a co-operator of God 49 — and
when you preach for the salvation of the soul or do other good
things, you co-operate with God. Thus God says to Moses: “I
have made you god for Pharaoh” [Ex 7.1].

♦♦♦

(2) He says: “who had a steward.” Who are stewards? I say
that God has appointed stewards on different levels in an or-
der:

(2.1) First, he appointed the angels who manage the things
that are above all creation. Hence Augustine says in his com-
mentary on Genesis: “All bodies are governed by a spiritual
creature.” 50 The Apostle says: “All of them are the Spirit’s man-
agers (sent for the benefit of those who receive the inheritance
of salvation)” [Heb 1.14]. These are great instruments.

(2.2) There are other great instruments, but they are small-
er than these, who are set over earthly things [only]. Thus we
read in Gn 1.26: “Let us make man to our likeness and image,
that he may be over the fish and the animals and the birds”:
in brief, over all things. Ps 8.8: “You have subdued all things
under his feet,” but: “Know that the Lord himself is God” [Ps
100.3]. Hence Chrysostom says: “You are a stranger, and the
things commissioned to you are only of a transitory and short

48. Cf. ST I-II 32,6; III 7,2,3.

49. Cf. 1 Cor 3.9 (in ST I 23,8,2), 4.1 (in ST II— II 63,2,1, 100,1), and Col
1.25-29.

50. Cf. ST I 1 10,1-3.


224


THOMAS AQUINAS


use” [cf. Ps 4g.11]. And he gives two examples, saying: “You
have a held or landed estate now; just imagine how many own-
ers it has had before you: an infinite number; it barely contains
so many clods of earth. Likewise, it is with you as with someone
who rests in the shade: you pass away and someone else comes
who rests there as you did. In this way things come and go for
you in the world according to the divine providence, not ac-
cording to yours.” Thus you are a steward, not a lord.

(2.3) Furthermore, there are mediating instruments between
people and angels, who are above the people and are appoint-
ed to lead the people. 51 The Apostle says: “Thus let a man re-
gard us as” leaders and managers [1 Cor 4.1].

(2.4) Furthermore, the Lord has raised up glorious servants,
like St. Dominic and St. Francis, who work with care for the sal-
vation of the people; 52 their special concentration has been fo-
cused on leading the people to salvation [cf. Acts 13.26, 47].
Yes, all saints have sought to work with care for the salvation of
the people. Glorious is the fruit of their good efforts [1 Pt 5.4;
cf. 1 Cor g. 23-25]. Hence they are glorious now in the heavenly
homeland, to which may we be led by the Son of God. Amen.


part 3: Collatio in sero

“There was a rich man” [Lk 16.1], et cetera. As it was said
today, in these words two persons are introduced: the person
of the lord and the person of the steward. Some things have
been said about the lord; now we will speak about the steward.
And concerning the steward we can consider three things: (1)
his task, (2) his abuse, and (3) the danger threatening him. We
can consider his task because he was a steward, his abuse be-
cause he squandered the goods of his lord, and his peril be-
cause he was discredited.


51. Cf. Mt 24.45 ( a ls° 2 Tm 1.8). In this sermon Thomas refers to the apostles
and their successors; in ST I 22,1, to leading figures in a family, a city, and a state.

52. The saints in heaven pray for us: ST II— II 83,1 1. Amministro (from min-
ister. servant, helper) is here translated as “to work with care” rather than “to
manage.”


SERMON 15


225


(1) I have said that stewards are managers, like angels 53
and people. 54 And since we are people, let us say that the care
for the regulation of the goods is commissioned to man. The
Lord entrusts three things to man: (1.1) himself, (1.2) spiritual
goods, and (1.3) exterior things.

(1.1) First, I say, the Lord entrusts man to himself. A differ-
ence between humankind and all other [living creatures] is
that God has given to man power over himself: a man can do of
his own accord what he wants to, whereas other living creatures
are moved by their natural instinct. Thus it says in Sir 15.14:
“From the beginning God established man and he gave him up
in the hand of his own plan.” 55 If you have entrusted something
to someone, you demand an account of him; if not, you don’t.
If a lion kills a man, God does not punish the lion, because he
has not entrusted responsibility for itself to a lion. The Apostle
asks: “Does God care about cattle?” [1 Cor g.g] But God has en-
trusted man to himself. Therefore, he ought to render account
to him. Thus we read in Siracli: “Walk in the way of your heart”
[Eccl n.g], that is, according to the desires of your will, “ac-
cording to what you observe with your eyes,” that is, according
to your intellect, “and know that for all these things” the Lord
“will bring you to judgment.”

(1.2) Second, God has entrusted the spiritual goods to man,
since man is able to use spiritual goods: 56 he can use them in
a good or in an evil way. Thus it says in the Gospel: “Someone
who was setting out on a journey to a foreign land called his
servants and gave them his goods” [Mt 25.14], that is, the spir-
itual goods. And he said to them: “Trade with it until I come”
[Lk ig.13]. If you have love ( caritas ), you can use it in a good
or evil way, 57 but [eventually] you will have to render account

53. The higher angels help ( illuminare ) the lower (ST I 106,4), and angels
help, serve, and guide ( amministrare ) corporeal creatures (ST I 1 10,1).

54. Gn 1.28; cf. ST I— II 106,3,3 ( deservire ).

55. The human being has a free will: ST I 83,1; I— II 10,4, which does not
mean he/she should just do as he/she desires: Sir 15.15-20; cf. ST I 91,4,2
(God’s laws); I— II 104,1 (obedience to those who are higher).

56. The virtues (ST I— II 55-67), the gifts (ST I— II 68), the beatitudes (ST
I— II 69), and the gifts of the Holy Spirit (ST I— II 70).

57. See also note 40. Someone can love what is good, but also what is evil, or


226


THOMAS AQUINAS


of this. Hence the Apostle says in 1 Cor 14.32: “The spirits of
the prophets are subject to the prophets” and so eventually
they must give account of it. Gregory states that “when the gifts
grow, the responsibilities for the gifts grow.”

(1.3) Third, God has entrusted exterior goods to man, that
we may use them, as the Psalmist says: “You have subdued all
things under his feet” [Ps 8.7], et cetera. Therefore, you ought
to render account. If a certain lord has entrusted his goods to
you, you ought to render account of those by the end of the year
[cf. Lk 16.2]. In the same way God demands at the end of your
life an account of the things granted to you ( prebenda ). Hence
it is said against the evil ones in Jas 5.1: “Come now, you rich
men, weep and cry out over the miseries that will come to you.”
And it continues. “Behold, the judge is standing at the door al-
ready” [Jas 5.9].

Now it is clear what is said about the steward.

❖

(2) Let us look at the abuse of the steward, which is men-
tioned where he says: “he squandered his goods.” So, in what
way does the steward squander the goods of his lord? In three
ways: (2.1) first, by using them for himself; (2.2) second, by
keeping back things that did not belong to him; (2.3) third, by
a superfluous and prodigal diversion.

(2.1) First, the steward squanders the goods of his lord by
using them for himself. For instance, a steward to whom his
lord has entrusted the house or other goods, would not want
to hand the proceeds over to his lord, but would keep them for
himself [cf. Mt 21.33-36]; he would be called a thief. 58

God has entrusted you to yourself not in order to be your
own, but that you may be his [cf. Rom 14.8] and that you seek
God’s glory, not your own [cf. Prv 25.27 (Vg)]. The Apos-
tle says: “I urge you: be eager to present yourself to God as an
irreproachable worker who cannot be confounded” [2 Tm

can love what is good in an evil way. In the latter two cases the love is called “un-
ordered” or “disordered”; cf. ST I 60,5; I— II 100,5,1; and II— II 26,1-12.

58. Cf. ST II— II 66,2-3. Therefore, Thomas discusses theft as a sin against
the virtue of justice, which is defined as giving to another what is due (ST II— II
58,1-3), and the virtue of liberality (ST II— II 58,9,2).


SERMON 15


227


2. 15]. 59 But some do not consider themselves servants of God,
but free men. They say with Jb 21.15: “Who is the Almighty, that
we would serve him?”

Likewise, if God has given you knowledge or virtue, to what
purpose has he given it to you except that you may serve him
and give him glory? Hence we read in Sir 51.17: “To the One
who gives me wisdom I will give glory.” Hilary says: “Almighty
Father, I am aware that I owe this privileged task for my life to
you, so that every word and thought of mine may speak of you.”
But others, of a different mindset, have said: “Our lips are ours;
who is our lord?” [Ps 12.5] From this way of thinking they want
to oppose God and the faith when they know how to discuss
and to read well, as we read in Is 3.8: “Their speech and their
ideas are against the Lord.”

Likewise, God has given you riches, so that you may turn
them into the honor of God [cf. Psalms 145, 147]. Thus Dav-
id has said to him: “Everything is yours, and we have given to
you the things we have received from your hand” [1 Chr 29.14].
Contrary to this, some hold that all things are theirs, not God’s.
Jb 22.18 reads: “They have thought of the Almighty as someone
who could not do anything, although he had Riled their hous-
es with good things.” 60 Is 24.5: “They have squandered the ev-
erlasting Covenant,” which contains that all creatures ought to
exist for the glory of God. 61

So the steward squanders the goods of his lord by using
them for himself.

(2.2) It also happens that a steward or regulator squanders
the goods of his lord by keeping back things that did not be-
long to him. Someone who ought to sell wine but would keep
something back, so that he is corrupted [cf. Prv 11.26, Am 8.5—
6], squanders the goods of his lord by keeping back what is not
due to him [the steward] . Taking care of yourself does not mean
that you only think about yourself and only care about your-


59. Cf. ST II-II 129,7.

60. N.B.: Even the powers in the created world are from God: SCG II 3.

61. Cf. Jer 31.33, 1 Cor 10.31 (concretely: ST I— II 88,1,2, 100,10,2; II-II
83,14).


228


THOMAS AQUINAS


self. 62 Just as the eye is not made for itself alone, but so that it is
of service to the whole body [cf. 1 Cor 12.21-26]. A certain old
man has said: “Because I am a human being, I consider nothing
human alien to me.” 63

Likewise, you have received grace from God. Do you believe,
therefore, that you have it in order to have it for yourself alone?
Certainly not. Just as the sun does not have brightness for itself
alone, but in order to pour it out for others, so God has given
you grace, so that you may distribute it to others [cf. Mt 5.15-
16, Rom 12.8]. Hence St. Peter says: “As each one has received
grace, use it for one another as managers, as Christ’s good dis-
tributors” [1 Pt4-io]. And the wise one says: “I have learned (wis-
dom) without delusion, and I share it without envy” [Wis 7.13]. 64

Likewise, you ought to distribute temporal things to others;
you should not have them for your own use. The Apostle says:
“Tell the rich of this age not to be wise in a lofty way (and to
give easily)” [1 Tm 6.17]. The Philosopher has said that those
cities are the best in which things are privately owned, while
the use of them is communal. 65 In J 1 1.17 it is said: “The store-
houses are squandered, because the wheat is mingled,” mean-
ing, to the letter: 66 “is corrupted.” And because of this it is said
in the Letter of James 5.2-3: “Your riches have become wholly
putrid; your garments are eaten by the moths; (your gold and
silver have rusted, and the rust of it will be a testimony against
you).” Basil says: “People usually say: ‘God is notjust.’ Is God un-
just because he is distributing things to us and does not give the
same to everyone? 67 Is God unjust? It is not unjust that a thing is
unequally portioned out to us. Why, then, 68 do you have abun-
dance and does someone else beg, but that by distributing well
you may obtain the reward of life, and that he may be crowned

62. Loving yourself, loving your neighbor: ST II— II 25,4-5 an d 2 ^’ 3 _ 5 -

63. In a play called Autotimus (act 1 scene 1) by Publius Terentius, a play-
wright from Carthage who lived from 190 to 158 BCE.

64. See also Sermon 08 Puerlesus, section 3.2.3.

65. ST II-II 66,2.

66. Thomas distinguishes four senses, four layers in Scriptural texts: the his-
torical or literal, the spiritual, the allegorical, and the moral or anagogical: ST
I 1,10.

67. ST I 65,2,3; also 47,2,3.


68. In the text ego should be ergo.


SERMON 15


229


with the trophies of patience? But are you not a looter by keep-
ing for yourself the things entrusted to you to be distributed? It
is the bread of the poor that you hold in your hand, the tunic of
the nude which you keep in your room, the shoe of the unshod
that decays in your possession; you have the silver of the needy
that you have hidden underground. Regarding these things you
could have given as much as your injustices are many.” 69

(2.3) Other stewards, or distributors, are distributors by be-
ing prodigal all around. First they give themselves up to the
devil for a mediocre delight. Against them we read in Prv 5.9:
“Do not give your honors to a stranger and your years to some-
one cruel.” 70

Others sell their grace if they have it 71 for a favor of the pub-
lic. Against them it is said: “Do not give what is sacred to the
dogs” [Mt 7.6]. They give temporal things to stage-players, but
they would not give anything to a good man. 72 It is said against
them: “Give to the just man and do not receive the sinner” [Sir
12.4], that is, insofar as he is a sinner, in order not to favor him
in his sin. We read that a prodigal son spent a part of his wealth
by living “a life of lustfulness” [Lk 15.3]. 73 O, I wish that not so
many would waste their soul!

It is clear now what was said about the steward’s task and his
abuse. 74

(3) Let us look at the danger that threatens the steward. We
see a danger for this steward on three grounds: (3.1) hrst, by
reason of scandal; hence it is said that he was discredited [Lk
16.1]; (3.2) second, by reason of the loss of his function; hence it

69. This view has consequences for how we assess stealing out of necessity:
ST II-II 66,7.

70. Cruelty is opposed to clemency: ST II-II 159,1. The devil is called cruel
because, although it is in accordance with justice that humankind is enslaved by
him, he is without devotion, compassion, etc.; cf. ST II-II 157,1,3, 159,2,2; III
46,3,3.

71. Cf. Prv 23.23. Cf. ST II-II 100,3-4.

72. On the question to whom we should give alms: ST II-II 32,5 and 9.

73. On luxuria: ST II-II 153.

74. The whole text of section 2 echoes 2 Cor 6.1 (and Heb 12.15): “As his
[God’s] co-operators we beseech you that you do not receive the grace of God
in vain.”


230


THOMAS AQUINAS


says: “You cannot be a steward anymore” [Lk 16.2]; (3.3) third,
we see the danger for the steward that he can not help himself
any more; hence he said: “I do not have the strength to dig, and
I am ashamed to beg” [Lk 16.3].

(3.1) First, I say, we see the danger that threatens the stew-
ard or distributor, by reason of scandalization. Someone has
possessed many goods. He dies. His sins do not remain hidden
[cf. Mt 10.26]. Who has discredited him? His conscience 73 and
the saints, as well as God himself, “for whom all things are bare
( nuda ) and open” [Heb 4. 13]. 76

(3.2) Likewise, we see the danger of the steward by reason of
the loss of his function, because it is said to him: “You cannot
be a steward any more.” You have had knowledge and money.
You die. You cannot have them any more, as the Psalmist says:
“When a rich man dies, he will not take all things with him” [Ps
49.18], meaning: nothing. Jb 1.21: “I have come from my moth-
er’s womb naked ( nudus ); I will return to it naked.”

(3.3) Maybe you will say: “I will be able to acquire something
for myself.” Surely not, for you will not be able to help your-
self. Hence he says: “I do not have the strength to dig, and I am
ashamed to beg.” Because of this, it is said in Siracli: “Whatever
your hand can do, do it immediately, because there is no work,
no thought, no knowledge, no wisdom with the inhabitants of
the netherworld, whither you will hastily go” [Eccl 9.10]. Maybe
you will say: “I will ask the Blessed Virgin and the saints to help
me.” Certainly, that will not be the place and time for begging. 77
Hence it says: “I am ashamed to beg.” The foolish virgins want-
ed to beg, but nothing was given to them; “but those who were
ready entered with the groom into the wedding” [Mt 25.10].

So the steward is in danger.

(4) But what is the remedy? 78 Who would have a case before
a judge when he is accused and his offense is known? What

75. Cf. ST II— II 33, 7 -

76. Cf. ST I 14,5-6.

77. Cf. Mt 7.21. Asking in prayer requires that your heart be with it: ST II-
11 83,4,2.

78. Thomas did not announce this fourth point. To conclude his homily he
gives practical advice.


SERMON 15


231


would be the salutary counsel? I say that the salutary counsel
would be the one that the king would give him, namely, if the
king told him: “Do this, and you will be free” [cf. 2 Kgs 5.10,
Lk 10.28]. This would be the salutary counsel. Christ gives you
the counsel. When people are discredited and can no longer
be stewards, and they can neither dig nor beg, they ought to
do what Christ recommends, who says: “Make friends for your-
selves with the mammon of iniquity, so that, when you are want-
ing, they may receive you in eternal tents” [Lk 16. 9]. But what
is this counsel about the mammon? This is the same counsel
that Daniel gave to Nebuchadnezzar, saying: “May my counsel
be pleasing to you, O King: buy off your sins through almsgiv-
ing” [Dn 4.24].

He says: “with the mammon of iniquity.” Should we then give
to the poor from unjust riches, as from theft? 79 Certainly not,
because Augustine says in On The Word of the Lord: “Do not con-
ceive of such a Lord as a man whom you would despise.” And
the Lord says: “I hate robbery in the camp” [Is 61.8]. We usually
explain or understand the expression “with the mammon of in-
iquity” in four ways.

(4.1) Basil explains it in one way, saying that the Lord says
“mammon of iniquity” because riches are iniquities. For it rare-
ly occurs that someone has riches which one of his ancestors
has not acquired unjustly.

(4.2) Augustine says that riches are called the “mammon of
iniquity” because an unjust man values these riches highly.

(4.3) Or riches are called “mammon of iniquity” because
they lead to iniquity. 80

(4.4) Chrysostom says that riches are called “mammon of in-
iquity” because you have kept them for yourself unjustly. 81

Do you have 20 or 40 pounds 82 of income in storage now? At
least when you die you would distribute it. And to whom should
[these riches] be given, then?

79. Cf. ST II-II 32,7, 66,8.

80. Therefore, it was becoming that Christ, who goes before us leading a vir-
tuous life, lived in poverty (although he himself could not have sinned; cf. ST
III 15,5,1, 22,4,1): ST III 40,3,1.

81. Cf. ST II-II 66,2.

82. The libra aurea: the Roman pound.


232


THOMAS AQUINAS


Some are worried about themselves with regard to their rep-
utation. Christ says: “so that, when you are wanting, they may
receive you in eternal tents.” Augustine connects the two words
of Christ and of the steward: the steward says: “so that when I
am removed, they may receive me in their homes” [Lk 16.4],
whereas the Lord says: “in eternal tents” [Lk 16. g]. Therefore,
we ought to distribute [our riches] to the ones of whom the
eternal tents are. Augustine says: “Who else are those of whom
the eternal tents are than the saints of God? And who else are
the ones that are received by them in the eternal tents than
they who serve their needs and give to them with gladness what
they lack? These are Christ’s little ones, who, after leaving “eve-
rything” behind, “have followed him” [Lk 5.11].

Must, then, alms be given to sinners? 83 I say that, all other
things being equal, it is better to give to a just man than to a
sinner, because by giving to a just man you do a work that is
meritorious and in a similar way the work of the one who re-
ceives is. But this is not so in the case of a sinner; indeed, only
the work you do is meritorious, but not what he does. Chrysos-
tom says: “Almsgiving is the most powerful art of the arts, be-
cause it does not build houses for us made of mud [cf. Jb 4.19];
for us it is a spending for everlasting life.” 84

And that this may be fulfilled for us by him who, et cetera.


83. Cf. ST 11-1132,9,2.

84. Cf. ST II-H 32,4.


SERMON 16
INVENI DAVID

Sermon on the Feast of St. Nicholas, the Sixth of December


Psalm 89.21-22: I have found David, my servant.

I have anointed him with my sacred oil;
my hand will help him and my arm will make him firm.


part 1 : Prothema


he miracles of God cannot be scrutinized by man, as
we read in Jb 37.5: “Who works great wonders and
things that cannot be scrutinized.” Some of the mir-
acles God performs in his saints. Augustine teaches this, say-
ing that justifying man is more than creating, 1 because creation
passes whereas justification remains [cf. Mt 24.35]. Thus “God
is wondrous in his saints” [Ps 68.36]. We cannot scrutinize these
wonders of God in his saints, unless he who is the scrutinizer of
hearts and reins [cf. Ps 7.10] teaches us. 2 Therefore, let us take
refuge with him in prayer and ask him at the beginning that he
may give me something to say, et cetera.


part 2 : Sermo

“I have found David, my servant,” et cetera. From these words
we can learn four praiseworthy things of this holy bishop: (1)
first, his wondrous election; (2) second, his unique consecra-
tion; (3) third, the effective execution of his task; (4) fourth, his

1. ST I— II 1 13,9; III 43,4,2. It is even more than creating another world: I
25 > 3 > 3 -

2. Because it is through grace; cf. ST III 2,10.


233


234


THOMAS AQUINAS


immovable and firm stability. His wondrous election is shown
in the words: “I have found David, my servant.” His special con-
secration is shown where it says: “1 have anointed him with my
sacred oil.” The effective execution of his task is shown in the
words: “My hand will help him.” His stable firmness is shown
where it says: “and my arm will make him firm.”

(1) So let us take a look at what he says: “I have found David,
my servant.” Here we can consider four things concerning the
meaning of “finding”: it implies (1.1) rarity, (1.2) inquiry, (1.3)
appearance, and (1.4) experimental proof.

(1.1) First, I say that finding implies rarity, for we say of rare
things that they are found; it would be ridiculous to say: “Find-
ing people on the Petit Pont.” 3 Now, what is rare is said to be
found, as in the question in Prv 31.10: “A strong woman, who
will find her?” As if it says: “She is difficult to find,” for a woman
is by nature soft and weak. 4

(1.2) Second, we speak of being found when things are
sought after. Hence it is said in Prv 2.4: “If you seek her as if she
were money, you will find her,” namely, divine knowledge. And
the Gospel speaks of a woman who seeks a lost drachma, “until
she finds it” [Lk 15.8-g].

(1.3) Third, finding implies that it appears clearly to you.

3. The Parvus Pons was one of the two bridges over the Seine in 13th-century
Paris; it connected the banks with the lie de la Cite (on which Notre Dame is sit-
uated) , the very center of the city and thus very busy.

This example is a clear sign that this sermon was delivered in Paris. It might
have been on a Sunday or — since St. Nicholas was a very popular saint — on a
weekday, probably when Thomas was Regent Master. Also the exact location is
uncertain; Kwasniewski (29, note 40) suggests it might have been delivered to
the Franciscans, in view of the reference to the stigmata of St. Francis (in 2.4).

4. Thomas shows himself a child of his time when he bluntly speaks of wom-
en as the weaker and softer sex. His view originates from the Genesis story — the
woman is the one seduced by the serpent (ST I 94,4,1; I— II 89,3,2) — as well as
Aristode’s ideas (e.g., in ST II— II 156,1,1). This view was confirmed by his ex-
perience, namely, the reality in the society of his time that women did not have
responsible positions and were treated as second-class citizens; cf. ST I g8,2sc;
I— II 105,3,1. Thomas, however, also says, not quite in tune with the reality in the
society, that in Christ women should not be treated as secondary people: ST III
72,10,3, in the light of Col 3.1 1 (“in Christ there is neither male nor female”).


SERMON 16


235


Thus we read in the Gospel: “The Kingdom of God is like” a
paterfamilias seeking “a hidden treasure in a held, who, when
he finds it, goes and sells all he has (and buys that held)” [Mt
13.44]. When a treasure is dug up from the earth and shown,
then we call it found.

(1.4) Fourth, hnding implies experimental proof. When
someone doubts about something and later on he knows it for
sure, he says: “1 have found 5 that this is how it is.” And in this
way Solomon says: “I have found a woman more bitter than
death” [Eccl 7.26]. 6

In these ways the Lord has found St. Nicholas.

(ad 1.1) First, he found in him something very rare, name-
ly, a matured 7 virtue that is rare in young men. 8 Thus it says
in Proverbs: “Adolescence and pleasure are vain” [Eccl 11.10
(Vg)]. It is a rare characteristic that a young man is not enslaved
to vanity, and because St. Nicholas was preserving his sanctity
in his youth, we say that he was found. For “even as a little boy
he tormented the body by fasting a lot.” 9 In Hos 9.10 we read:
“Like unripe grapes in the desert I found the sons of Israel,
as the first fruits of the fig tree.” 10 Figs ripen later than other
fruits, and if they ripen at the right time, they are called found.
In this sense, boys who preserve their sanctity in their boyhood
are called the first fruits of the fig tree and are called found —
and that is pleasing to God. Hence we read in Mi 7.1: “My soul
has desired early-ripening figs.” Fish of the season and fruits of
the season are in great demand; so great is God’s demand that
man carries the yoke of the Lord in his youth. Hence it says in
Lam 3.27: “It is good for a man to carry the yoke of the Lord


5 . Or: “I have found out”: inueni.

6 . Note that Thomas’s audience consists of religious and religious-to-be; the
attractiveness of women may be a threat to their life as religious.

7 . Tempestiuam : translated here as “matured” in view of the comparison made
later with ripe fruits.

8 . So Thomas is also critical towards the young men in his audience; in view
of virtue and temptations they are certainly not presented as superior to women.

9 . An antiphon from the office of the Feast of St. Nicholas.

10 . The Hebrew text seems to make more sense: the grapes are ripe there.


236


THOMAS AQUINAS


from his adolescence,” for [Prv 22.6] “the adolescent will walk
along his path; even when he is old he will not recede from it.”
And even if such people leave the path of sanctity, they return
more easily. 11

(ad 1.2) Second, the Lord found in St. Nicholas what he is
looking for. And what does the Lord seek? Certainly a devout
mind. Thus it says in Jn 4.24: “God is Spirit” and he seeks “those
who worship him in spirit and truth.” And why does the Lord
seek a man with a devout mind? I say: Someone who delights in
living with someone else, seeks someone who is the same. 12 This
also applies to God; since it is delightful to him to live [with
someone] with a devout mind, he seeks [someone with] a de-
vout mind. Hence it says: “My delights are living with the sons
and daughters of people” [Prv 8.31]. And in St. Nicholas God
found a devout mind, since he was constantly in the church and
in devout prayer. Therefore, it befits him what is said in Hos
12.5: “He implored him in Bethel in tears and he found him.”
Bethel is, in translation, “house of God.” 13

See also that it is rightly said, “He found David,” for David
was in his boyhood great in power and virtue; 14 he killed a bear
and a lion, and he was chosen in preference to his brothers, and
he was also most devout. 15 The Psalmist says: “As with fat 16 and
wealth” — meaning: with devotion — “my soul is filled” [Ps 63.6].
And in Sir 47.2 we read: “Like the fat separated from the meat,
so David” was set apart from “the sons and daughters of Israel.”
Also St. Nicholas was holy 17 in an eminent way.

1 1. Cf. ST I— II 52,1, 53,2; with God’s help, ST I — II 1 14,7.

12. ST II-II 25,6,5.

13. Cf. Thomas’s explanation of Jn 2.16 on the question whether it is neces-
sary to worship in a church: ST II-II 84,3.

Obviously “house of God” is interpreted by Thomas in this instance as the
church building; cf. Jn 2.16.

14. In view of Thomas’s following exposition, virtus is translated as “power
and virtue.”

15. Cf. 1 Sm 17.34-36 (killing bear and lion), 16.12 (being chosen), and
the Psalms (devotion) .

16. I.e., the part of the animal offered to God; cf. Lv 3.3-4; devotion is to-
wards God: ST II-II 82,1.

17. Connotations of “holy” are, among others, “separated/set apart” (ST III
4,6) and “purely good” (ST I 36,1,1): Heb 7.26.


SERMON 16


237


(ad 1.3) Third, the Lord found in St. Nicholas something
that shone clearly, namely, dedicated affection. What makes a
man shine? I say that nothing makes a man so radiant as dedi-
cation and kindness ( benignitas ) to others [cf. Mt 5.16]. God is
hidden in himself. Still he is revealed to us through his works
of kindness ( opera beneficientie ) [cf. Rom 1.20]. Hence it says in
Sir 44.10 about those who act with piety towards others: “These
are men of mercy, whose dedicated works have not been want-
ing,” and the Church proclaims “their praises” [Sir 44.8]. And
elsewhere we read: “May the lips of many praise the man illus-
trious in handing out bread” [Sir 31.28 (Vg)]. St. Nicholas was
to the highest extent “compassionate and he felt deeply for the
afflicted.” 18 And by a gift of gold he relieved the poverty of vir-
gins. 19 Thus we read in Hos 14.9 what applies to him as well:
“From me his fruit is found.” 20

And because of this the Lord rightly says: “I have found Dav-
id, my servant.” A servant is someone who carries out the oper-
ation of the Lord. 21 The pre-eminent operation of the Lord is
mercy, as the Psalmist says: “And his acts of mercy are over all
his works” [Ps 145.9]. So a servant of the Lord is someone who
tries to carry out his mercy towards the poor. The Apostle says:
“We are servants because of Jesus.” 22

(ad 1.4) Fourth, the Lord found in St. Nicholas something
proven by experience: faithfulness that is much sought-after. 23
Thus the Apostle says: “Still it is sought-after among the manag-
ers,” only “that someone may be found faithful” [1 Cor 4.2]. And

18. A responsory from the night office of the Feast of St. Nicholas.

19. A reference (which Thomas also makes in ST II— II 107,3,4) to th e story
that by a generous gift of gold that Nicholas made to an impoverished family,
three young girls were rescued from a life in the prostitution that was hanging
over their heads.

20. Ex me: the fruits of the Holy Spirit: ST I— II 70,3.

21. Cf. the angels as servants of God in ST I 111-113.

22. The expression propter Iesum, “because of Jesus,” is in Paul’s letters found
only in 2 Cor 4.1 1 (“constantly we are handed over to death because of Jesus”
or “for the sake of Jesus”). We find the expression servi Iesu (“servants of Jesus”)
in Phil 1.1, where St. Paul refers to himself and Timothy; cf. Phil 2.5-8.

23. Fidelitas, in terms of keeping the Lord’s word, being trustworthy, is first
of all towards God, but also towards fellow human beings (ST I— II 100,5; II— II
88,3).


238


THOMAS AQUINAS


in Wis 3.6 we read: “He has tested them and found them worthy
of him.” 24 A servant ought to be faithful, so that he refers every-
thing he has and does to God. Whether you pray, or do works of
mercy, every good thing you do, you must refer to God. Hence
it is said: “He who is tested in it, 28 is found perfect” [Sir 31.10].
This is St. Nicholas and because of this it says: “my servant.”

Yet, contrary to this, many do not serve the Lord but them-
selves. Thus the Apostle says: “Such people do not serve Christ,
but their belly” [Rom 16.18]. If you do good in order to have al-
lowances ( prebenda ), you serve yourself, not God [cf. Mt 6.1]. A
good bishop should not be like this, but he ought to be innocent
as for himself [cf. Heb 7.26], devout in his relation to God, and
merciful in his relation to his neighbors 26 as well as faithful in
everything and in respect of everything [Lk 16.10, 1 Tm 3.2-13].

(2) Next is his consecration, which is mentioned where it
says: “I have anointed him with my sacred oil.” We are to ob-
serve that the sanctification of bishops and some others is done
with oil; there is hardly any sanctification in which oil is not
used [cf. Ex 30.31-32, 40.9]. In order to signify the power of oil,
we must notice that we use oil for four purposes: (2.1) for the
healing of a wound, (2.2) as the fuel of a light, (2.3) to season
the taste, and (2.4) to soften.

First, I say, we use oil for healing. Is 1.6 reads: “Injury, bruise,
and swollen wound are neither bound up, nor healed by medi-
cine, nor bathed with oil.” Second, we use oil as the fuel of a
light. Hence we find a precept in Ex 25.6 [and 35.9, 28] for the
children of Israel to offer “oil for the light to be made.” Third,
we use oil to season food. Thus we read that King Solomon sent
Hiram oil for meals [cf. 1 Kgs 5.25; cf. 2 Chr 2.9]. Fourth, I say
that we use oil to soften. Thus it says: “His words are smooth,
more than oil” [Ps 55.22].

24. Thomas distinguishes between temptations from the devil (which are
aimed at leading us astray) and being put to the test by God (to make sure that
we love him: Dt 13.4; cf. Mt 25.21, 23): ST I 1 14,2.

25. I.e., in gold.

26. Devotion to God and mercy towards neighbors: ST II— II 30,4,2, where
Thomas cites 1 Tm 4.8.


SERMON 16


239


(2.1) First, I say that oil is used for the healing of a wound. By
this we understand healing grace, as in Lk 10.34: the Samaritan
who wanted to take care of the injured man “poured on wine
and oil.” 27 The sick are anointed with oil, as James [instructs]:
“If someone among you gets sick, call for the presbyters of the
Church, that they pray over him and anoint him with oil” [Jas

5.t 4 ].

And when St. Nicholas was anointed with the oil of heal-
ing grace — we say this because he was full of health 28 and thus
equipped to anoint others — it says that he poured out “wine
and oil,” the wine of severe correction and the oil of mercy and
comfort. 29

(2.2) Second, we use oil for light to be made, by which the
study of wisdom is signified [cf. Ps ng.130, Prv 6.23]. Concern-
ing this oil it is said: “May oil not be absent from your head”
[Eccl g.8], and in Zee 4.14: “These are the two sons of gleam-
ing oil.” Since oil is used as fuel of a light, prophets are anoint-
ed with oil [cf. Is 61.1].

(2.3) Third, we use oil to season food, by which spiritual joy
is signified. For tasteful ingredients make the seasoning; in the
same way, spiritual joy makes it easier to do good works. For
with sadness even ordinary work is difficult; with joy even hard
work is easy [cf. Is 12.3]. The Psalmist says: “So that he makes
his face cheerful with oil” [Ps 104.15], and: “God, your God,
has anointed you with the oil of joy before your companions”
[Ps 45.8]. And Is 61.3 reads: “Oil of mirth instead of mourn-
ing.”

Hence priests are anointed with oil [cf. Ex 28.41], namely,
with the oil of joy. Thus it seems that spiritual joy belongs to
those who are dedicated to the divine cult, as the Psalm reads:
“May your priests be clothed with gladness,” 30 et cetera.

27. Thus the good Samaritan is an image of Christ.

28. He was full ( plenus ) of it, so that he could pour it out for others; cf. ST III
7,10, referring to Eph 3.8-9.

29. Wine of correction, e.g., in Ps 60.5 and Jer 25.15-38. Oil of mercy be-
cause oil softens (see section 2.4); oil of comfort or strengthening; cf. Is 61.1
and Lk 4.18.

30. This is a quotation from Ps 132.9: ‘Your priests will be clothed with jus-


240


THOMAS AQUINAS


(2.4) Fourth, we use oil to soften, by which mercy and kind-
ness ( benignitas ) of heart are signified — and these were in St.
Nicholas, for he was completely filled with mercy and devo-
tion. In Dt 33.24 it says: “May he be pleasing to his brothers; let
him dip his foot in the oil.” Oil spreads itself; mercy in a similar
way. Oil flows; in a similar way mercy flows over all good works.
So, unless you have mercy, your works are nothing [cf. 1 Cor
1 3.i— 3]. Hence the Apostle says: “Devotion avails for all things”
[1 Tm 4.8b]. 31

You ought to consider that in the future the marks of re-
wards will reflect in the bodies of the saints [cf. 1 Tm 4.8c] in
accordance with the merits of the graces. Also, in our days the
marks of the affection show, as we clearly see in St. Francis: the
marks of Christ’s Passion were in [his body], because he was in-
tensely affected by the Passion of Christ. Likewise, the marks of
mercy reflect in St. Nicholas, for “oil dripped from his tomb,” 32
as a sign that he was a man of great mercy. Dt 32.13: “So that he
may cause honey to flow from the rock, and oil from the hard-
est stone.” That belongs to a king. 33

(3) Then the execution of his task follows, when he says: “My
hands will help him,” et cetera. God does not have a physical
hand, but his power is called his hand. 34 See that God’s hand
has helped him in four ways: (3.1) by drawing him to himself
and tearing him away from evil things, (3.2) by leading him,
(3.3) by comforting or strengthening him, and (3.4) by per-
forming miracles.

(3.1) First, I say: the hand of the Lord, that is, his power, has
helped him, St. Nicholas, by drawing him to himself and tear-

tice and your holy ones will exult,” and/or from 2 Chr 6.41: “May your priests,
Lord God, be clothed with salvation, and your holy ones will be glad over good
things.”

31. In ST I— II 68,7,2 Thomas explains this verse as referring to good exte-
rior works.

32. A responsory from the night office of the Feast of St. Nicholas. This leg-
endary oil is called the “manna of St. Nicholas.”

33. See Sermon 05 Ecce rex tuus under 2. 2. 2-2. 2. 4.

34. Hence, “the hand” of God is a metaphor: ST I 1,9 and 3,1,3. See also
note 14.


SERMON 16


241


ing him away from evil things. The Psalmist says: “Stretch out
your hand from on high, and tear me away and rescue me from
the many waters and from the hand of the sons of strangers”
[Ps 144.7].

(3.2) Second, the hand of God has helped St. Nicholas by
leading him. People who lead others usually take them by the
hand. Thus the Lord leads the just ones by means of his power,
as the Psalmist says: “Let the wickedness of sinners be brought
to nothing”; yet the Lord “leads the just one” [Ps 7.10]. Like-
wise, Is 8.11 reads: “He has instructed me by his strong hand,
that I may not proceed on the path of this people.”

(3.3) Third, the hand of the Lord, that is, his power, has
helped St. Nicholas by [comforting or] strengthening him.
Thus it is said in Ezek 3.14: “And the hand of the Lord was with
me to strengthen me.” He was greatly strengthened.

(3.4) Fourth, the Lord’s hand, that is, his power, has helped
St. Nicholas by working miracles. 35 Thus we read in Acts 4.30:
You will stretch out “your hand, and signs and wonders occur in
the name of your Son.” St. Nicholas was filled with [the power
to work] miracles. Who has ever sought the glory of the world
and has received it like St. Nicholas, who was a poor bishop in
Greece? 36 The Lord has adorned him with miracles, because he
was most merciful. Ps 4.4 says: “Know that the Lord has made
his saint work wonders.” Mercy has made St. Nicholas won-
drous, and the Lord has strengthened him until the achieve-
ment of the goal of eternal life. 37

May he lead us to this, who with the Father and the Holy
Spirit lives, et cetera.

35. For only the Lord works miracles; people who work his miracles are in-
struments of him: cf. ST I 105,7, 1 10,4, 1 14,4; II— II 178; and as for Christ, cf.
ST III 43.

36. Myra, where St. Nicholas was bishop, is in southern Turkey; in St. Nicho-
las’s days the language of the people living there was Greek.

37. The fourth point, Nicholas’s stable firmness, announced at the begin-
ning of the Sermo, is missing in the manuscripts. Bataillon gives three possible
reasons: ( 1 ) the copyist did not write it down or copy it, e.g., because he became
tired; or (2) Thomas never came to the fourth point (cf. Sermon 20 Beata gens);
or (3) the fourth point was discussed in the Collatio in sero, which did not come
down to us.


SERMON 17
LUX ORTA


Sermon on the Feast of the Birth of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
the Eighth of September


Psalm 97-ii: A light has gone up for the just,
and joy for the upright of heart.


part 1 : Prothema

light has gone up for the just, and joy for the upright
of heart” [Ps 97.11]. “Every very good endowment and
every perfect gift from above is coming down from
the Father of lights.” 1 This second quotation is from the Let-
ter of James 1.17. Temporal things are a good (bonus) endow-
ment. The things that belong to us naturally, like the body and
the soul, are a better (melior) endowment. Eternal glory and
the goods bestowed by grace are the best ( optimus ) endowment.
Every very good ( optimus ) endowment — we understand this as
grace — comes from the Father of lights. Grace is called the
best ( optimus ) gift, given to us so that we may perform merit-
orious works. 2 Hence it says in Jn 15.5: “Without me you can-
not do anything.” Likewise, we call grace the perfect gift, given
to us so that we may receive the good of glory. And this grace
comes from the Father of lights, as we read in Ps 84.12: “The

1 . Since donum is usually translated as “gift,” datum is translated as “endow-
ment.” In ST I 49,1-2 Thomas discusses how it can be that the Creator is per-
fectly good whereas evil is a reality in his creation, in view of Mt 7.18, where
Christ says that a good tree bears good fruit.

2. Grace ( gratia cooperantis) is the origin of our merit, in the first place
through love ( caritas ): ST I— II 1 14,4.


242


SERMON 17


243


Lord will give grace” in the present, “and glory” in the future.

So, because the grace of God is so effective a gift for work-
ing the good in the present and for arriving at eternal glory in
the future, let us ask at the beginning that the Lord may give us
grace, et cetera.


part 2: Sermo

“A light has gone up for the just.” This is a short saying, but it
holds a manifold meaning. We find it in Ps 97.11.

(1) We read that the birth of the Blessed Virgin is shown be-
forehand by many figures in the Old Testament. 3 Among other
figures it is pointed to by three figures in particular, namely,
(1.1) in the ascent of dawn, (1.2) in the rising of the morning
star, and (1.3) in the sprouting of a twig from the root. In the
dawn her birth is designated insofar as her sanctification is con-
cerned. In the rising of the star we find a prefiguration insofar
as it concerns the integrity of her virginity. In the sprouting of a
twig her elevation and great contemplation are prefigured.

(1.1) Concerning the ascent of the dawn, 4 through which the
birth of the Blessed Virgin is prefigured insofar as it concerns
the sanctification she brought, 5 we read in Gn 32.27 that the
angel has said to Jacob: “Let me go; the dawn is already ascend-
ing.” The struggling of Jacob is a sign of the company of the
Old Fathers [Patriarchs] , who struggled with the angel with two
arms, namely, tears and prayer. Thus we read in Hos 12.5: “He
fought with an angel and was strengthened; he asked him in
tears.” But after the angel got to know about the dawn in the

3. In the figurative reading of the Old Testament, things and events are seen
as referring to the Christ event to come; cf. also the Law (ST 101,2, 102,2, 103,3
and 104,2) and the Eucharist (ST III 73,6).

4. Dawn or daybreak ( aurora ) announces the coming of the sun. In Scrip-
ture the sun is identified with Christ, e.g., Mt 4.16 (citing Is 9.1), Lk 1.78-79
(ST III 35,8,3), Jn 8.12. Traditionally also the “sun of justice” in Mai 3.20 (4.2)
is identified with him.

5. Not only by giving birth to Christ, but also as a great example of a virtu-
ous life, as Thomas expounds in the following in the Sermo; cf. ST III 27,4 and
27 > 5 > 2 .


244


THOMAS AQUINAS


birth of the glorious Blessed Virgin, he said: “Let me go,” as if
he was saying: “Ask me no more, but take refuge with the Bless-
ed Virgin.” Dawn is the end of the foregoing night and is the
beginning of the day that follows. Likewise, in the rising of the
Blessed Virgin Mary the night of guilt has ended, and the day
of grace 6 has begun. Hence Sedulius 7 says: “She has put an end
to vices and taught the way of life.”

(1.2) Second, the birth of the glorious Virgin is prefigured in
the rising of a star insofar as it concerns the integrity of virgini-
ty. 8 Thus Balaam prophesied in Nrn 24.17: “A star will rise from
Jacob, and a twig will rise up from Israel.” Now, the rising of her
star is compared to the integrity of her virginity, because, just as
a star shines without being corrupted and without diminution
or loss of light, thus the Blessed Virgin brought forth her Son,
without a violent opening of the flesh and without the loss of
her virginity. Thus Bernard of Clairvaux has said: “The Blessed
Virgin is justly compared to a heavenly body, because, just as a
heavenly body shines without being corrupted, and just as the
shining does not diminish the clarity of the heavenly body, so
does the Son not affect the virginity of his mother. 9

(1.3) Third, the birth of the glorious Virgin was shown be-
forehand in the sprouting from a twig insofar as it concerns
her contemplation. Is 11.1 reads: “A twig will sprout from the
root of Jesse, and a flower will come up from his root,” et cete-
ra. The twig 10 is raised up towards heaven. In this the contem-


6. Cf. ST III 36,78c: the star is not one of the ordinary stars in the sky.

7. Sedulius: an Italian poet and priest who worked in Greece in the 5th cen-
tury. These words occur also in a homily by Jerome on the Assumption. It is
not really clear which text is older. Apparently Thomas knew the text through
Sedulius, who wrote a poem in five books, the “Paschal Song ( Carmen Paschale ) ,”
on the life of Christ. Some of the verses of this poem became part of the liturgy
of the Church. Later on in this homily Thomas quotes from this work without
explicidy referring to it.

8. ST III 28 and 29,2.

9. Although we know that stars actually burn up and that planets only reflect
the light of a star, the point Thomas makes remains clear. Also, by this figura-
tive interpretation Thomas enforces the argument against astrology, as in ST

"-'I 95 . 5 -

10. Thomas is playing on the words virgo (virgin) and virga (twig).


SERMON 17


245


plation of the Blessed Virgin is signified, who overcame these
earthly things and who lifted up her heart to the things that
are above. 11 Thus Bernard says: “O sublime Virgin, in which
sublime [realm are you]? You raise up your mind to the One
who sits on the throne, to the Lord of majesty.”

Therefore, in this way, with a triple figure, the birth of the
Blessed Virgin Mary was prefigured for us: it was as the dawn in
birth, as a rising star in bringing forth God’s Son, and as a twig
sprouting in a commendable life. David comprehends these
figures in one verse when he says: “A light has gone up for the
just,” et cetera. The light puts an end to night and starts the day,
shines and does not fall into corruption; and after the lower
things of nature have been bypassed, it aims at higher things.

(1.4) Also, however, the company of the apostles is called
“light” in the Gospel. In Mt 5.14 we read: “You are the light of
the world.” Likewise, the angels are called “light.” Gn 1.3 reads:
“God said: ‘Let there be light,’ and light was made”; a gloss says
that this is understood as concerning the blessed spirits, that is,
the angels. 12 And since the Blessed Virgin transcends the com-
panies of the apostles and angels because of her excellence, she
is suitably called “light.”

(1.5) Moreover, with another reasoning she can be called
“light.” In Jn 8.12 we see God, 13 who says, “I am the light of the
world.” Well, the Blessed Virgin has given birth to that light,
and it is impossible that light be brought forth unless from
light, at least in a univocal generation. Hence, she is suitably
called “light.” 14

11. SCG III 37: the way to ultimate happiness is found in contemplation of
God (cf. also ST I— II 38,4), who is “above,” “in heaven.”

12. Cf. ST I 6i,4sc, 63,5,2. And yet another interpretation of Gn 1.3 is found
in ST I 32,1,3.

13. That is, Christ insofar as he is God; cf. the linguistic rules in ST III
16,1-2.

14. In a univocal generation the one bringing forth and the one brought
forth are of the same nature: a man brings forth a man (in time) , and the divine
Father brings forth the divine Son (eternal generation), as in “God from God,
Light from Light, True God from True God” (cf. ST I 27,1-2). Since Thomas in-
terprets Jn 8.12 as concerning the divine Son, the speech of generation of the


246 THOMAS AQUINAS

Thus those words befit her well: “A light has gone up for the
just,” et cetera.

Now, two things in particular are brought to our attention in
this verse: (1) first, the rising of the Virgin’s glory, when it says,
“A light has gone up”; and (2) second, the fruits of the birth:
“for the just, and joy for the upright of heart.”

(2) “A light has gone up for the just.” 15

(2.1) This just one is her father Joachim, as she is his daugh-
ter. 16

(2.2) But “for the just” also refers to the fact that for Christ
a light has gone up, meaning that the Blessed Virgin is, so to
speak, a special mother-to-be.

(2.3) “A light has gone up for the just” is also interpreted as
“for the penitent,” for whom she is, so to speak, an advocate.
Hence we sing: “O Virgin, our advocate.” 17

(2.4) Furthermore, “a light has gone up for the just” means
“for those exercising justice,” the active ones; “and joy for the
upright of heart” refers to the contemplative ones. Those who
work for justice are called the actives; those who are lifted up
towards the things above through contemplation are called the
contemplatives. 18 These long for doing well through the guid-
ance of the light as well as for the contemplation of God.

light from Mary must be understood in the same way as that we call Mary the
Mother of God; Mary is not God. But since the one Christ has the divine and
the human nature, we can and do in fact use words that signify the divine na-
ture (e.g., “Son of God”), and words that signify the human nature (“he died”)
for him who is born of Mary, whether we mean Christ insofar as he is God or
Christ insofar as he is a man; cf. ST III 16,1-5. Consequently, on the veneration
(rather than adoration) of the Mother of God: III 25,5.

15. The part “and joy for the upright of heart” is the subject of the Collatio in
sero and is briefly touched upon in 2.4.

16. Since justo in Ps 96.11 (Vg) is masculine and singular, Mary’s mother,
St. Ann according to the same tradition, is out of Thomas’s sight.

17. Thomas quotes the Salve Regina, but in a slightly different wording: “eja
virgo, advocata nostra,” instead of “eja ergo, advocata nostra.” Quite a few names
that were originally given to the Holy Spirit were in the course of time also at-
tributed to Mary, e.g., advocate, comforter, and counselor.

18. On the distinction and the nature of these two: ST II— II 179-182, where


SERMON 17


247


In this way it is obvious why the Blessed Virgin is called
“light” and through which figures she is prefigured. The Sermo
will be on this part: “A light has gone up for the just”; the Colla-
tio will be about what is left.

We have seen the reasons why the Blessed Virgin is called
“light.” Let us add some more. 19 We see that physical light is
(1.6) a source of joys, (1.7) the leader of travelers and of those
who are on the way, (1.8) the expeller of darkness, (t.g) the
spreader of its likeness, (1.10) the mother of the heavens’ grac-
es, (1.11) the most splendid of creatures, and (1.12) a delight as
well as a consolation to the eyes. These are found in the Blessed
Virgin; because of these, the sight [of her] is called good.

(1.6) First, I say that light is the source of joys, because some-
one who lives on the sea longs for the light 20 and rejoices in it
[cf. Ps 21.7]. Hence it befits the Virgin well, who is prefigured in
Est 8.16. For there it is said that “for the Jews,” that is, the ones
who believe, and thus for the Christians who confess Christ as
God and man, “there is a new light,” that is, the Blessed Virgin.
She is called “new light” because “neither was she seen to have a
woman [as an equal] before her nor after her” [Sedulius] . And
she is called “light” because she is without darkness of sin and
ignorance. 21

Her rising is seen with the eyes of the heart, and how it takes
shape is now seen with the eyes of the body and [results in] in-
terior joy, honoring your neighbor and dancing for God [cf.

Thomas refers several times to Lk 10.38-42, on Martha and Mary (II— II 180,8,
182,1-3).

19. Thomas mentioned three figurae, prefigurations (1.1-1. 3), which may be
an allusion to the Trinity, then two arguments based on sayings of Christ ( 1 .4-
1.5), which may refer to his divinity and humanity, and now he adds seven rea-
sons connected with life on earth (1.6-1.12), which may be a hint at the full-
ness of life on earth (seven days, virtues, etc.). Together this makes twelve, which
seems to be by reason of the twelve lights, stars, in Mary’s crown in Rv 12.1.

20. An implicit reference to Ave Maris Stella (also explicitly mentioned later
on, in 1.8) and to Ps 130.6.

21. She was conceived like any human being, but God removed every sin
from her in order to make her a dwelling place for himself; cf. ST III 27,1-5.


248


THOMAS AQUINAS


Est 8.16]. About the joy of that rising, Solomon says in Prv 13.9:
“The light of the just ones,” that is, the Blessed Virgin, “rejoices;
the lamp of the wicked goes out.”

(1.7) Second, light is the way [cf. Jn 8.12, 14.6] and the lead-
er of the people on the way [cf. Ex 13.21]. Similarly, the Blessed
Virgin is the one who directs us on this way. It is said in Jn 1 2.35:
“Walk, while you have the light, that the darkness may not seize
you.” Christ says: “Walk,” by making progress in what is good.
He does not say: “Stand unemployed,” as those do about whom
the Gospel according to Matthew 20.6 says: “Why do you stand
here all day unemployed?” He does not say: “Sleep,” but: “Walk,
while you have the light,” — that is: the Blessed Virgin — “so that
the darkness may not seize you.” By “the darkness” the works
of darkness or the angels of darkness, the demons, are meant;
or darkness stands for the torments of hell. Hence it says in Prv
4.18: “The path of the just ones proceeds as a shining light, and
it becomes brighter until full ( perfectus ) day.” “The path of the
just ones”: it is the Blessed Virgin who is the path: narrow [cf.
Mt 7.14] and clean; 22 the Blessed Virgin is clean through the
purity of her virginity 23 and narrow through the meticulousness
of her religiousness, 24 as well as upright through the rectitude 25
of her way of life (via). So the path of the just ones, the Blessed
Virgin, is as a light: as such, shining, and in respect of others
she proceeds from what is good to what is better and increases
until full day, that is, until the joy of eternity.

(1.8) Third, light expels darkness. In a similar way vices are
eradicated by the glorious Virgin’s power. Is g.2 reads: “The peo-
ple that walks in darkness” — that is, the darkness of ignorance
before the coming of Christ and the birth of the Blessed Virgin
Mary — “sees a great light,” namely, the Blessed Virgin. She was a
great light because, just as her Son enlightens the whole world,
so the Blessed Virgin enlightens the whole human race.

22. Munditia, necessary for living a God-centered life: ST II— II 81,8, 180,2,2.

23. A great virtue, the highest form of chastity (ST II— II 151), also for those
who do not live a religious life: ST II— II 152; cf. 186,4.

24. Religio : ST II— II 81-91.

25. Rectitudo : necessary in order to become happy, ST I— II 4,4; cf. 21,1. Be-
ing rectus refers to a disposition: just, righteous, upright of heart.


SERMON 17


249


About this light it says in Gn 1.3: “God said: ‘Let there be
light,’ and light was made.” Let there be light for the creation
of the Blessed Virgin’s soul, and light was made in her sancti-
fication. For we read in Gn 1.4: “God separated the light from
the darkness,” since after [this] she has not committed a sin. 26
In Gn 32.27 we read about this light: “Let me go, the dawn is al-
ready ascending.” At dawn darkness flees and light is brought
in. In a similar way the Blessed Virgin flees from the darkness
of sin and brings in the light of grace. It is even said that dawn
is like the bedewing hour because in its rising the heavens were
made flowing with honey. 27

Furthermore, we say that the dawn is like a mild breeze [Gn
3.8, 1 Kgs 19.12], because then the birds are chirping and thus
show in a way joy and gladness. In a similar way the Fathers in
heaven 28 rejoiced in the rising of the Virgin.

Moreover, we call the dawn Aurora, which is a contraction of
aurea and aura , 29 “golden air,” because of its preciousness. As
Bernard says: “Take away the sun which enlightens the whole
world; where is the day? Take away Mary, the Maris Stella, the
star of this great and wide sea which is the world; and what
would remain except fog and thickest darkness? Then what?
But if she is present, darkness flees. And if she is present, light
begins to shine.”

(1.9) Fourth, the light of its rays is wide and expansive. In a
similar way the Blessed Virgin lets the rays of her grace shine
on all and gives all a share in it. Hence we read in Sir 24.19-20:
“Come over to me, all you who desire me, and you will be made
full by the things which I bring forth: for my spirit is sweet, more
than honey,” et cetera. “Come over,” namely, from the emptiness
of the world, “to me,” that is: who is full of grace. 30 Or: “Come

26. And in this respect Mary was unique; cf. ST III 27,6, 1 .

27. A responsory from the First Nocturn of Christmas.

28. The Patriarchs of the Old Testament who believed, the first of whom was
Abraham; cf. ST I— II 102,5,1.

29. It is more likely that the Latin word Aurora is derived from the Greek
ctuooc; [ausos] , Ionic r\Fcoq [aswoes] : “daybreak”; “the goddess of the red morn-
ing sky”; “the East.”

30. Cf. Ave Maria, gratia plena: “Hail Mary, full of grace.”


250


THOMAS AQUINAS


over” from the error of the world “to me,” because I have vir-
tue. Or: “Come over” from the pleasures “to me,” because I love
( amo ) chastity. 31 And “you will be made full by the things which
I bring forth,” namely, by the spiritual gifts of graces: you will
not receive too little, but evidently much, for it says: “My spirit is
sweet, more than honey,” because the Blessed Virgin is kind and
merciful to all. Thus Bernard says: “The Blessed Virgin opens
her bosom of mercy to all, and all people receive from her abun-
dance: the sick receive care; the sad, consolation; the sinner, par-
don; the just, grace. 32 Even more, God’s Son receives the sub-
stance of the flesh, so that there would be no one who would
hide away from her warmth.”

(1.10) Fifth, light is the gracious mother of colors. 33 In the
same way the Blessed Virgin is the mother of virtues. Just as
colors make the body beautiful, so virtues the soul, because the
mother of virtues is the Blessed Virgin. We read in Sir 24.18:
“I am the mother of beautiful love ( dilectio ),” of God, that is.
Love ( dilectio ) is a bond of two: it connects us with God and with
fear, through which we flee from sin. 34 Solomon says: “The just
one fears and turns away from evil” [Prv 14.16]. And elsewhere
it says, in Sir 1.21: “The fear of the Lord drives out sin. And
[she is the mother of] acknowledgment,” of holy faith, 35 that is,
“as well as of holy hope,” 36 that is, of hope of future happiness.
Hence Bernard says: “If we have any virtue, if we have any salva-
tion and grace, we know that we are completely satiated by her
who overflows with delights. For here is that enclosed garden
through which the Auster, the divine wind, 37 blows, and the
odors of it flow into the spiritual gifts of the graces” [cf. Song
4.12-16].

31. See note 23. 32. See note 17.

33. Sunlight that breaks apart shows that it contains all colors; at night we do
not see colors, not even in the moonlight.

34. Cf. ST II— II 7,1, 19, 22,2. Thomas distinguishes between fear as a virtue
(fear of God) and as a vice (fear of worldly things, of losing your life: ST II— II
1 25).

35. Cf. ST II-II 7.

36. Cf. ST I— II 72,7,2; II-II 35,4,2.

37. In the Roman mythology it was the Southern wind (Scirocco). It could
bring dark clouds and fog as well as scourging heat.


SERMON 17


251


(1.11) Sixth, light is the most shining of the creatures. In a
similar way the Blessed Virgin Mary is. Hence we read in the
Book of Wisdom 7.29: “She is more shining than the sun” —
meaning: than a just man who shines in the Church Mili-
tant 38 — and “above every constellation of stars” — that is: the
saints in the Church Triumphant — “compared to light,” com-
pared to an angelic creature, that is, “she is found greater” in
dignity and beauty [Wis 7.29].

(1.12) Seventh and last, light is a delight and a consolation
to the eyes. In a similar way the Blessed Virgin is a consolation
to humankind. 39 Hence it says in the Book of Wisdom 7.10: “(I
loved [diligo] her) more than health,” through which infirmity
flees, “and more than the splendor of the body,” through which
deformation is purified; “and I have chosen and resolved to
have her rather than the light” of a good life.

Evil ones, like the demons, hate this light, whereas it is de-
lightful for good ones. Hence St. Augustine says that bread
is bitter to the taste of someone who is ill, whereas it is sweet
for someone who is healthy; and sick eyes hate light, whereas
pure eyes love ( amo ) it. This light is amiable ( amabilis ) for the
intellect that is made healthy by faith, and for our affections
that are made healthy by love ( caritas ). And it is no wonder that
the Blessed Virgin is amiable, because about her it says in Est
2.t5 (Vg): “For she was very finely formed and of an incredible
beauty, and the eyes of all saw her as gracious and amiable.”
Prv 11.16 says of her: “A gracious woman will find glory,” that is,
eternal glory,

to which we are led by the One who with the Father and the
Holy Spirit lives, et cetera.


38. Here Mary appears as Lady Wisdom (see also note 17). The Church Mil-
itant is the Church on earth, which is involved in a spiritual warfare against evil
spirits and thoughts; she is fighting against the aberrations of heretics; she is try-
ing to win non-Christians for Christ (see also the Collatio in sero of the Sermons
13 Homo quidam fecit and 14 Attendite afalsis ). Cf. also Sermon 21 (part 3 section
2.1), where St. Martin is presented as the perfect soldier of Christ for the spir-
itual warfare. Cf. ST II— II 188,3 an d 1 88,4,5.

39. See note 17.


252


THOMAS AQUINAS


part 3: Collatio in sero

“A light has gone up for the just, and joy for the upright of
heart” [Ps 97.11]. Today it was said in what way the Blessed Vir-
gin in her rising is a brilliant light. It remains to see in what way
she is joy for [righteous or] upright people, since it is written in
this verse: “and joy for the upright of heart.”

Joy is promised in sacred Scripture not to just any kind of up-
right people, but to the upright of heart, that is, the perfectly
upright. 40 So, we will expound how we understand Jb 1.1, where
it says of Job: “That man was single-hearted and upright who
feared God and avoided evil”; “single-hearted” in intention, 41
“upright” in what he did. “He feared God and avoided evil,”
that is, sin. Thus Solomon says in Prv 14.16: “A wise man fears
and turns away from evil.” And elsewhere, in Prv 15.28, we read:
“Through fear every man turns away from evil.” To such a right-
eous man joy is promised [cf. Ps 97.11].

We must look at the fact that there are two sides to a man:
(1) the interior and (2) the exterior. And according to this it is
necessary that a perfectly upright man be upright inside and on
the outside. 42

(1) The interior man consists of the soul. And the soul has
two parts: the intellect and the affection. 43 And in accordance
with this it is required that there be rectitude in the interior
man: (1.1) First, in respect of the intellect, because rectitude is
the knowledge of the truth. (1.2) Second, it is necessary that
there be rectitude in respect of the affection, which is the de-
light in true goodness. 44 This ought to be the case, since the

40. Because our heart is where our interior movements (like love) begin: ST
I 20,1,1; cf. I— II 45,3. See also note 25.

41. In other words: not being two-faced, as Thomas formulates it in view of
Mt 6.22, at the end of section 2.3.

42. Cf. ST I-II 21,1.

43. Cf. ST I 14 intr., 77,1,4, 77,4 and 8, 78 intr.

44. In ST I 16,4 Thomas considers how goodness and truth are related.


SERMON 17


253


knowledge of love ( caritas) keeps the intellect upright, and love
(amor) for true goodness keeps the affection upright. 45

(1.1) First, I say that knowing the highest truth keeps the in-
tellect upright. 46 Thence we read in Ps 73.1: “How good,” that
is, very good ( valde bonus), “is Israel’s God for these who are
upright of heart.” He is good, meaning that he is pouring out
his goods, 47 for those who are upright of heart: those who have
knowledge of the highest truth through faith, 48 because faith is
a special light for getting to know the Lord and the things that
concern the Lord. 49 Ps 125.4 reads: “Bless, O Lord, the good
ones” as for their affection, “and the upright of heart” as for
their intellect. It is obvious, now, that for man to be perfectly
righteous, the interior light must be aimed in the right direc-
tion; in other words, the rectitude of the intellectual part of the
soul is required. 50

(1.2) Second, the rectitude of the interior man is required in
respect of his affection. Concerning this rectitude Bernard says
that the rectitude of a rational creature consists in conforming
his will to the divine will. Well, this conformity consists in love
(caritas), which transforms the one who loves (amo) into some-
one beloved (amatus), not in his substance, but by making the
will congruent with God’s will. 51


45. For Thomas’s terminology see Sermon 01 Veniet desideratus, note 39: amor
can be a passion and a virtue, but dilectio, caritas, and amicitia can only be virtues;
cf. also ST I— II 26. Passionate love, like all other passions, may — but does not nec-
essarily — blur the distinction between good and evil; cf. ST I— II 59,1-2 and 5.

46. Ignorance leads to sin: ST I— II 76. Cf. ST I— II 93,1-2 (knowing the eter-
nal Law) and 109 (the necessity of grace for knowing, willing, and doing what
is true and good) .

47. Thomas takes over Dionysius’s definition, which says that it is character-
istic of goodness to distribute goods. This applies to the highest extent to God,
who is the highest good and whose essence is goodness itself: ST I 5,4, 6,1-4,
65,2; I— II 1,4,1.

48. Which is a gracious gift from God: ST I— II 63,1.

49. Cf. ST I 12,13. The virtue of faith itself is extensively contemplated in
ST II— II 1-16.

50. ST I— II 4,3.

51. ST I— II 4,4, 104,4,2.


254


THOMAS AQUINAS


(2) Even more, it is also necessary that everything be upright
[or righteous] in the exterior man. 52 For this, three things are
required: (2.1) first, that he be upright in his sight, in what he
looks at; (2.2) second, that he be upright in speech or affection;
(2.3) third, that he be upright in his walking [cf. Prv 4.20-27].

(2.1) First, I say that it is required that the exterior man be
upright in his sight, or in what he looks at, as Solomon says in
Prv 4.25: “Let your eyes see upright things, and let your eyelids
go before your steps.” It says: “Let your eyes see upright things,”
not only internally, but externally the things that are allowed
to be seen. For Gregory says: “It is not allowed to look at what is
not allowed to be desired.” Proverbs says, “Let them see upright
things,” namely, the examples of the saints and the good works
of our neighbors. “And let your eyelids,” et cetera: a man ought
to cast down his eyes toward the inferior and low things. 53

But some have their eyes lifted up in pride and haughtiness
of heart. In Prv 6.16-ig we read about these people: “There are
six things the Lord hates, and a seventh thing his soul detests:
haughty eyes, a lying tongue, (and hands that shed innocent
blood, a heart that plots wicked schemes, feet that run swiftly
to evil, the false witness who utters lies, and the one who sows
discord among brothers).” When a peacock vaunts its tail and
sees its feet, it immediately puts its tail down. 54 In a similar way,
when some good people are carried away by pride, 55 which I
hope will not happen, may they take a look at their feet and be
made humble. It says [in Prv 4.25] “eyes,” plural, not just one
eye; and “let them see up-right things (recta)” not “up-left” ( sin-
istra ), that is, bad things.

52. Cf. Ps 15. Therefore, an upright man acts in accordance with justice: ST
i-ii 55 , 4 , 4 .

53. Cf. Ps 1 19.37, Is 33.15. After all, what we see affects the soul: ST I 97,2;
II— II 154,4; cf. Ps 45.12, Mt 9.36. In ST II— II 53,4 Thomas connects seeing dili-
gently with prudence: negligence, not being attentive to what you take in, may
well lead to a wrong way of thinking and a wrong decision.

54. The peacock is a royal bird (cf. 1 Kgs 10.22) and a symbol of vanity and
pride. Its feet, however, are nothing to be proud of. Looking at your feet is also
looking “down” at yourself, as opposed to “haughty” eyes looking at others (cf.
ST II— II 161,2,1 [citing Ps 131.1] and 161,6).

55. A most serious sin, also because other sins may follow from it: ST I-II
84,2; II— II 162.


SERMON 17


255


(2.2) Second, the exterior man ought to be upright [or right-
eous] in speech in accordance with his affection. 56 For the
Apostle says in 2 Tm 2.15: “Be careful that you present yourself
to God as approved by him, as an irreproachable laborer, right-
ly treating the word of truth.” He speaks primarily to the highly
placed man and accordingly to all others. He says: “Be careful,”
by the pain of contrition, “that you present yourself to God as
an upright, irreproachable laborer,” namely, as someone who is
not worthy of blame but of praise and reward. Such is the one
who has said useful things.

But evil ones are worthy of blame. “Rightly treating the word
of truth,” [the Apostle says]. Some do not treat the word of
truth in the right way, namely, those who preach for their own
glory or in order to show the excellence of their good qualities
or for their own ostentation. 57 But those treat the word of truth
rightly who treat it in such a way that God is glorified and the
neighbor is edified [cf. Mt 5.16, Eph 4.29]. I have heard about
a certain magister in theology who was magister for 25 years, and
during 20 years, as he confessed on his deathbed, he had done
it more because of vainglory than because of giving honor to
God and the edification of the neighbor.

A beautiful sword that is made for ( ordinatus ad) cutting — if
someone used it for digging up mud, he would use it in a bad
way, because he does not use it for the aim for which it is meant
( ordinatus ad). In a similar way the word of truth is meant for
God’s praise and the edification of the neighbor. 58 So someone
who uses it in another way or for another end, uses it in an evil
way. Because of this it is said in Sir 28.25: “You must make a pair
of scales for your words,” that is, consider whether your words
are to the praise of God or not, or whether they are harmful for
the neighbor or not; “and an upright bridle for your mouth.”
A bridle is upright, when it is not more on the one side than
on the other. But when it is loose on one side and very tight on

56. Otherwise, he/she would be a wolf in sheep’s clothing. See Sermon 14
Attendite a falsis: Collatio in sero.

57. Thus it is against the virtue of truth (ST II— II 112) and one of the daugh-
ters of empty glory (ST II— II 132,5).

58. Cf. ST I-II 101,2; II-II 109,2-3.


256


THOMAS AQUINAS


the other, then it is not upright. And sometimes someone keeps
the bridle of his mouth upright when things go well for him,
whereas in adversity he blasphemes and groans 59 — -James says
in his letter about such people: “If someone considers himself
religious, but does not restrain his language,” from evil words,
so that he blasphemes, “his religiousness is empty” [Jas 1.26].

(2.3) Third, every exterior man ought to be upright in his
intellect. Hence the Apostle says in Heb 12.13: “Take right
steps with your feet,” namely, with your mind as well as with
your body, “so that the lame does not err” by unbelief in his
intellect, 60 “but may rather be cured,” namely, by divine grace. 61
Someone became in his affection lame in two parts, as we read
in 1 Kgs 18.21: “How long do you remain lame in two parts [or:
feet]? If he is the Lord, follow him.” Others are lame in one
foot: they have true faith in their intellect, 62 but they hate the
good with their affection. 63 They who have the error of unbelief
in their intellect and hatred of goodness in their affection, are
lame in both feet; or they are the ones who are elated in time
of prosperity, but groan in time of adversity. Because of this the
Apostle says in Heb 12.13: “Take right steps with your feet,” et
cetera, so that you may have humble patience, true faith, and
good love {amor).

So, if we have a righteous man, interior and exterior — to such
people joy is promised [in Ps 97.11]. But you will say: “The one
who has written ‘the upright of heart,’ why did he not in a simi-
lar way write ‘the upright of body’ or ‘the upright of steps’ or ‘of

59. See esp. ST II— II 13,2,3; it can be a forgivable, but also an unforgivable,
sin, i.e., against the Holy Spirit (ST II— II 14). In this section 2 Thomas connects
it with our sight, as he does in the ST: II— II 15.

60. ST II — II 1,5,1: “The godless are ignorant of the things that belong to the
faith, because they neither see nor know these as such, nor do they know that
these are credible.”

61. Cf. Ps 6.3-5, etc -’ ST I— II 68,5,1; II— II 9,1,2; III 4,4.

62. ST II— II 1,5,1: “In this way believers have an acquaintance with the things
that belong to the faith, not by way of proof, but insofar as through the light of
faith it seems that these things are to be believed.”

63. Thomas does not mean here “hating your father and mother” as a condi-
tion for following Christ (Lk 14.26; cf. ST II— II 26,7,1), but as in 1 Jn 4.20: one
cannot hate his brother and sister and love God; cf. ST II— II 26,1,1.


SERMON 17


257


sight’?” The reason is that when there is rectitude in the interior
man, there is rectitude in the exterior man as well, because, as
we read in Mt 6.22, “If your eye be single,” that is, without a fold
of being two-faced or erroneous, 64 “your whole body will be en-
lightened,” meaning: the multitude of your works will be good
and upright. Thus, since the exterior man depends on the inte-
rior man, he is only writing “upright of heart” and not also “of
body.” In this way it is clear who the upright [or righteous] are.

♦♦♦

(3) Do you know what these upright people do? 65 They
render three things to the Lord: (3.1) first, they improve their
life; (3.2) second, they love ( diligo ) the Lord; and (3.3) third,
they bless the Lord and they give the Lord thanks in return for
the blessings which they received from God.

(3.1) First, I say, they improve their life. Hence it says in Prv
21. 29: “The godless,” who neither holds the Lord in veneration
nor has compassion toward his neighbor, “unbridles his face,”
meaning, does not furnish the seat of his thought with a bridle,
“stubbornly,” that is, imprudently and without reverence; “but
someone who is upright improves his life” by means of fore-
sight. 66 Such is the one who is righteous through rectitude of
justice to his neighbor and through the rectitude of contempla-
tion towards God. But the godless unbridles his face, so that he
does not accept an order of God, or if he accepts it, he does not
accomplish the work [cf. Mt 21.30].

(3.2) Second, the upright of heart cling to God through love
( dilectio ). Thus we read in Song 1.4: “The upright love (diligo)
you.” Ps 25.21: “The innocent and the upright have clung to
me,” namely, through zeal and the virtue of love ( caritas ) mas-
tered by practice. 67


64. Cf. ST I— II 12,1,1. Simplicitas is derived from sine plica (“without a fold”);
cf. Caesarius Heisterbacensis, Dialogus Miraculorum Dist. VI c. 20.

65. First Thomas has focused on what an upright man is: (1) interior and
(2) exterior. Next he discusses what an upright man does: practical instructions.

66. ST II— II 49,7,3: Thomas considers foresight ( praevidentia ) a part of pru-
dence, the first of the four cardinal virtues (II— II 47-56). Here he strongly con-
nects it with the second cardinal virtue: justice (II— II 57-122).

67. Fervor, zeal, refers to the intensity, whereas habitus, a virtue mastered by


258


THOMAS AQUINAS


(3.3) Third, the upright of heart give the Lord thanks in re-
turn for the blessings received. 68 Hence it says in Neh 8.5 that
when “Ezra absolved the Law, all the upright stood.” “When he
absolved the Law” means that he read it all the way through and
explained it [cf. Neh 8.8]. It is called “Law” since it is binding
for us. “But he also blessed the Lord Most High,” the almighty
Lord of hosts; “and the whole people responded: ‘Amen’” [Neh
8.6]. Then it proceeds: “and all came together into Jerusalem to
celebrate with joy” [Neh 8.12],
to which, et cetera.


practice (rather than “habit”), to the constancy: ST I— II 48,2, respectively, I— II
49 “ 8 9 -

68. This is considered justice unto God, which is called religio : ST II— II 81-
9 1 -


SERMON 18

GERMINET TERRA

Sermon on the Feast of the Birth of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
the Eighth of September 1


Genesis 1.11: Let the earth put forth the green plant that brings forth seed
and the fruit-bearing tree that yields fruit.


part 1 : Prothema

E biIet the earth put forth the green plant that brings
g forth seed and the fruit-bearing tree that yields fruit”

i| [Gn l.i i]. Isaiah says about Christ: “Who will tell of his

generations?” [Is 53.8] The generation of Christ rests in a way
on the generation of Mary — I speak here of Christ’s generation
in time. 2 Hence the human understanding is not enough for
telling the whole story of the generation of Mary. 3 Let us, there-
fore, call upon the grace of the Holy Spirit, by which 4 Mary is

1 . The Sermo is about the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin; it was preached with-
in the octave of this feast. The Collatio in sero is about the Exaltation of the Cross,
during the First Vespers of this feast. So this sermon was delivered on a 13th of
September. It is clear that this sermon was given to university students. Since the
13th of September was usually not a dies predicabilis, a day on which a sermon
was given, it is most probable that it was a Sunday. During Thomas’s years in Par-
is the only year in which the 13th of September was a Sunday was 1271.

2. “In a way” (quodarmnodo) , for not in an absolute way; God did not depend
on her, but he had chosen her to be the mother of Christ. Cf. how Thomas dis-
tinguishes between different meanings of necessity: in ST III 46, 1 in the context
of the Passion in view of God’s almightiness.

3. Although she is a human being born from an earthly father and an earth-
ly mother, her birth is a mystery: ST III 27,1-5.

4. Latin: quam, the antecedent of which is “grace” ( graciam ).


259


260 THOMAS AQUINAS

sanctified, and let us ask the Lord himself that he may give me
something to say.


part 2 : Sermo

“Let the earth,” et cetera. These words reflect the divine dis-
position to provide for each and every thing according to what
befits it. Hence God in his providence gave to man, because he
is earthly, a remedy from the earth. 5 Hence it says in Sir 38.4:
“The Most High has created a medicine from the earth.” Now
a twofold medicine is put forth from the earth: the green plant
and the fruit-bearing tree. The green plant is the Blessed Vir-
gin, whose birth the Church is celebrating these days. For she
is called (1) “plant” because of her humility [cf. the Magnificat:
Lk 1.48], (2) “green” because of her virginity, and (3) “bringing
forth seed” because of her fruitfulness. 6

(1) Regarding the species of plants we can consider three
things: (1.1) a plant is short in height, (1.2) pliant in slender-
ness, and (1.3) health-bringing through strength.

(1.1) First I say that a plant is short in height. If we compare a
plant with a tree, we see that a plant grows upwards a little bit,
whereas a tree grows very high. Now, by the height of the tree
pride is signified [cf. Dn 4.1-24]. Thus the Psalmist says: “I have
seen the godless exalted and lifted up like a cedar of Lebanon”
[Ps 37.35]. “I have seen the godless,” that is, the proud, because


5. The Latin word humanus is translated as “earthly” here; Thomas plays with
the words which are derived from the Latin word humus, soil, earth: homo (hu-
man being, taken from the earth; cf. Gn 2.7), humanus (human, earthly), and
later on in this homily humilis/ humilitas (low/lowliness, humble/humility) , as
opposed to being exalted, elevated, proud.

The word remedium occurs only once in Scripture, in Tb 6.7 (Vg): in the
fish — thus in creation — the remedy against evil is found. The fish is the oldest
Christian symbol of Christ; the letters of the Greek word IX 0 YZ stand for “Jesus
Christ God’s Son Savior.” Thomas, however, does not refer to this explicitly.

6. Thomas presents Mary implicitly as a great example for every vowed reli-
gious: she excelled in obedience (ST II— II 104) and humility (161), in chastity
( 1 5 1 ) /virginity (152), and in a fruitful, virtuous life (ST I— II 55-67); cf. ST II-
II 186,4-5. $ ee also note 8.


SERMON 18


261


“pride is the origin of godlessness”; 7 “exalted” in the prosper-
ity of the world. 8 Against them the Apostle says: “Tell the rich
of this age not to be wise in a lofty way” [1 Tm 6.17]. And “lift-
ed up” in their thoughts, because a proud man elevates himself
above himself in his thoughts. As we read in Jb 20.6: “If he as-
cends to heaven and his pride and his head touch the clouds, in
the end he will be lost like a dunghill.” Thus you see that “the
godless” is “exalted” in the prosperity of the world and “lifted
up” in his thoughts “like the cedars of Lebanon.” Hence it says
in Am 2.9: “The height of cedars is his height.” So a plant does
not grow very high, but is short, in which humility is signified.
The Psalmist says: “He put forth a plant for the servitude of the
people” [Ps 104.14]. By “servitude” humility is signified. 9

It is amazing that a tree is highly elevated from the earth and
yet most firmly fixed in the earth. A plant, however, only clings
a little to the earth, and its roots are just under the surface. In a
similar way a proud man’s heart is pinned to the earth, and he
cannot come loose from the earth, although he makes himself
very big and is elevated high. 10 On the other hand, a [lowly or]
humble man does not have anything on earth; 11 therefore, his
heart is easily removed from the earth. So in this way Mary is
compared with a plant in regard to her moderation.

In the Blessed Virgin there were many things because of
which she is praiseworthy. She was full of grace, according to
the testimony of the angel. 12 She was chosen to be the mother

7. Sir 10.12; cf. ST I— II 84,2, where Sir 10.12-18 forms the guideline of the
discussion. In this sermon the imagery that follows seems to be inspired by Sir
10.15: the roots, the humble.

8. The Holy Family (including Mary, of course) is traditionally regarded as
poor; cf. ST III 40,3, and Sermon 08 Puer Jesus, section 4.3. Thus Mary is also
(see note 6, above) presented as an example of religious poverty: SCG 130-135;
cf. ST II-II 186,3.

9. Latin: servitudo; cf. Lk 1.38: “Behold, I am the handmaid ( ancilla ) of the
Lord,” etc.; cf. ST III 30,1: Mary accepted it voluntarily.

10. Thomas is playing with words here: he contrasts the tree which inheret
and multurn elevatur, respectively: elevetur in altum (is much elevated, elevated
high from the earth) with the plant which adheret and whose roots breviter evel-
luntur (a short distance loose from the earth) .

11. Cf. ST 1-1169,3.

12. Lk 1.28; not as Jesus was (full, by nature), but in the way John the Bap-


262


THOMAS AQUINAS


of God; indeed, she was made the mother of God. And still she
gloried only in her lowliness, saying: “Because he has looked
upon the lowliness of his servant” [Lk 1.48]. The Lord sought a
woman through whom he would save the human race, 13 and op-
posites would be cured by opposites. The human race was lost
by pride, because “the origin of every sin is pride” [Sir 10.15].
So it was not becoming 14 that in a proud mother the humble
Son would live who had to save the human race through humil-
ity. 15 Hence God had no eye but for humility. About St. Mary’s
humility Augustine says in a homily on her Assumption: “O,
true humility of Mary, which gave birth to God for the people,
gave life to mortals, renewed the heavens, purified the world,
opened Paradise for humankind, and liberated the souls of the
people.” So in the littleness of a humble plant the humility of
Mary is commended.

(1.2) Second, a plant is not hard, but pliant. Pliant is what
gives in at a touch; a heart is called pliant when it easily gives in.
But we must observe that there is a certain virtuous and natu-
ral pliability of the heart as well as a vicious and unnatural one.
The natural order requires that a lower thing gives in to an ac-
tion of a higher thing. 16 The will or the heart of a human be-
ing is set between two; it has something above itself and some-
thing underneath. If it easily gives in to what is below, like the
concupiscence of the flesh or the cupidity of the world, it is an
unnatural pliability. 17 About this we read in Prv 2.16: “in order
to save you from an” evil and “foreign woman, who makes her
words pliant.” Jeremiah warns us: “Go out of her [that is, Ba-
bylon’s] midst, so that your heart may not become pliant” [Jer
51.45-46]. This was not the pliability of this plant. Likewise, the

tist (Lk 1.15) and St. Stephen (Acts 6.8) were (full, i.e., filled by grace): ST III
7,10,1.

13. Thus Mary is an instrument of salvation, not the Savior, that is, not the
one who uses the instrument; cf. ST III 48,5.

14. Decens indicates a certain beauty (the verb deceo is, for instance, also used
for clothes that look good on someone), harmony, and order — instead of hard
evidence. God in his wisdom orders the whole of creation and has planned
(from eternity) our salvation history.

15. Phil 2.8; cf. ST III 19,3-4.

17. Cf. ST I 63,4,2 and I— II 71,2.


16. Cf. ST I 2,3, the first way.


SERMON 18


263


will of a human being has God above itself. Hence it ought to
bow for a divine movement, because “a hard heart will endure
much on the Last Day” [Sir 3.27]. Concerning this pliabilityjob
says: “God has made my heart pliant” [Jb 23. 16]. 18

A young man is compared to a plant by the Psalmist: “Let
him come early in the morning,” that is, in his youth, “like a
plant” [Ps go.6]. Someone is easily led in his youth. The Blessed
Virgin had this tenderness through obedience, for immediately
at the word of the angel she yielded ( obedio ) and believed that
she had conceived by the Holy Spirit, and she subjected herself
immediately: “Behold the servant of the Lord; may it happen to
me according to your word” [Lk 1.38]. Thus it is with the saints,
that they cannot but teach as they live; and because the Blessed
Virgin was most obedient, thus she taught obedience. 19 Among
other things that are said of her in the Gospel, we read that she
taught in particular the precept of obedience, saying: “What-
ever he may say to you, do it” [Jn 2.5]. She says: “Do whatever
he may say,” not: “whatever he may order,” because it belongs to
immediate obedience that it yields readily to the mere word of
someone or something higher. Hence the Apostle says in Ti 3.1:
“to obey what is said.” 20

Obedience is a special virtue. 21 Thus Gregory speaks of it in
his book On Morals: “It is the only virtue that plants the other
virtues in the mind and protects the ones that have been plant-
ed.” 22 Some whisper and say that it is better to be obedient with
a spontaneous will than on the basis of a vow. This is not true. 23
Among other exterior goods there is no good as great as offer-


18. Since Job is a just man (Jb 1.1, 42.7-8), Thomas interprets it as virtuous
pliability.

19. See note 6. Thomas, however, presents Mary as so perfect that she be-
comes almost super-human and thus difficult to identify with and apparently
impossible to follow. On the other hand, religious and people in holy orders
were said or supposed to live a perfect life (status perfections) , even more perfect
than secular priests and archdeacons (ST II— II 184,8).

20. Thus prompt or immediate obedience is primarily, but not only, in re-
spect of God: ST II— II 104,1 and 2,2.

21. ST II-II 104,2.

22. ST II-II 186,8.

23. Thomas is defending the vowed religious life in ST II-II 186,6-7.


264


THOMAS AQUINAS


ing sacrifice, 24 and obedience is even better than sacrificial ani-
mals [cf. t Sm 15.22, Is 1.11-20]. Hence Gregory says: “Obedi-
ence is placed above the law of sacrificial animals, because in
them something else’s flesh is slaughtered; in obedience, how-
ever, one’s own will is slaughtered.” The Blessed Virgin has set
this teaching of obedience before us in her deed and word. 25

“By the disobedience of one man” we are all sinners [Rom
5.9]. 26 So it was becoming that we would be saved by obedi-
ence and that, just as the obedience of the Son began in the
mother, 27 so the Blessed Virgin was obedient.

(1.3) Third, a plant is health-bringing through strength.
So it is able to cure weaknesses; only if a plant has medicinal
strength does it make sense what is said in Wis 16.12: “Neither
a plant nor a bandage has cured them (but your word, Lord,
has cured them).” The human race was weak, as the Psalmist
says: “Have mercy on me, Lord, because I am weak; cure me”
[Ps 6.3]. This weakness is acquired by reason of sin, 28 and God
wanted to apply the remedy of a medicine. He did it like a good
doctor. When good doctors want to show [that] their medicine
[works], they first apply it to serious weaknesses, so that they
thus may become famous. The whole human race was feeble,
and as for the woman it seemed that it was completely corrupt-
ed. 29 Hence Solomon says: “I found a woman more bitter than
death” [Eccl 7.26]. And so the Lord, willing to show that his
medicine was good, showed it in a woman first, in order to dis-
tribute it through a woman to others. 30

24. Cf. ST I-II 101,4; n-H 85.

25. In ST III 27,5,3 ’ however, Thomas explains why the Blessed Virgin Mary
does/did not teach.

26. Cf. ST II— II 163.

27. Cf. ST III 34.

28. Sin causes weakness, ignorance, malice, and concupiscence (ST I-II
85,3), and these may cause someone to sin. As for weakness: ST I-II 77,3.

29. E.g., ST II— II 149,4, 163,4, 177,2; cf. also I-II 105,3,1 (concluding re-
mark); II— II 124,4,2, 165,2,1.

30. By depicting the woman in such a negative way, Thomas underlines
the splendor of Mary and the goodness of God. This negative view of women,
brought on by Aristotle and an interpretation of Genesis 3 employed by Church
Fathers, was common in those days (e.g., in Thomas’s commentary on Aristo-
de’s VII Ethic., lectio 5, n.8, he mentions the incontinentia of women as if it is


SERMON 18


265


Hence we read in Sir 43.22: “The medicine of all people is
in the swiftness of a cloud.” And Solomon says in his prayer:
“The Lord has said that he abides in a cloud” [1 Kgs 8.12]. In
this cloud, that is, in the Virgin, is the salvation of the human
race, because it is cured through this cloud. 31 Thus it says in Sir
24.25 (Vg): “In me is every grace of life and truth, in me is eve-
ry hope of life and strength ( virtus ).” 32 And therefore, since the
medicine of all people is in this cloud, that is, in the Blessed
Virgin, the Apostle says: “Let us approach with confidence the
throne of his grace, in order to obtain mercy in timely help”
[Heb 4.16]. 33

It says: “in the swiftness of a cloud,” because the strength ( vir-
tus ) of this medicine appeared swiftly. “Swift” is that someone in
his adolescence obtains grace, and the Blessed Virgin obtained
grace in the maternal womb because she was sanctified in the
womb from original guilt, although she was conceived in it. 34
As the Psalmist says: “God will not be shaken up in her midst”
[Ps 46.6], meaning: neither by mortal nor by venial sin. 35 Hence
Augustine says: “When we speak about sins, I do not want to
mention anything at all concerning the mother of the Lord.”
“God will come to her aid early in the morning at daybreak”
[Ps 46.6], that is, in her rising. Hence Jerome wrote in his Psal-

common ground; cf. also Thomas’s use of Prv 31.10-31 on the strong woman
in Sermon 1 6 Inueni Dauid, in section 1.1), yet Thomas accentuates it strongly
in this sermon (although he does not explain it in sexual terms, as, e.g., Chrys-
ostom and Augustine do). See also in section 1.2 of this sermon where he in-
serts “evil” in the quotation of Prv 2.16. It should be noted, however, that at the
same time Thomas underlines that Mary was a woman and that our salvation
came through a woman: he stresses that this woman as a woman, namely, as a
mother and a virgin, has a pivotal place in the salvation history. See also how
Gal 3.28 (“in Christ there is no male or female”) functions in, e.g., ST I 93,6,2,
and III 36,3, 72,10,3.

31. See note 13.

32. Virtus can also be translated as “virtue.”

33. The reason given in Heb 4.14-15 why we ought to approach with confi-
dence is different; cf. also ST III 59,2.

34. ST III 27,1-3.

35. See for this distinction ST I— II 72-73. God and his plan of salvation are
not hindered by any sin; cf. ST I 22,1,2 (eternal providence) and 22,3-4; also
ST I 9,1 (God as the unmoveable Mover) and III 1,3 (would God have become
incarnate if we had not sinned?).


266


THOMAS AQUINAS


ter: “God will help her in her rising in the early hours.” There-
fore, we celebrate her birth above the other saints, except the
birth of Christ and of John the Baptist. 36

Thus the Blessed Virgin was a plant because of her humility.

♦t*

(2) Likewise, she was a green plant because of her virginity.
It says in Jer 12.4: “Every plant of the land will wither,” but the
Blessed Virgin was a green plant through her virginity. Hence
it says in Lk 1.26-27: “The angel Gabriel was sent to the Virgin
Mary.” See that in the greenness we observe (1) moisture, (2)
beauty, and (3) usefulness or necessity.

(2.1) First, I say, in the greenness we see moisture as a cause,
since moisture is the cause of greenness. Thus we read in Sir
40.16: “Greenness on all waterfronts.” And you should know
that, just as every plant withers because of fire or the sun, so
the concupiscence of the flesh makes the greenness of virgin-
ity wither. It says injb 31.12: “It is a devouring fire aimed at con-
summation.” 37

But by what is the greenness of virginity nurtured? Surely
by heavenly love ( amor ), s 8 for virginity is something heavenly.
Hence Jerome says: “Living in the flesh beyond the flesh is not
a worldly or human way of life, but heavenly.” And the Apos-
tle has said in his admonition about virginity: “Everyone has re-
ceived a proper gift from God: someone this gift, someone else
another” [1 Cor 7.7]. Virginity is the result of God’s grace with
the freedom of the free decision. 39 So a young man said: “I can-

36. Christmas, the feast of Christ’s birth, is of course a greater feast. John
the Baptist’s birth (celebrated on the 24th of June) is as great a feast as Mary’s.
These are the only three people whose birthdays are celebrated by the Church.
(Of other saints only the day of their dying, which is the day of birth to new life
in Christ, is celebrated or commemorated.)

37. In ST Thomas also speaks of another fire: the fire of love (ST II— II
24,10), which excites us to devotion (ST II— II 82,2,2); excess leads to corrup-
tion: ST I— II 28,5.

38. All virtues in us come with love; cf. ST I— II 65,3. For Thomas’s terminol-
ogy of “love,” see Sermon 01 Veniet desideratus, note 39.

39. The consequence is that candidates for religious life must not be forced,
but helped in the process of discernment: is God calling me? Is he giving me this
grace? Cf. ST II— II 189,1,3 and 189,5, where Thomas speaks of religious life in


SERMON 18


267


not live celibately unless God has given it to me” [Wis 8. 21]. 40

The moisture of grace was in the Blessed Virgin, wasn’t it? It
surely was. Thus the angel said to her: “Fear not, Mary; you have
found grace with God” [Lk 1.30]. 41 She had grace in a most
abounding way. Thus the angel said to her: “Hail, full of grace”
[Lk 1.28]. 42 And because she had the fullness of the moisture
of grace, it was not enough for her to live as a virgin only in the
usual way, namely, by marital continence, but beyond the usual
custom it was her strongest resolution to live as a virgin forever.
Thus she said: “How will this come to pass, since I do not know
a man?” [Lk 1.34] This means: I am resolute not to know. 43

(2.2) Second, we see in the greenness a beauty that delights.
It says in Sir 40.22: “The eye will long for grace and a beauti-
ful appearance, but above these for green farmland.” Purity of
the flesh and virginity are a delight for the eyes of God and the
saints. And why? Order, or the beauty of the order, is proper-
ly delightful. 44 Augustine says: “If someone saw windows that
have been placed in a house arbitrarily, he would not delight in
them.” The natural order of humankind is that the flesh is sub-
ject to the spirit. 40 It is becoming when we live according to this
order. But when this order is confused, someone is disgraceful.
And it is, therefore, that carnal sins, although some are not as
severe as others, 46 make someone even more shameful, because
they are disgraceful and disturb the order in humankind; they
make higher what is lower in humankind, and the other way
round. But in the Blessed Virgin nothing was disordered, nei-

terms of process and of nurturing a vocation. See also Sermon 13 Homo quidam
fecit, in the Collatio in sero.

40. Cf. ST I-II 63,2-4.

41. Theological aspects of the Annunciation in ST III 30.

42. See note 12.

43. Thomas concludes that Mary vowed virginity: ST III 29,4; Mary remains
the great example for Thomas’s religious audience. Texts like 1 Sm 2.5 and Is
54.1 on a childless woman (in Isaiah without a man) who will give birth several
times are not discussed in this context by Thomas, in accordance with the tra-
dition.

44. See note 14.

45. Cf. Rom 8.1-17. The soul is, after all, the forma of the body and thus
more excellent: ST I 76,1.

46. Thomas distinguishes between them in ST II— II 154, on luxuria.


268


THOMAS AQUINAS


ther in action nor in affection, nor did she have the first move-
ments leading to sin. Hence it says in Song 4.7 : “You are total-
ly beautiful, my friend, and no stain is in you.” And because
of this it is said to her: “The king will desire ( concupisco ) your
(beautiful) appearance” [Ps 45.12].

(2.3) Likewise, we find in greenness what is useful. As long
as a plant is green, there is hope that it will produce fruit. But
when it begins to shrivel, there is no hope of her fruit any more.
Is 15.6 says: “The plant has shriveled, the grass is dead, all
greenness has passed away.” On the contrary, when a plant is
green, there is hope that it will produce fruit. Hence it says in
Isaiah: “And its leaves will be green, and it will not cease to pro-
duce fruit” [Jer 17.8]. In a similar way someone who is green
through virginity produces the fruit of love ( caritas ), but when
he shrivels through concupiscence, his works are fruitless in
view of eternal life. 47 The Apostle says: “Someone who sows in
the flesh will reap corruption from the flesh” [Gal 6.8]. A dry
plant is not useful for anything but to be thrown into the fire
[cf. Jn 15.6]. In a similar way the ones who become dry through
the fire of concupiscence are useful for nothing but to be
thrown into the fire of hell.

But the Blessed Virgin was excellent in virginity; indeed, she
is the queen of the virgins. And because she had the green-
ness of virginity in an excellent way, she produced an amazing
fruit. Other virgins produce, since they are virgins, a spiritu-
al fruit. The Apostle says of this fruit: “The fruits of the Spirit
are love (caritas), joy, and peace” [Gal 5.22]. But since the Bless-
ed Virgin had an abundance of greenness, she even produced
the fruit of the womb. It is said to her: “Blessed are you among
women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb” [Lk 1.42]. And
Is 7.14 says about that: “Behold, the virgin will conceive and
bear a son (and you will call his name Emanuel).” Hugo [of St.
Victor] says: “Since the love ( caritas ) of the Holy Spirit burned
in her heart in a marvelous way, he has done marvelous things
in her flesh.” Other virgins have produced spiritual fruit, but

47. For the theological virtues of faith, hope, and love order us towards the
supernatural happiness; cf. ST I— II 62,3.


SERMON 18


269


she even produced the fruit of her womb. Thus she has been a
green plant.

(3) It says: “Let it put forth the plant that produces seed.”
Seed of what kind? I say (3.1) holy seed, (3.2) virtuous seed,
and (3.3) necessary seed.

(3.1) First, I say, the Blessed Virgin produced a holy seed, [in
conformity with] Is 6.13: “It will be a holy seed that is in her.”
And why holy? Because its origin will be holy: 48 first, the holiness
of God, because he himself is the Holy One of the saints. “You
[plural] will be holy,” he says, “because I am holy” [1 Pt 1.16].
From such a Holy One the seed comes, and thus the seed is holy
[cf. Mt 7.17]. “The seed is the Word of God” [Lk 8.11], and Christ
is God’s Word [cf. Jn 1.1-18]. It is characteristic of seed that it
produces what is similar to that from which it comes forth. Thus
the seed of God’s Word brings forth what is similar to itself, be-
cause it produces gods. Hence we read in Jn 1.12: “He has given
them the power to become sons and daughters of God.” Abra-
ham is praised for his holiness. Just as Christ is the seed of God
according to the Spirit [cf. Lk 8.11], so he is the seed of Abra-
ham according to the flesh [Rom g.5; cf. Mt 1.1-17], an( l “to Ab-
raham promises were made and to his seed” [Lk 1.55, 73]. “In
your seed,” the Lord said, “all peoples will be blessed” [Gn 12.3].
And therefore that seed is blessed. Likewise, children of God are
brought about by the seed of God’s Word, just as the children of
Abraham by the seed of Abraham: blessed is the seed that brings
us the Blessed One [cf. Jn 8.31-59, 10.31-39].

(3.2) Furthermore, that seed is virtuous. Hence it is com-
pared in the Gospel with a mustard seed, which is the tini-
est seed and produces a great tree, so that the birds of heaven
make their nests in their branches [Mt 13.32]. The little seed is
Christ, who was little on the Cross and grew so big that he filled
heaven and earth: “He ascended above all the heavens, in order
to make all things full” [Eph 4.10].


48. Cf. ST I 65,1: He who is good brings forth what is good, as in Mt 7.16-
18 (‘You will know them by their fruits”). See also the beginning of Eucharistic
Prayer II: “Father, you are holy indeed, the fountain of all holiness.”


270


THOMAS AQUINAS


(3.3) Furthermore, that seed is necessary. Hence Is t.g says:
“Unless the Lord had left seed for us, we had become like
Sodom.” 49 And St. Peter says: “There is no salvation in anything
else, and no other name is given to the people in which we are
to be saved” [Acts 4.12]. Amazing is this plant, and amazing its
offspring. This earth is the human nature destitute of the mois-
ture of grace, as Jer 4.23 puts it: “I have looked at the earth,
and behold: it was empty and for nothing.” Then how could it
bring forth a plant? Surely, in no way. 50

Again, this earth was arid because of the concupiscence of
sin. Hence it says in Sir 43.3: “At noon it scorches the earth.”

In addition, this earth was the lowest, because God created
heaven above and the earth underneath [Prv 25.3]. So how has
he put it forth? In Gn 1.11 it says: “God said: ‘Let the earth put
forth the green plant.’” “He said” the word, meaning: He put
forth the word that produced a fruit. Thus we read in Prv 9.1:
“Wisdom has built a house for herself,” 51 namely, in the Blessed
Virgin, and he caused her to produce a plant for himself. The
Psalmist says: “A man is born in her, (the Most High himself has
established her)” [Ps 87.5]. This very man has filled this earth,
because it was empty, as the Psalmist says: “You have visited the
earth and you have saturated it; you have multiplied its riches”
[Ps 65.10]/

Also, because it was arid, the Holy Spirit has made it moist,
according to the Psalmist: “The one who puts forth will rejoice
in his raindrops” [Ps 65.11].

Besides, because the earth was lowest, he gave himself to it
and entered it, so as to make it the heavenly seed. Is 55.10 says:
“Just as a heavy rain comes down from heaven and saturates the
earth and causes it to bring forth, so my word will be.”


49. 1 .e., extinct; cf. Is 13.19-20; Jer 49.18, 50.40; Rv 1 1.8.

50. In other words: we cannot save ourselves; we need God our Savior, who
saves us through the seed of his Word: ST I— II 91,5,2; II— II 2,7. This realization
makes salvation history even more mirabilis (marvelous, amazing) for us.

5 1 . Cf. ST III 32,1: the conception is an act of the triune God, but it is attrib-
uted to the Holy Spirit.


SERMON 18


271


Therefore, if someone is empty through sin, let him ask for
this plant, and he will be filled with good things. The Psalmist
says: “We will be filled with the good things of your house” [Ps
65.5]. Likewise, if someone is arid, let him take refuge with that
Word, and he will be moistened. The Psalmist says: “My heart
has hoped in him and I received help” [Ps 28.7]. Likewise, if
someone is downhearted, let him take refuge with that Word,
and he will be led back to the heavenly light. The Psalmist says:
“Send out your light and your truth; they have led me back onto
your holy mountain and into your tents” [Ps 43.3] -
May he deem us worthy to stand before, et cetera.


part 3: Collatio in sero

“Let the earth bring forth the green plant,” et cetera. The
Most High has raised from the earth two remedies for us: the
green plant and the fruit-bearing tree. We have spoken about
the plant, which is the Blessed Virgin. Now it remains to speak
about the fruit-bearing tree, the tree of the Cross of our Lord,
which is to be venerated. We have begun the solemn days of
his Cross. 52 It is very suitable to connect these two remedies, be-
cause the green plant has brought forth our salvation, whereas
the fruit-bearing tree has sustained the plant and has exalted
it. For the Son of God “became obedient (to death, even death
on a cross)” [Phil 2.8], and it follows: “Because of this he has ex-
alted him” [Phil 2.9]. 53 Hence it says in the Gospel that “Jesus’
mother stood at the foot of the Cross” [Jn tg.25]. 54 Let us look
at this tree.

It seems that Moses 55 describes three things concerning that
tree: (1) its appearance, (2) its adornment, and (3) its fruit.
If you seek its appearance, it is wood; its adornment: it bears
many fruits ( pomiferum ); what it produces: it produces fruit (/«-
ciens fructum).

52. See note 1. 53. ST III 49,6.

54. She (and other believers with her) wants to abide with him because he
sustains her (us) during her (our) life on earth (cf. ST III 46,3) and will exalt
her (us) in the end (cf. ST III 57,6).

55. As the reputed writer of Genesis.


272


THOMAS AQUINAS


(1) First, I say, if you seek the appearance of this wood, I say
it is wood. That wood really befits our remedy, for three rea-
sons: (1.1) it befits the wound, (1.2) it befits the healing of it,
and (1.3) it befits the healer.

(1.1) First, the wood of the Cross befits our remedy, because
it befits the wound. The human race is wounded by wood, be-
cause the first man ate from the forbidden wood and therefore
the divine Wisdom found the medicine from wood. 56 The hu-
man race is wounded because of disobedience, since the first
man stole a fruit from the forbidden wood. The new man has
placed himself, as a salutary fruit so to speak (quasi), back onto
the wood. The Psalmist says: “Did I pay what I have not stolen?”
[Ps 69.5] 57 Fie has given himself back to the wood, so that he
would recompense the injury and bring the remedy. 58 Flence
we read in Wis 14.7: “Blessed the wood by which justice comes
about.”

See, we are going to compare wood with wood. Scripture says
three things about the forbidden wood. “The woman, who saw
that the wood was (1.1.1) good to eat from and (1.1.2) beautiful
to the eyes and (1.1.3) delightful to look at, has taken from” the
wood “and eaten it” [Gn 3.6].

(1.1.1) First, I say, that wood is good to eat from, and, because
of this, it is suitable for being nourished. Contrary to this, the
wood of the Cross teaches the mortification of the flesh. Flence
it is said: “Your princes” have destroyed “it.” 59

56. Cf. Rom 5.18-19, 1 Cor 15.21-22. See also note 14. God is so wise that
he takes the remedy from the thing that harmed us; things created can be
abused but are not therefore intrinsically evil (cf. ST I 2,3,1, and 49,1).

57. The basis of this line of thought is Thomas’s understanding of justice as
“giving back what is due.” The pride of the first human being was that he was
not obedient to God but wanted to be like God (ST II— II 163,2). Only someone
who was free of this sin, i.e., someone who had not “stolen” what properly be-
longs to God, could take away the guilt and the punishment by being more than
obedient, by voluntarily “paying back” more than what was due, i.e., by abun-
dance (ST III 46,4, 48,2).

58. It was salutary because it was an act of obedience that counteracted the
disobedience of the first homo : Rom 5.19; cf. ST III 47,2.

59. It is not really clear from where this quotation has been drawn: probably
fromjer 44.21, for here the words principes vestri (“your princes”) are connected
with sacrificing something, i.e., giving something up for God. The contexts of


SERMON 18


273


Moreover, the former is the wood of death. The Apostle says:
“If you live according to the flesh, you will die” [Rom 8.13]. But
the wood of the Cross, on the contrary, has made us alive by
mortifying the flesh. The Apostle says: “Christ has died once
for our sins, the Just for the unjust, so as to offer us to God;
made dead in the flesh, yet made alive in the Spirit” [1 Pt 3.18].
Likewise, the Apostle says: “If you made the flesh die in accord-
ance with the Spirit, you will live” [Rom 8. 13]. 60

(1.1.2) Second, there was worldly beauty in the forbidden
wood. Thus it says in Gn 3.6: “She saw the wood, that it was beau-
tiful to the eyes.” But Is 40.6 [calls to our mind that]: “Every glo-
ry of it is like the flower of the held.” A flower has the beauty and
the glory of the world, but it is cursed, because through its beau-
ty people are drawn to damnation. Jb 5.3 reads: “I have seen a
foolish man with a strong root, and I have cursed his beauty.”
On the contrary, the wood of the Cross has shame. Hence it was
written for that time in Dt 21.23: “Cursed by God is the one who
hangs on the wood.”

See that it says that it was beautiful to the eyes of Adam and
Eve, and that it was praised for this. First, for the knowledge, of
which the serpent said to them: “You will be like gods, knowing
good and evil” [Gn 3.5]. Hence it was called “the tree ( lignum )
of the knowledge of good and evil” [Gn 2.17]. There are some
goods which man does not use in an evil way, for instance, vir-
tues. But having the skill of dealing with material things is not
the same as having virtues. 61 Some have an abundance of goods
of the world and often they use them in an evil way. That wood
( lignum) had a visible beauty, whereas the wood ( lignum) of the
Cross had the disorder of foolishness. Hence the Apostle says:
“We preach the crucified Christ: for Jews yet a scandal, for Gen-

Dt 29. 10 and Acts 3.17 and of Ps 23.7 (Vg; in the version of the Psalterium Roma-
num) make it quite unlikely that Thomas refers to any of these verses here.

60. Thus mortification is nothing like suicide (ST II— II 64,5) or hatred of
the body; it is training yourself to live a life in the Spirit of Jesus Christ for the
sake of your well-being now and in the hereafter. So love of God and yourself,
rather than hatred, is the motive. Fasting is a virtuous form of mortification of
the body: it puts a check on our desires, makes our minds free to contemplate
higher things, and is penance for our sins: ST II— II 147,1.

61. Cf. ST 1-1163,2-4.


274


THOMAS AQUINAS


tiles even foolishness” [1 Cor 1.23]. But the beauty of the first
wood is completely changed into shame. Thus it says in Hos 4.7:
“I will completely change their glory into shame.” The shame
of the Cross, however, is completely changed into glory. Thus it
says in Ezek 17.24: “I, the Lord, have brought low the lofty wood
and I have exalted the low wood.”

See how the wood of the Cross is exalted. 62 Chosroes, king
of the Persians, had taken that wood as a captive so to speak,
from Jerusalem, and it was brought back to Jerusalem by Hera-
clius. And because of the memory of that glory we speak to the
present day of the Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross. The
Cross is always exalted, because “the Lord strengthens the just
ones” [Ps 37.17]. Augustine says in a commendation of the Holy
Cross: “The Cross is not used to punish people any more, and
yet it remains; we find it from those condemned (who make the
sign of the cross when they pray), to the crowns of emperors.”
And Chrysostom says: “The Cross shines in crowns of kings eve-
rywhere, on the armor of soldiers, 63 on sacred altars, and kings
receive a cross when they give up their crowns.” Thus the wood
of the Cross is exalted. The Lord will exalt it even more. Hence
it says in Mt 24.29-30: “Sun and moon will be darkened, and
they will see the sign of the Son of man in the sky,” which is the
wood of the Cross. And Chrysostom says that “the Son of man
would never appear after the sun and the moon are darkened,
if the Cross were not brighter than the rays of the sun.”

(1.1.3) Moreover, that wood had delight. Thus it says in Gn
3.6: “It was delightful to look at.” The delight of the flesh is not
a true delight, since it is more about bitterness than about de-
light. Hence Solomon says: “I considered a laugh foolishness,
and I said to joy: ‘Why do you deceive yourself in vain?’” [Eccl
2.2] On the contrary, the wood of the Cross had the sting of bit-
terness, which is signified in 2 Sm 23.7 where it says: “He will

62. On the vigil of the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross (the 14th of Sep-
tember) Thomas explains the origin of this Feast (cf. note 1).

63. St.John Chrysostom lived from about 349 to 407. Thus he is not refer-
ring to knights of the Cross, who were around in Thomas’s time, but to soldiers
of the Roman Empire who, since Emperor Constantine (after 325), were fight-
ing for a Christian empire.


SERMON 18


275


be armed with a sword and the wood of a lance.” And the Apos-
tle Peter: “Because Christ suffered in the flesh, you too must be
armed with the same mindset” [1 Pt 4.1].

This sting of bitterness turns into sweetness, which is signi-
fied in Ex 15.23-24, where it is said that “the children of Isra-
el arrived at bitter waters: the Lord ordered Moses to throw a
piece of wood in, and the waters became sweet.” If the just suf-
fer adversities, the wood of the Cross makes these sweet [cf. Gal
2.19-20, Col 1.24]. The Cross even makes you glory in adver-
sity, as the Apostle says: “I do not glory unless in the Cross of
our Lord” [Gal 6.14]. And Jas 1.2 reads: “Brothers and sisters,
consider it total joy when you fall into temptations of different
kinds.” And why? Because of the consideration of the Cross. 64
The Apostle says in Heb 12.3: “Reflect on him, who for us took
upon himself such opposition ( contradictio ) from sinners,” when
he was counted among the robbers [cf. Is 53.9, Mt 27.38]. So,
what should we consider evil, if he took contradictions on?

Thus the wood of the Cross befits the wound.

(1.2) Furthermore, it befits the healing. Look in Sacred Scrip-
ture: where there was a danger, the remedy was given through
wood. The first evil of man occurred when Adam was thrown
out of Paradise [Gn 3.23-24]. What was the remedy? The wood
of life [cf. Rv 22.2]. But, because he could not approach the
wood of life [cf. Rv 2.7], he could not have the remedy. Thus the
Lord has said: See “that he does not take from the wood of life”
[Gn 3.22] — but Christ has taken up the wood for us. Hence it
is written: “The wood of life, who would take hold of it?” [Prv
3.18] 65

Another danger was in the destructive flood [Gn 6-8]. The
remedy came by means of the wood of the ark. If you are in a
destructive flood, in the streams of this age, take refuge with
the wood of the Cross. The Psalmist says: “If I walk in the midst
of the shadow of death, (I fear no evil, for you are with me);


64. Cf. ST III 46-50. In ST III 46,3 Thomas expounds how abundant the
fruit of this tree is for us.

65. Cf. ST I 102,5.


276


THOMAS AQUINAS


your rod and staff” — of the Cross that is — “(will console me)”
[Ps 23.4]; by the Cross I am delivered and led to [the Lord’s]
guidance.

Again, the people of Israel was in danger when it was op-
pressed by the Egyptians [Ex 1.8-22]. The remedy came by
means of wood, since Moses struck the Egyptians with a rod [Ex
7-12]; the rod divided the sea [Ex 14.21]. If you are attacked by
hostile spirits, take refuge with the wood of the Cross.

It says in 1 Sm 4.7 that the children of Israel fought against
the Philistines and that the Ark of the Lord was brought into
the camp. And “the Philistines groaned, saying: ‘Woe to us,”’
because the Ark of God came into the camp. The Ark was made
of wood that could not rot [cf. Is 40.20]. The Psalmist recalls:
“Those who live in the borderlands became confused by your
signs” [Ps 65.9].

Those who are overcome, fear the banner of their enemy,
and since the demons are overcome by Christ, 66 they fear his
banner, which is the wood of the Cross. Hence the Church
sings: “Behold the wood of the Cross; flee, enemy parties.” 67

So the wood befits the wound and the healing.

❖

(1.3) Third, it befits the Healer, because Christ is exalted by
the wood of the Cross. Thus it is even written: “The Son of man
must be exalted” [Jn 3.14]. But how is he exalted? Surely as a
warrior. Hence what is said in Nm 24.17 befits him: “A rod will
rise from Israel, and it will bring the kings of Moab to nought.”
The Apostle says: “He has thoroughly plundered the principali-
ties and powers” [Col 2.15]. So the wood of the Cross is like a

66. Cf. ST III 49,2, referring tojn 12.31.

67. Words taken from the so-called St. Antony’s Brief (St. Anthony’s Letter).
A Portuguese woman tormented by evil spirits was determined to drown herself
in a river. As she stopped for a last prayer at a shrine in honor of St. Antony, she
received from him a piece of paper with a text (either during her prayer or af-
ter she had fallen asleep) . As long as she had this text with her, she was cured.
Copies of the text spread during the 13th century and it became very popular.
The complete text, based on Rv 5.5, reads: Ecce crucem Domini. Fugite, partes ad-
versae. Vicit Leo de tribu Iuda, Radix David. Alleluia (“Behold the cross of the Lord.
Flee, enemy parties. The Lion from the tribe of Judah has conquered, the Root
of David. Alleluia.”).


SERMON 18


277


triumphant chariot: it is the thing that elevates Christ. Thus it
is like the sedan chair of Solomon [cf. Song 3.9]; it also is like
the rod that guides the people, as the Psalmist says: “The rod
of guidance, the rod of your Kingdom” [Ps 45.7]- Thus Christ is
exalted like a warrior [cf. 1 Cor 15.54-57].

Moreover, he is exalted as a magister in his seat of instruc-
tion. 68 Concerning this exaltation he says: “When I am exalted
from the earth, I will draw all things to myself” [Jn 12.32]. 69

We have seen now the appearance of the remedy.

♦♦♦

(2) Let us take a look at the adornment of the wood. The
adornment of a tree is that it be loaded with fruits. 70 And of
this wood it is said that it is fruit-bearing. Well, then, which
are his fruits? It says in Song 7.14: “I have served you all fruits,
old and new.” The old fruits are the prefigurations that refer
to the wood. Hence we read in Hos g.10 about these fruits: “1
have seen” all “their fathers as the first fruits.” 71 The new fruits,
which are they? In Dt 33.13-15, in the blessing of Joseph, men-
tion is made of three fruits: (2.1) the fruits of heaven, (2.2) the
fruits of sun and moon, and (2.3) the fruits of eternal hills.

(2.1) Which are the fruits from heaven? The members of
Christ are. The Cross was adorned with the members of Christ, 72
just as a tree is adorned with fruits; not only with the physical
members of Christ’s body, but with those of his mystical body, 73

68. Christ teaches from the Cross, a metaphor derived from Augustine (cf.
the corpus of ST III 46,4) , obviously chosen in view of the academic audience.

69. Since the Cross coincides in this way with the Crucified, the Cross must
be venerated as Christ himself: ST II— II 103,4,3; HI 25,4.

70. Cf. the hymns for Lent Vexilla regis prodeunt and Thomas’s own Pange lin-
gua gloriosi (from the Vespers of the Feast of Corpus Christi).

7 1 . Thus the old fruits are the believers of the Old Covenant: Abraham, Mo-
ses, David, et al.

72. The Rhythmica oratorio is attributed by some to St. Bernard of Clairvaux
(12th century), by others to Arnulf of Louvain (13th century), both Cistercians.
It contains seven meditations of Christ on the Cross, each one focusing on one
member or pair of his members: the feet, knees, hands, side, breast, heart, and
face. The text had already spread during Thomas’s lifetime (cf. the corpus of ST
III 25,4) . It became very popular over the years. It has been set to music several
times, e.g., by Dietrich Buxtehude (ca. 1637-1707): Membra Jesu nostri.

73. 1 Cor 12.12-27; cf. ST III 8,1.


278


THOMAS AQUINAS


of whom it is fitting to say: “With Christ I am crucified” [Gal
2.19]. About these fruits it is said in Song 4.16: “May my beloved
enter his garden, in order to eat the yield of his fruits.”

(2.2) Furthermore, the fruits of sun and moon are examples
of virtue, 74 which Christ has shown on the Cross. 75 You have the
example of love ( caritas ) from Christ on the Cross, because he
loved ( diligo ) us and gave himself over for us [cf. Gal 2.20]. And
in Jn 15.13 we read: “No one has a greater love ( caritas ) than
someone who lays down his life for his friends.” 76

Again, he has shown us an example of humility, because “he
has humbled himself” [Phil 2.8].

He has also given the example of obedience, “because he be-
came obedient” [ibid.] to the Father.

And he has taught us the example of patience, for “when he
was cursed, he did not curse” [1 Pt 2.23].

These are the fruits of the enclosed valleys, of which we read
in the Song of Songs [6.11]: “I have come down into my garden,
in order to see the fruits of the enclosed valleys.”

(2.3) The fruits of the eternal hills, what are they? I say that
they are the writings of the teachers who are imbued with wis-
dom. The Psalmist says: “Yet you (come) from the eternal moun-
tains, shining in an amazing way” [Ps 76.5]. You will find some
teachers who instruct you in the faith; and Christ on the Cross
has taught us 77 faith, saying: “My God, my God, why have you
abandoned me?” [Mt 27.46] 78 He shows that the humanity has
suffered, yet not because of powerlessness of the Divinity. 79

Likewise, you will find teachers who show the way to hope;

74. Cf. Dn 12.3, Mt 13.43; 1 Cor 15.41-42.

75. Cf. ST III 46,3-4. The virtues mentioned in this section are discussed in
ST II— II 23-27 (love), 161 (humility), 104 (obedience), and 136 (patience).

76. In section 2.3 we find how Christ on the Cross has taught us faith and
hope as well: the three theological virtues.

77. In the corpus of ST III 46,4, Thomas cites Augustine, with reference to
Eph 3.18.

78. It is an exclamation of faith, not of despair, according to Thomas: Christ
is calling upon God, believing that God the Almighty can save him; cf. Thomas’s
commentary on Matthew: c.27 n.2.

79. Cf. ST III 46,1 2: Christ did not suffer insofar as he was God; divinity is in-
compatible with undergoing (pati) anything (such as change or suffering) .


SERMON 18


279


and Christ on the Cross showed the way to hope when he said
to the criminal: “Today you will be with me in paradise” [Lk
23.43].

Likewise, you will find teachers who teach patience. Christ
has done this on the Cross as he said: “Father, forgive those, for
they do not know what they do” [Lk 23.34].

Likewise, you will find some teachers who incite to devotion;
and Christ has done this on the Cross as he said: “Father, into
your hands I commend my spirit” [Lk 23.46]. 80

Likewise, you will find some who give instructions on how
to live a human life together; and Christ has done this on the
Cross, because he has shown his mother what ought to be, and
in a similar way the disciple, as he said: ‘“Woman, behold your
son.’ Then he said to the disciple: ‘Behold your mother’” [Jn
19.26-27].

These are the fruits of the eternal hills which are mentioned
in the Song of Songs [4.13]: “The things you are bringing forth
are a paradise-garden of pomegranate trees bearing fruits.” So
it is the wood of fruits.

(3) Now, there are trees that have flowers and fruits all the
time [cf. Ezek 47.12]. In a similar way the tree of the Cross has
flowers all the time. See that the wood of the Cross has pro-
duced a triple fruit: (3.1) the fruit of cleansing, (3.2) the fruit
of sanctification, and (3.3) the fruit of glorification.

(3.1) First, I say that the wood of the Cross has produced the
fruit of cleansing, because through the Cross we are liberated
from sins. 81 Hence St. Peter says: “He has borne our sins on the
wood” [1 Pt 2.24]. Is 27.9 says about this fruit: “This is all the
fruit, so that sin may be taken away.”

(3.2) Second, the wood of the Cross has produced the fruit of
sanctification, of which Rom 6.22 says: “You have fruit in sanc-
tification.” Of what does sanctification consist? It makes some-
one cling to the Cross. It is also true that man, alienated from
God through sin, is reconciled through Christ. 82 Thus we read

80. Cf. STII-II82. 81. ST III 49,1.

82. ST III 61,3; cf. II-II 81,8; III 62,6,2, 63,6,2.


280


THOMAS AQUINAS


in Rom 5.10: “We are reconciled with God through the death of
his Son.” Jb 22.21 reads: “Be quiet for him and hold your peace;
in this way you will have the best fruits,” namely, “the fruits of
the Spirit: love ( caritas ), peace, joy” [Gal 5.22]. And “Christ suf-
fered outside the city walls in order to sanctify us” [Heb 13.1 2] 83
by the wood. So the ministers of the Church use the sign of the
Cross in any sanctification.

(3.3) The third fruit of the Cross is the fruit of glorification,
about which we read in Jn 4.36: “He who reaps, gathers the
fruit for eternal life.” And in Wis 3.15 it says: “The fruit of good
works is glorious.” This fruit is gained through the Cross, as was
said. Through sin humankind is excluded from paradise, and
therefore Christ has suffered on the Cross, so that through the
Cross the gate from the earthly things to the heavenly things
would be open. 84 Hence the Cross of Christ is signified by the
ladder that Jacob saw. As we read in Gn 28.12, Jacob saw the
ladder, and its top touched the heavens, and he saw angels as-
cending and descending, and the Lord leaning on the ladder.”
All the saints go up to the heavens by the power of the Cross. 85
Hence the Apostle says: “By reason of the blood of the Cross we
trust that the saints will go in” [Heb 10.19], et cetera.

We will ask the Lord, et cetera.


83. ST III 46,10: He suffered outside the Temple and outside the city walls,
so that not only the Jews but all God’s people in the whole world would be sanc-
tified.

84. ST III 49,5.

85. ST III 57,6,2.


SERMON 19
BE AT I QUI HABITANT

Sermon on the Feast of All Saints, the First of November


Psalm 84.5: Happy those who live in your house, O Lord;
they will praise you forever and ever.


Sermo


here is no one with a correct understanding who
does not know that the community of God and angels

and people is one community. The Apostle speaks
of this in 2 Corinthians 1: “the faithful God by whom you are
called into the community of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ”
[1 Cor t.g]. And John 1 reads: “If we walk in the light, just as
he also is in the light, we are in communion with one another”
[1 Jn 1.7]. This is a community insofar as they share the same
end, namely, happiness, * 1 for God is happy, and angels attain
happiness by effort, and people do, too. But God has it by es-
sence, whereas the others have it by participation. 2 Therefore,
it says in 1 Tm 6.15: “In his time the happy and only powerful
(God will show us Jesus Christ).”

Now, people who live together, in the sense that they have
the same end, must share with one another what they are do-
ing in such a way that those who have not yet reached the end


1. Thus this community ( societas ) is one in the sense that we are one with
God through the Son, one with the other people of God and with the angels,
and one in the sense that we are directed towards the same goal: happiness ( be -
atitudo ) . It is also one in the sense that there is no other community like it; it is
unique. Cf. how Thomas explains “one” in ST I 1 1, on the oneness of God.

2. ST I 26 resp.; I— II 5,1 and 3, and 5,5-7.


281


282


THOMAS AQUINAS


are led to it. And therefore, we, the ones on the way ( viatores )
to happiness, are led into it by words and examples. 3 Where-
as the ones who have already achieved the end help others to
achieve it. And this is the reason why we celebrate the feasts of
the saints who have already attained happiness, 4 so that we may
be helped by their favors 5 and may be built up by their exam-
ples and stimulated by their rewards.

But since we cannot celebrate all the feasts of the individual
saints, because their number is unknown to us [cf. Rv 7.9], and
since in the solemnities that we do celebrate we neglect many
things, the Church provides to our benefit that she celebrates
the festivities of all the saints conjointly at the same time, so that
what was not rendered to each individual saint would at least be
rendered in his solemn feast, and everything that was neglected
would be somehow replenished by it. Therefore, since we have
come now to the festivities of the community of the saints, the
happy ones, 6 we are to speak about happiness.

(1) So we must know that, although the affect of all people
is directed towards happiness, 7 still there are some people with
a different idea about happiness, very many of whom err. For
some err concerning (1.1) the abode of happiness, (1.2) others
concerning its duration, and (1.3) others again concerning the
occupation or operation of the happy ones.

(1.1) Some err concerning the abode of happiness because
they think that happiness is in this world: either in corporeal

3. Thomas says the same as for wisdom and knowledge; cf. Sermon 08 Puer
Jesus, section 3.2.3. One Latin text reads incLucimus (“we lead”): “We [Domini-
cans and Franciscans embarking upon preaching and teaching ministries] lead
the ones on the way to happiness by words and examples.” Another Latin ver-
sion reads inducimur (“we are led”): “We, the ones on the way to happiness, are
led into it by words and examples [of the saints].”

4. And we pray to them: ST II— II 83,4.

5. Through their prayers: ST II— II 83,1 1.

6. Beatus means “happy” as well as “saint,” someone who attained the ulti-
mate happiness in patria, in heaven; thus societas beatorum is synonymous with so-
cietas sanctorum.

7. This view was already formulated by Augustine. Cf. ST I— II 5,8; cf. I 19,3,
82,1, 94,1; I— II intr., 10,2, 13,6; III 18,1,3.


SERMON 19


283


things 8 or in virtues or in knowing things. 9 Against them the
Lord says through Is 3.12: “My people, those who are calling you
happy are deceiving you.” And this is rightly spoken, 10 because

(1.1.1) this opinion is first of all at odds with the perfection
of happiness. For, according to the Philosopher, happiness is
the perfect good. 11 And since it is the ultimate end, it is abso-
lutely necessary that it quiets desire. This would not be the case
if, after these things have come into our possession, some de-
sire would remain. In this life, however, neither can the perfec-
tion of the good be in the things of this world — because as peo-
ple attain these things, they desire even more — nor can they
be in virtues and knowing things, because for every man hith-
erto [the desire] remains to advance in virtue and knowledge. 12
The Psalmist says: “Your eyes have seen my imperfection” [Ps
139.16]. 2 Corinthians 13 reads: “For we know in part, (in part
we prophesy)” [1 Cor 13.9].

(1.1.2) Second, this opinion is at odds with the purity of hap-
piness. For, since happiness is the highest good, it cannot be
mixed with evil. 13 For it is absolutely necessary that white be not
at all mixed with black. Hence someone cannot be called hap-
py who is subject to one or another misery, nor can someone at
the same time be unhappy and happy. 14 Yet in this life no one
can be found who is not subject to a particular misery, either
insofar as it concerns discomfort as regards things or [insofar
as it concerns discomfort as regards] friends or some person,
through which also the realization of our virtue and knowledge
is hindered. 15 Hence Job says about man that “he is filled with
many miseries” [Jb 14.1].

8. ST I— II 2,1 and 2,5-6.

9. ST I-II 2,7.

10. ST I-II 2,8, 5,5; Thomas describes the group of people who think that
true happiness is something created, and thus within creation, and therefore
consider it possible to grasp it.

11. ST I-II 3,1,2.

12. Growth is a sign that one has not reached perfection yet; cf. the 4th way
in ST I 2,3; also 4,1,1.

13 - ST I 5,3,2.

14. At least, not concerning the same thing: ST III 46,8,1.

15. ST I-II 5,3, where Thomas cites the same text from Job. Actus is translat-


284


THOMAS AQUINAS


(1.1.3) Third, this opinion denies the stability of happiness.
For happiness would not quiet our desire unless it were stable;
the more we love ( amo ) the goods we possess, the more afflic-
tion they bring about as we fear losing them. 16 Therefore, ac-
cording to the Philosopher, we must not think that a happy per-
son is a chameleon which changes color at a glance; he must
rather be unchangeable, something we cannot be in this life.
For exterior things and the human body are subjected to vari-
ous events, and no one is safeguarded against this, so that from
experience we can learn that in this life there is no stability. 17
Thus it says in Jb 14.2 that man “never remains in the same
state.” And Prv 14.13 reads: “The ends of joy are taken up by
grief.”

Therefore, if you ask the Psalmist where the true abode of
happiness is, he answers: “Happy those who live in your house,
Lord” [Ps 84.5].

(1.2) Concerning the duration of happiness some people err,
saying that the souls that have left the body attain happiness
and that after a long course of years they return to a body and
that they subsequently stop being happy because they are sub-
jected [again] to the miseries of our present life. 18 And this is
the error of Plato and his followers; even Origen fell into this
error. What is said in Wis 2.22 can be applied to them: “They
were of the opinion that the souls of the holy ones are not re-


ed here as “realization”: the development of the virtue and knowledge which we
have in potentia, so that it becomes full-grown, in actu, is hindered, because of
the fact that we are acted upon (passio) by things that are harmful or not help-
ful.

16. In ST II— II 19,2 Thomas calls this type of fear “human” or “worldly,”
for it concerns what is worldly ( humanus , mundanus). This fear is never a good
( 1 9,3) ; it is not a gift from the Holy Spirit ( 1 9,9) ; it diminishes our love (19,10)
and will not remain in heaven (19,11), contrary to the holy fear of the Lord,
which is a virtue: 19,7 and 9-12.

17. The idea that everything on earth changes all the time and nothing re-
mains (the same) — as in the famous words Ttavra pel Kai ouSev pevei, attributed
to Heraclitus — is based on our experience; cf. the first and third ways in ST I
2,3. God, however, who is not part of the creation but the Creator, is stable, un-
changeable, and fully happy: ST I 4,1, 9,1, and 26,1 and 4.

18. The idea of reincarnation is not compatible with the Christian faith and
is furthermore not appealing to Thomas: SCG IV 91.


SERMON 19


285


warded.” And in Mt 25.46 we read: “These will go into the eter-
nal punishment, but the just ones will enter eternal life.” Well,
this idea of theirs seems to be reprehensible for three reasons:

(1.2.1) First, because it is at odds with the natural desire.
For naturally there is in everything an appetite by which it con-
serves itself in being and in its perfection. 19 But there is a differ-
ence: things which lack the ability to consider [what perfection]
in general [is], do not reach [for perfection]; their appetite is
directed towards the here-and-now, so that their perfection is
preserved. 20 Yet a rational nature which surmises [what perfec-
tion] in general [is], 21 naturally has the appetite to conserve its
perfection all the time. So, if the soul has not reached everlast-
ing happiness, it is not satisfied by natural desire. Nor would
it be true happiness with the ignorance of a defect to come or
with the foreknowledge of misfortune to come. 22 Well, in view of
this natural desire the Apostle says in 2 Cor 5.2: “For we groan,
longing to be clothed with our dwelling place from heaven,” et
cetera.

(1.2.2) Second, because it is at odds with the perfection of
grace, for everything that is totally filled with its own perfection
is immovably preserved in it. 23 Therefore, the first materia does
not remain in the forma of air forever, since such a forma does
not fill the total capacity of the materia . 24 The intellect truly re-
mains immovable in its thinking according to the first princi-
ples, because through them the intellect is filled insofar as it
concerns that truth. It is not, however, completely filled with
probable chains of reasoning, and so it does not think in an


19. Cf. ST II— II 64,5 and 7. Although eventually it is God alone who con-
serves all things in being: ST I 9,2, 14,1-2, 46,1; III 13,2.

20. ST I 62,1, 63,3, and 75,6.

21. ST I 12,8,4. Therefore, Thomas approaches “perfection” from different
angles, e.g., ST I 6,3 (in view of God), I 73,1 (in view of the substantial and acci-
dental forma, the substance and the end), I— II 98,2,1 (in view of the nature of a
thing and the time when it is/was).

22. Because the first is not stable and the second contains fear, which is in-
compatible with happiness. ST I 64,2; II— II 18,3; cf. I 102,2,1.

23. Cf. ST I 62,8; I— II 109,10,3; II— II 137,4.

24. ST I 66,1-2.


286


THOMAS AQUINAS


immovable way. 25 But a happy soul is totally filled with happi-
ness; otherwise, happiness would not be a perfect good. There-
fore, we read in a Psalm: “You will fill me completely with joy
when I see your face” [Ps 16.11], et cetera. And because of this it
continues: “Delights are in your right hand till the end” [ibid.].
And because the everlasting duration [of this] leads to such a
fullness of grace, it says in Rv 3.12: “The one who will conquer, I
will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will not
go out from it any more.” 26

(1.2.3) Third, it goes against the equity of the divine justice,
for through love (caritas) a human being clings to God with the
intention never to recede from him. 27 Rom 8.35: “Who will sep-
arate us from the love ( caritas ) of Christ?” Hence it is not fully
satisfying for love ( caritas ) if it is at times removed from the en-
joyment of God. Because of this Jn 6.37 says: “I will not throw
out who comes to me.” 28

So if you ask the Psalmist what he thinks about this idea, he
responds: “They will praise you for ever and ever” [Ps 84.5] .

(1.3) Jews and Muslims ( Sarraceni ) err about the happy ones’
occupation or what they do; they say that the happy people
abandon themselves to excessive eating, drinking-bouts, and
unions with women. The Lord rejects this in Matthew 25: “In
the resurrection they neither marry nor are they given in mar-
riage, (but they are as God’s angels in heaven)” [Mt 22.30]. 29 In-
deed, their opinion is justly rejected, for it is,

(1.3.1) first of all, against the privilege of humankind. Be-
cause, if happiness were according to the use of food and sen-
sual things that are found in other living creatures too, not
only humankind, but even animals ought to have happiness —
although this still is the privilege of humankind, that among
the lower creatures only the human being is capable of happi-

25. ST I 17,3 85,6. So the principles may be clear, but as soon as our reason-
ing begins to depart from them, we may err.

26. SCG III 62; ST 1-115,4.

27. ST II— II 25,1; I— II 49,2,3; the perfection of a Christian life consists in
love ( caritas) : II— II 1 84, 1 .

28. Likewise, it is in accordance with the divine justice that sinners are pun-
ished, e.g., in ST I 49,2 and 1 13,7.

29. Cf. also ST I 98,2,1.


SERMON 19


287


ness. 30 Hence the Psalmist says: “Lord, you will save people and
yoked animals” [Ps 36.7], that is, through the salvation of the
bodies; “yet” only “the children of the people will hope in the
shelter of your wings” [Ps 36.8] .

(1.3.2) Second, it goes against the nature of joy, for a high-
er nature is not made happy by something lower. 31 If, however,
the happiness of humankind consisted in eating and drinking,
then someone would also be made happy by the foods he eats,
and thus these foods would be worth more than a human be-
ing. Humankind, however, is still placed above all other lower
natures, according to the Psalmist: “You have laid all things un-
der his feet, (sheep and cattle all over the world and further-
more the wild animals of the plain, the birds of the heaven, and
the fish of the sea)” [Ps 8.7-9]-

(1.3.3) Third, it goes against the concentration on the vir-
tues. Because, for a human being, virtue consists in being torn
away from pleasures. 32 Hence the virtues that concern pleas-
ures are named by what restricts them, like abstinence, tem-
perance, and the like. On the other hand, there are the virtues
that concern wearisome and difficult things, as we clearly see in
regard to strength and magnanimity and the like. 33 Now if the
happiness of humankind consisted in the pleasures of the flesh,
virtue, which is the way of happiness, would not tear us away
from the pleasures of the flesh, but would imply the pleasures.
This happens in those about whom Phil 3.19 says: “Their belly
is their god,” et cetera.

So, if we ask David 34 what he thinks that the occupation and
action is of the happy ones, the saints, he would answer: “They
will praise you” [Ps 84.5].

30. ST I— II 3,3-4. The lower creatures are the creatures on earth, as distinct
from the creatures in the heavens, like the angels, who are happy too; cf. ST I
62,1.

31. Cf. ST I— II 4 ,k and 7; a human being is made perfectly joyful only by
God: ST I-II 5,6; II-II 28,1 esp. ad 2.

32. Virtues are certain perfections through which the reason is directed to-
wards God, and all other powers in us are ordered in accordance with the rea-
son: ST I 95,3; cf. I-II 55,1.

33. These virtues correspond with respectively the so-called passiones con-
cupiscibiles (ST I-II 26-39) and irascibiles (ST I-II 40-48).

34. Psalm 84 is in fact attributed to the sons of Korah.


288


THOMAS AQUINAS


(2) Now it remains to see how we can arrive at this happiness.
We must know then that there are three types of happiness.

(2.1) The first is worldly happiness, which consists in posses-
sions and the enjoyment of worldly things. The Psalmist says:
“They call the people that has these things happy” [Ps 144.15].
And indeed, this happiness consists primarily in honors, rich-
es, and delightful things, 35 because, as it is said in 1 Jn 2.16: “all
that is in the world: the concupiscence of the flesh,” et cetera.
Yet, under honor we understand dignity and a good name, so
that in this way these three include those five in which, accord-
ing to Boethius, earthly happiness consists. 36 Ambitious people
strive after dignity by means of arrogance and money, as it is
written in Eccl 10. tg: “All things obey money,” and in Prv tg.6:
“Many honor a person” because of his riches. The Lord teaches
[us] , however, to arrive at dignity by the opposite way: by pover-
ty and humility, because, as it says in Luke 2: “He has brought
down the mighty from their seat” [Lk 1.52], and it is said in
Mt 5.3: “Happy the poor in spirit, (for the kingdom of heaven
is theirs).” It says “kingdom” because it is precious among the
honors. Well, this happiness belongs foremost to Christ, 37 for,
because the Old Fathers [Patriarchs] made use of riches, 38 he
was the first who preached and taught this, 39 as we read in 2
Cor 8.g: “You know the gracious gift of our Lord Jesus Christ,
(that, although he was rich, he became poor for your sake, so
that by his poverty you might be rich)”; [compare] Matthew 2:
“If you want to be perfect, go and sell (what you have and give

35. ST I— II 2,1-3 and 5-6.

36. “Those five . . . according to Boethius”: In The Consolation of Philosophy
Boethius names wealth, power, honor, fame, and desire. Even if someone had
all five, he says, it would not be perfect happiness, i.e., the highest good, unless
these were eternal.

37. ST III 40,3.

38. E.g., Abraham (Gn 24.34-35), Isaac (Gn 26.13-14), Jacob (Gn 32.6),
David (2 Sm 12.30). King Solomon surpassed everyone: 2 Chr 9.22. Thomas
frequently warns his pupils about riches, e.g., in ST I— II 30,4, 84,1; II— II 32,1,4,
1 18,4,3, 1 86,3,4, 188,7; an d HI 41,4,3. Since material goods are limited, exces-
sive riches are a sin against the neighbor: ST II— II 1 18,1,2.

39. Cf. ST I— II 108,3,4. Although we find a similar teaching in Prv 16.19 (“It
is better to be humble with the meek than to plunder with the proud”).


SERMON 19


289


to the poor, and you will have a treasure in heaven)” [Mt ig.21].

Yet people of this world often arrive at riches by quarrels or
warfare or by somehow using violence in matters, 40 as it says in
Jas 4.2: “You quarrel and wage war.” But God teaches the oppo-
site way, 41 namely, the way of mildness, by which no one either
angers or becomes angry. 42 And this is not astonishing, because,
as it says in Prv 3.34: the kingdom “will be given to the mild.”
And hence the Lord says, “Happy the meek (for they will inher-
it the earth)” [Mt 5.5]. And this happiness befits the martyrs,
who were not angry with their persecutors, but rather prayed for
them. Thus it says in Corinthians 8: “We are cursed, but we bless;
(we are persecuted, but we endure)” [1 Cor 4.12]. Thus it is said
about them: “no groaning resounds, no complaint,” 43 et cetera.

People strive to arrive at delights by various comforts. Thus
it says in Isaiah 21: “They hold the tambourine (and the harp
and rejoice at the sound of the flute)” [Jb 21.12]. But the Lord
teaches the opposite way: mourning; he says: “Happy they who
mourn (for they will be comforted)” [Mt 5.4]. And concern-
ing this, Tb 3.22 (Vg) reads, “After lamentation and tears (you
pour out exaltation).” 44 And this happiness befits the ones who
confessed their faith, who under much sighing and mourning
have lived their life on earth, in accordance with Lamentations
3: “For, many are our sighs” [Lam 1.22].

(2.2) The second happiness belongs to the political realm, 45

40. ST II— II 118,1,2.

41. In what follows, Thomas presents the Beatitudes not only as a way to clas-
sify the saints in heaven, but also as the way to happiness for all people.

42. ST II— II 157-158. Mildness belongs to the virtue of temperance (II— II
143,1).

43. From the fourth stanza of the hymn Sanctorum mentis inclyta gaudia, sung
at the First Vespers for feast days of the apostles: “Caeduntur gladiis more bi-
dentium: Non murmur resonat, non quaerimonia; sed corde impavido mens bene
conscia, conservat patientiam” (translated in the Breviary as: “Like sheep their
blood they poured: and without groan or tear, they bent before the sword for that
their King most dear: Their souls, serenely blest, in patience they possessed and
looked in hope towards their rest”).

44. These words are taken from Sarah’s prayer to God for mercy after being
falsely accused of murdering her seven husbands as they died each time during
the wedding night: Tb 3.1 1-15.

45. ST I— II 2,4: Does the happiness of a person consist in power?


290


THOMAS AQUINAS


which consists in this: by acting with prudence someone gov-
erns his own actions well. The maximum of his ability is
reached when he governs not only himself, but even a city and
a kingdom. Hence this happiness befits in particular kings and
princes. We read about this in Job 22: “The hearing ear bless-
es 46 me” [Jb 2g.11].

Still, we must know that there is a difference between a king
and a tyrant, 47

(2.2.1) for a king is someone who is intent upon the good of
the people by his reign. So, what a king issues is not discord-
ant with the order of his wisdom [cf. Jer 23.5]. Prv 8.15 reads:
“Kings reign by me.” But a tyrant is by his own wish intent upon
being discordant with the divine order of wisdom, for he aims
rather at the satisfaction of his own desire, so that he accom-
plishes everything as he pleases and is intent to arrive at this
through greed, by plundering others unjustly. Hence it says in
Prv 28.15: “A godless prince over a poor people is a roaring lion
and a hungry bear.” 48 But the Lord teaches us to arrive [at hap-
piness] by the contrary way: by justice. 49 Thus he says: “Happy
they who hunger and thirst for justice, (for they will be filled)”
[Mt 5.6]. And this is what is said in Prv 13.25: “The just eats and
is satisfied.” Now, this happiness befits the Old Fathers [Patri-
archs], who with the greatest desire hungered for the perfect
justice of Christ. We see this desire in Isaiah 58: “O, that you
would rend the heavens (and come down)” [Is 63.19].

46. For Job in his misery this was history; Job refers to the past, when he was
exceedingly wealthy (cf. Jb 29.2-10). Accordingly the Vulgate text reads beatifi-
cabat, in the imperfect tense. Thomas uses the present tense form beatificat, ap-
parently he considers it reality for the rulers of his day.

47. Cf. Sermon 05 Ecce rex tuus, section 2.1.4.

48. Hence the title “King” (Rex) for Christ (or for God: SCG III 64) is not
problematic for Thomas. But in our day we can no longer make the distinction
that Thomas makes, because the term “tyrant” still is a negative term as Thomas
explains it, but the term “king” has become a neutral term now; a king can be
a tyrant. Thus the original Greek word tupavvoi; is synonymous with our word
“king”: the absolute sovereign. Since “power corrupts and absolute power cor-
rupts absolutely,” the Greek word soon had a negative undertone (as in Tho-
mas’s explanation). Cf. also ST I— II 105,1,2.

49. ST II— II 50,1,1: A king ought to be prudent (cf. section 2.2) and right-
eous ( iustus ).


SERMON 19


291


(2.2.2) Second, a tyrant is intent upon not being punished for
the evils he has done; he does so by means of cruelty. He exerts
himself to obtain this along this way, so that he may be feared
so much that no one would contradict him. 50 The Psalmist says
about these tyrants: “They have placed the dead bodies of your
servants as bait for the birds of the sky” [Ps 79.2]. But the Lord
teaches a contrary way, in order to obtain the way of mercy, say-
ing: “Happy are the merciful, (for they will obtain mercy)” [Mt
5.7]. And he continues in Mt 6.14: “For if you forgive the people
their sins (your heavenly Father will forgive you).” This happi-
ness befits the angels, who, though they are without passio, ap-
pear so merciful to us, 51 as they come to our assistance in our
miseries. 52 Thus we read in Is 33.7: “The angels of peace will cry
bitterly.”

(2.3) The third happiness is a contemplative happiness that
is in particular proper to those who apply themselves to acquir-
ing the truth and especially divine truth. Sir 14.20: “Happy the
man who will abide in wisdom.” Philosophers can only obtain
this happiness if they are intent upon two things: learning the
truth and obtaining authority. 53 They will only get to know the
truth by studying. But God teaches a shorter way: by the clean-
ness of the heart, 54 saying: “Happy the clean of heart, (for they

50. Thomas is in favor of defending the common good and resisting evil,
but he is not enthusiastic about a revolution against a tyrant or a tyrannical re-
gime, even if he/it is unjust (ST II— II 42,2,3, 1 18,8,5). For a revolution may well
lead to greater chaos and cruelty. Therefore, the tyrant(s) should be brought
down, indeed, for the sake of the common good, yet it ought to be done under
the direction of a righteous neighboring king: ST II— II 40,1, 42,2,3.

51. In human beings mercy ( misericordia ) is always with passio because we
have a body (ST I 95,3; II— II 30,3,2); in God and in angels, who are without a
material body, it must be without passio : ST I 2 1 ,3.

52. The term compassio is used by Thomas in the sense of “suffering with,”
whereas misericordia is more like what we call “compassion”: being touched
(habeas miserum cor), so that you reach out to take away your neighbor’s misery:
ST I 2 1 ,3. Misery — not every weakness or suffering is misery — is contrary to hap-
piness: ST I 21,4; II— II 30,1.

53. Thomas says this with irony (cf. below). Real authority is found in the
teachings of Sacred Doctrine: Scripture and the tradition; cf. ST I 1,5.

54. Which is even necessary in order to focus on God: ST II— II 81,8; cf.
180,2,2. Living a holy life is a source of knowledge and insight about God. In


292


THOMAS AQUINAS


will see God)” [Mt 5.8] . 55 Wis 1.4 reads: “Wisdom will not en-
ter a malevolent soul, nor will she dwell (in a body subjected
to sin).” And this happiness befits in particular the virgins who
preserved a cleanness of mind and body.

Philosophers truly want to acquire authority by contentious
debates. But, as it is said in 1 Cor 11.16: “If someone” wants “to
be contentious” among you, “(we do not have such a custom
and it is not proper to God’s Church).” 56 Thus the Lord teach-
es us to arrive at divine authority through peace, as a man may
be considered by others the one in authority, according to what
he has said to Moses in Ex 7.1: “I have placed you as” lord “over
Pharaoh.” And therefore it is said: “Happy the peacemakers,
(for they will be called the children of God)” [Mt 5.9]. Well,
this happiness befits especially the apostles, about whom 2 Cor-
inthians 6 reads: “He has placed in us the word of reconcilia-
tion” [2 Cor 5-ig], 57 et cetera.

Now, the saying “Happy they who suffer persecution (for the
sake of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of the heav-
ens)” [Mt 5.10] does not mention another happiness, but is said
in order to strengthen the ones mentioned before. For, if some-
one is pulled away from happiness because of persecution, he
is not strong in poverty, in mildness, and in the other virtues.
Therefore, all rewards mentioned before ought to be included
in this happiness — and so he returns to what he said at the be-
ginning [of the Beatitudes], saying: “for theirs is the kingdom
of the heavens” [Mt 5.3, 10]. 58 And in a similar way we should
understand “because they will possess the earth” [Mt 5.5], and
likewise the other sayings.


Thomas’s view it would be impossible to study theology while living as an unbe-
liever. What you learn must be practiced; otherwise, it is meaningless.

55. Cf. ST II-II 8,7.

56. In view of the context it seems likely that Thomas quoted the whole
verse.

57. Cf. ST I 43,7,6, 1 17,2 and III 64,2,3.

58. In ST II-II 1 24,1 and 5 Thomas cites this verse in the context of martyr-
dom.


SERMON 19


293


So the happiness of the saints contains something of any of
the sayings mentioned insofar as we find anything praiseworthy
in them.

(ad 2.1) For, compared to earthly happiness, the happiness of
the saints has an abundant abode. Hence it says: “Happy those
who live in your house” [Ps 84.5]. This is the house of glory,
about which the Psalmist says: “One thing I have asked from the
Lord: (to live in the house of the Lord all the days of my life)”
[Ps 27.4]. In this house he will obtain whatever he may desire,
because: “We will be filled with the goods of your house” [Ps
65.5], as the Psalmist says. Revelation 1 reads: “You have made
us (for our God) a kingdom and priests” [Rv 5.10]. There will
be enough riches present there, as the Psalmist testifies: “Glory
and riches are in his house” [Ps 112.3a]. There will be delights
that refresh the total human being, according to the Psalmist:
“They will be fed with the copiousness of your house (and you
will slake them from the brook of your will)” [Ps 36.9].

(ad 2.2) Compared to the happiness that belongs to the po-
litical life, they have continuity, for the ruler of a city ought
to apply himself to preserve the good of the city all the time.
Hence it says: “(and his justice remains) for ever and ever” [Ps
112.3b]. For sure, this continuity comes forth from three things:
first, from living together with good people. The Psalmist says:
“I will be satisfied when your glory appears” [Ps 17. 15]. 59 Sec-
ond, from the removal of condemnable behavior, for, although
[people on earth] are satisfied, they still hunger always, as we
read in Sirach 22: “Those who eat me will still be hungry, (and
those who drink will still be thirsty)” [Sir 24.21]. Third, from
the immunity to all evils and miseries, as in Rv 7.16: “They will
no longer hunger or thirst, (nor will the sun or any heat strike
them) .”

(ad 2.3) Compared to the contemplative happiness, they will
live in a way with the divine things, since contemplative hap-
piness consists particularly in contemplation. And therefore it

59. Note that this is the final verse of a Psalm in which the Psalmist prays
as he is persecuted by evil people. In ST I— II 69,2,3 Thomas explains that this
verse applies not only to the hereafter, but even, albeit not to the full, to life on
earth.


294


THOMAS AQUINAS


says: “They will praise you” [Ps 84.5], for they will see God with-
out an intermediary and clearly, as it says in 1 Cor 13.12: “Now
we see by means of a mirror, (veiled in mystery, yet then face
to face; now we know in part, yet then I will know as I also am
known).” And like sons and daughters they will love ( amo ) him
incessantly, for according to the Greeks “son” is derived from
“to love.” 60 John 3 reads: “See what love ( caritas ) the Father has
given to us, so that we may be called and are, indeed, God’s
sons and daughters” [1 Jn 3.1]. And as good sons and daugh-
ters they will honor God by praising him, in accordance with
Is 35.10: “(The ones who are redeemed by the Lord will re-
turn and enter Zion with praise, and an everlasting joy will be
over their head.) They will obtain joy and gaiety, (and pain and
moaning will flee).”

Therefore, the Psalmist only mentions this 61 with the things
that are said above in mind, because what is praised is known
and loved {amo). 6 - Hence Augustine says in Book 6o 63 of The
City of God: “This task, this affection, this realization, 64 is, just
like eternal life, for all people.”

May we be led to it by the Son, et cetera.


60. In Greek a word for “son” is (piAoc; ( philos ), “to love” is (piAito ( phileo ).

61. “Happy those who live in your house, O Lord,” Ps 84.5.

62. Cf. ST I— II 101,2.

63. The text reads LX, but it is in fact book 22: XXII, the last book. Chapter
30 is its last chapter: it discusses the eternal happiness of the City of God and
the perpetual Sabbath. In Sermon 20 Beata Gens, section 2.3.3, Thomas refers to
the same chapter.

64. Actus: see note 15.


SERMON 20
BE AT A GENS


Sermon on the Feast of All Saints,
the First of November


Psalm 33.12: Happy the nation whose lord is its God,
the people whom he has chosen for his heritage.


part 1: Prothema

appy the nation whose lord is its God, the people
whom he has chosen for his heritage” [Ps 33.12]. In
many ways holy Mother the Church focuses her atten-
tion on challenging her sons and daughters to desire heavenly
things [cf. Col 3.1]. And if you want to examine this correctly,
you see that she is totally devoted to transforming us to desire
heavenly things by showing contempt of earthly things. This is
clear from the first Founder of the Church and our Savior 1 on,
who, in his application to preaching and teaching, said, in Mt
3.2: “Repent,” in order to remove us from earthly things. “The
kingdom of heaven has come near”: He says this in order to
allure us to desire heavenly things. 2 Among other things that
provoke a heavenly desire she reminds us and impresses in our
hearts today the saints’ glory for which we strive. God willing,
we will ask God at the beginning that for the suitability of such

1. John the Baptist belongs to the New Testament (ST II— II 174,4,3). What
he taught and did was preparatory: ST III 38,2,2, and 38,3; for instance, John’s
baptism of Christ, in ST III 27,6.

2. Thus conversion consists of a double movement: aversio, a turning away
from what is evil or not worthwhile, and adversio or conversio, a turning towards
God and the things that are God’s; cf. ST II— II 20,1,1, 24,12,4, and 162,6.


295


296


THOMAS AQUINAS


a great celebration he may give me something valuable to say,
which would be to his honor and to the honor of all the saints
as well as to the salvation of our souls.


part 2 : Sermo

“Happy the nation” [Ps 33.12], et cetera. [This inspired say-
ing] is meant for the souls of the people all together, so that
they hear with delight the praises of their heavenly homeland
( patria ) and of their parents: the praises of their homeland, so
that they hasten to return to it; the praises of their parents, so
that they, by following their example, will not be lapsed.

But what is our homeland? The homeland for which we strive
is the heavenly homeland. Thus the Apostle says in Heb 13.14:
“Here we do not have a city that remains, but we seek a future
city.” Our parents are the spiritual men 3 who have taught us, in-
structed us, and who have given us the good example of living
well. 4 These are the saints in the homeland, whose solemn feast
we celebrate today, and therefore we ought to praise them con-
tinually with gladness. Thus we read in Sir 44.1: “Let us praise
the glorious men, our parents in their generation.”

See: by the mouth of David the Holy Spirit calls to mind this
company of the saints in four ways: (1) first, on the ground of
their dignity; (2) second, on the ground of their leader; (3)
third, on the ground of how they are arranged; and (4) fourth,
on the ground of their election. He calls that group of the saints
to mind on the ground of their dignity where it says: “Happy
the nation”; on the ground of their leader where it says: “whose


3. Thomas uses the word viri, “men,” here. The use of this word is deter-
mined by Sir 44.1 (cited further on), which is the directive text for this part of
the sermon. Besides, his audience consists of men only. By speaking of “men”
here, Thomas might give the impression that “spiritual” women are not regard-
ed as teachers and examples for his audience. But in view of, for instance, the
Sermo of Sermon 1 7 Lux orta, on the feast of Mary’s birth, we must say that such
a conclusion would be drawn too quickly.

4. And lived examples are more convincing and moving than words: ST I— II
34 A-


SERMON 20


297


lord is its God”; on the ground of how they are arranged he
calls them a people when he says “people”; on the ground of
their election when he says: “whom the Lord has chosen,” et
cetera.

♦♦♦

(1) First, I say, David calls to mind this company of the saints
on the ground of their dignity, where we read: “Happy the na-
tion.” The dignity of this company is mentioned because (1.1)
they have arrived at the place for which we strive. Furthermore,
(1.2) they possess everything we desire. Moreover, (1.3) they are
invested above what we can understand.

(1.1) First, I say, we look at the dignity of the saints, because
they have arrived at the place for which we strive. Happiness ( be -
atitudo) is the end of all our actions. 5 Hence the Apostle says in
Rom 6.22: “You have your fruit in sanctification, but your end
is eternal life.” Look also at Augustine; he says in his book The
City of God: “What else is the end of our desires than to arrive at
the Kingdom where there is no end?” 6

And see, in Sacred Scripture the end of humankind is com-
pared to three things: (1.1.1) first, it is compared to a crown.
Thus the Apostle says in 2 Tm 4.8: “What remains is that a
crown of justice is reserved for me.” (1.1.2) Sometimes it is com-
pared to a prize, as the Apostle does in Phil 3.14: “I press on to
the destination, to the prize of the heavenly call from above.”
(1.1.3) Likewise, it is compared sometimes to a reward. Thus we
read in the Gospel according to Matthew 5.12: “Be glad and ex-
ult, for your reward is abundant in the heavens.”

The Son of man has not made these three comparisons
unjustly, 7 because every action of ours is reduced to these
three:

(1.1.1) Some struggle ( certo ) when they act — this applies to
the actives. Hence it says injb 7.1: “The life of a man on earth is

5. ST I— II 1,1-2 and 1,4-7.

6. There is no end for the ones in patria — in the homeland or heavenly
homeland — for the ultimate end has been attained by them; cf. ST I 82,1.

7. The Son of man only made the third comparison directly; the other two
are made by him indirecdy, through the inspiration of Wisdom; cf. ST II— II
45 * 1 *


298


THOMAS AQUINAS


warfare.” 8 And those who have struggled according to the rules
deserve a crown, because, as we read in 2 Tm 2.5: “no one will
be crowned, unless he struggles according to the rules.”

(1.1.2) Others, like the contemplatives, run. And these have
nothing that slows them down; they run fast. 9 Ps 119.32 says
about them: “I have run the way of your commandments.” Well,
those who compete in a race ( certo ) deserve a prize. The Apos-
tle says in 1 Cor 9.24: “All run, but only one receives the prize.”

(1.1.3) A third group are the workers, like the highly placed
people, who bring about salutary works among the ordinary
people. And these deserve a reward. Hence the Apostle says in
1 Cor 3.8: “Everyone will receive a proper reward in accordance
with his work.” 10

But what is the glory of the saints in the homeland? I say that
they have sought after a crown as good strugglers. They have
pursued a prize as runners and have sought after a reward as
good workers [cf. Lk 10.7]. People in the world work in order
to have crowns, but that crown is corruptible. The crown of the
saints is incorruptible. 11 Hence the Apostle continues in 1 Cor
g.25: “Those, indeed, in order to have a corruptible crown; but
we, an incorruptible one.” Thus is the dignity of the saints, be-
cause they have arrived at that place for which we strive.

(1.2) Furthermore, they have everything we desire and even
more. Hence it says in Prv 10.24: “To the just he will give what
they desire.” Consider what you can desire among the pleasures
and delights; all of that the saints have. But, I say, only as for

8. In the same way Thomas speaks of a “Church Militant” in Sermon 17 Lux
orta, section 1.11, and in Sermon 21 Beatus vir, Collatio in sero, section 2.1.

9. Because no earthly things hinder them (cf. ST II— II 186,3,4); they have
completely dedicated their lives to God in contemplation: ST II— II 1 80.

10. And merit is closely connected with God’s gracious gift of love ( caritas ):
ST I— II 1 14,4. See also how Thomas compares the merit of the active and of the
contemplative religious, in ST II— II 182,2.

11. Incorruptibilis can be understood in different ways; cf. ST I 97,1. Here
Thomas means incorruptible in the first sense, that it does not have materia. Cf.
also Thomas’s commentary on 2 Tm 4.8 in lectio 2 where he cites Is 28.5 (“the
Lord will be a glorious crown and a brilliant diadem to the remnant of his peo-
ple”) and explains it as the joy concerning the truth and the aureole. Compare
also how Thomas speaks of the immateriality of the food of the heavenly feast in
Sermon 1 3 Homo quidam fecit.


SERMON 20


299


spiritual delights, not the worldly and the foul things. Ps 16.11
reads: “Your delights are in your right hand.” 12 If you desire
riches, the saints are the wealthiest, for nothing is missing for
those who fear the Lord, according to Prv 1.33: “They will thor-
oughly enjoy abundance.” 13 Likewise, if you desire honors, the
saints are invested with the greatest honor. Psalm 133: “Your
honorable friends, O God, are honored beyond measure” [Ps
138.17 (Vg)]. If you seek knowledge, the saints have that perfec-
tion too, because they drink knowledge from the very fountain
of wisdom [cf. Prv 18.4, Sir 1.5 (Vg)]. The saints have to the
fullest extent everything that man can seek on earth either by
sinning or by not sinning.

Thus it is clear what the dignity of the saints is: they have ar-
rived at the place for which we strive, and they possess every-
thing we can desire.

(1.3) Moreover, they are invested in the highest beyond our
understanding, since the happiness of the saints 14 is beyond
what you can understand. 15 Thus it says in Is 64.4: “Eye has
not seen, O God; you alone have seen the things you have pre-
pared for the ones who love ( diligo ) you.” What is the reason
why the saints are invested in the highest beyond what you can
understand? Surely because the saints in the homeland have
all their desires fulfilled. And how can they be filled with eve-
ry good, unless they have come to the fountain of every good? 16
When a tree is heavy with fruits and you come to one branch,

12. The right hand is the powerful, giving hand (cf. ST III 58,1), the left
hand the receiving hand.

13. Therefore, there is no hope in the inhabitants of the patria; hope is to-
wards something good you do not (yet) have or experience: ST I— II 67,4. Like-
wise, fear of something evil: ST II— II 19,1 1 .

14. Beatus means “happy” as well as “saint,” someone who has attained the
ultimate happiness in patria, i.e., in the heavenly homeland; beatitudo beatorum is
translated as “happiness of the saints.”

1 5. Cf. ST I— II 3,8 and 4,3.

16. Cf. Ps 42.2 and 23.1-6; cf. ST I 20,1,2. Whereas during our life on earth
our desires will never be totally fulfilled; cf. ST I— II 5,3; II— II 28,3. Still Thomas
speaks of a certain desire of the saints (and angels) , yet not because of what they
lack, but because of the bodily desires that are removed from them, in ST I — II
33,2 and 67,4,3, referring to 1 Pt 1.12: “It was revealed to them . . . things into
which the angels long ( desiderant ) to look.”


300


THOMAS AQUINAS


you cannot take them all. In a similar way if you go to anoth-
er branch. But someone who cuts off the roots will take away
all the fruits of the tree. In a similar way you cannot fully en-
joy every good, unless you come to the fountain of every good,
that is, as we read in Ps 103.5: “He who fulfills your desire with
good things.” 17 Hence the Lord has said to Moses in Ex 33.19:
“I will show you every good,” that is, myself [cf. Ex 33.20-23],
in whom every good is. And since God is great and above eve-
ry intellect, the saints who enjoy God are elevated so high that
no one can reach [them]. Thus we read in Isaiah 53: “I will lift
you up above every height of the earth” [Is 58.14], that is, above
every high thing which an earthly man can understand. The
Lord says in Psalm 149, “I will enrich you with the highness of
your father,” 18 which applies to all his saints.

Thus it is clear what the dignity and the glory of the saints in
the heavenly homeland is: since they have arrived at that place
for which we strive, they have whatever we can desire; and they
are invested on high, beyond what we can understand.

(2) Let us look at their leader.

(2.1) The whole dignity of the saints depends on their very
leader. It is most miserable and degrading and terrible that
a human being would be subordinate to someone inferior to
himself or to a villain. 19 Hence the Lord utters a threat when
he says through the Prophet: “I will hand Egypt over into the
hands of cruel lords” [Is 19.4]. Someone who has a worthy mas-
ter whom he serves, is happy. Thus it says in Sir 25.8: “Happy
the one who has not served those unworthy of him.” The un-
worthy are the demons. Yet we are God’s children [cf. 1 Jn 3.1].
It is unworthy for children to serve the enemy of their father.
So: happy are they who serve God. Thus it says in 1 Kgs 10.8:
“Happy your servants.” It is just to be subordinate to God, for

17. Cf. ST I-II 2,8; II-II 28,3.

18. The Latin text refers to Psalm 149, but in fact nowhere in Scripture is
this text found. “Highness ( altitudo ) of the Father” may refer to Ps 132.1 1 and
Lk 1.32 (where the term sedes, “throne,” is used).

19. For this would go against the good order of creation: ST I 47,2; cf. I
109,4 and SCG III 17.


SERMON 20


301


the highest perfection of a thing is that it is subordinate to what
is more perfect than it. 20 Materia is not perfect unless it is sub-
ordinate to a forma , 21 and air is not beautiful unless it is subject
to the sun, and so the soul is not perfect unless it is subordi-
nate to God. 22 Therefore, our happiness lies in being subordi-
nate to God. You could say: “Are we subjected to God, then?”
Yes we are, but in a mediated way: 23 by mediating angels, highly
placed people, and those who educate us, 24 who guide us where
we ought to go in order to arrive at happiness.

But the saints in the homeland are not subjected to edu-
cators. Hence the Apostle says in t Cor 15.24: “Then the end
comes, when Christ hands over the reign to God the Father and
when he makes every dominion empty.” 25 Therefore, he 26 says:
“Happy the nation, whose lord is its God” [Ps 33.12].

(2.2) See also that there were and are some people who have
said that bliss and happiness are in earthly things; 27 their opin-
ion is expressed in Psalm 142: “Their storehouses are chock-
full, bulging out from here to there. Their sheep are bearing
(abundantly in their pastures; their cattle are fat)” [Ps 143.13-
14 (Vg)] — and then: “They have called ‘happy’ the people that
has these things” [ibid., verse 15a]. This is how the general pub-
lic has spoken, but this opinion is false, because all things pass
like a shadow [cf. Eccl 6.12].

20. Something is perfect insofar as it is perfect in its being, as it has things/
characteristics needed for a perfect operation, and — to this point Thomas re-
fers in this homily — as it has reached the end to which it is ordered. In ST I 6,3
Thomas points out that as such this applies to God alone.

21. Cf. ST I 7,1 and 44,2.

22. For God is all people’s ultimate end, as it is said in Heb 2.10; cf. ST I 2
intr.; I— II 3,7,2.

23. ST I 22,3 (providence and God’s reign); cf. Ill 20,1: in what way was the
man Christ subordinate to the Father?

24. Respectively ST I 1 10,1-2, 1 1 1,1—4, 1 12,1-7 and II— II 45,5. A lower per-
son, however, is still bound to criticize a higher person in terms of the fraternal
correction: ST II— II 33,3-4.

25. In ST I 108,7,1 Thomas explains this verse by saying that the saints in
the homeland serve the ones on the way; they guide others towards this ulti-
mate end.

26. I.e., Christ, who speaks through the Psalms, as, e.g., in Heb 2.12.

27. ST I-II 2,1-6.


302


THOMAS AQUINAS


Moreover, they do not fill [themselves], because “the greedy
will never have enough money” [Eccl 5.9] , 28 You may think of
earthly things that they remain, that they meet your desire,
but I am telling you: yes, there is happiness, but it is not found
there. So they are wrong, thinking that there is happiness in
earthly things. Where then is happiness? The Psalmist answers
in Ps 144.15b, saying that his God is his happiness.

Likewise there are or were some, like the Stoics, who said
that happiness and bliss are found in internal goods. They held
that having virtues and knowledge is the highest good. 29 Their
opinion is rejected in Jer g.23: “The wise will not take pride in
his wisdom,” says the Lord, “nor will the strong take pride in his
strength.” Why? Because everything that is within you is subor-
dinate to your nature, but what makes you happy ought to be
above you, not subjected to you. Because of this the text contin-
ues: “But he will take pride in this: knowing me and being ac-
quainted with me” [Jer g.24]. 30

There are others who say that happiness is found in these
things that are [not above or within us, but] next to us. Such
people put their trust in humankind. 31 Against them Ps 146.3
says: “Do not put your trust in princes.”

Even in angels we must not put our trust; some have said that
seeing angels is our end, 32 but our intellect is made for the vi-
sion of the Highest Cause. 33 Anselm says: “For we are not hap-
py by seeing angels, but by seeing the virtue through which we
love (diligo ) 34 angels.”

(2.3) “Happy the nation whose lord is its God.” And how are
we to understand this “its”? I say that it means that (2.3.1) God
is to be known, (2.3.2) possessed, and (2.3.3) enjoyed.


28. ST I— II 46,6,1; cf. 30,4.

29. Cf. ST I-II 2,7.

30. Cf. ST I-II 2,8 (our happiness is not in created things) and 3,1-8 (it is in
seeing the divine essence).

31. In ST I-II 4,8 Thomas is more nuanced, i.e., positive, about the value of
fellow human beings or friends for our happiness (on earth).

32. Cf. ST I 88,1 and I-II 1 15,6,3.

33. So God has created us in order to be happy: ST III 9,2,3.

34. For Thomas’s terminology of “love”: see Sermon 01 Veniet desideratus,
note 39.


SERMON 20


303


(2.3.1) First, I say that their God is to be known. The perfect
happiness of the saints in the heavenly homeland consists in
knowing God. Augustine says so in Confessions, Book IV, chapter
4: “For a man is unhappy who knows all those things, but does
not know you; happy is the one who knows you, even if he does
not know all those things. Someone, however, who knows you
and also those things, is not happier because of those things,
but he is happy only because of you.” Happiness is that we may
know God, or that we may have God to know. 35 But the saints in
the heavenly homeland know God, don’t they? They certainly
do. 36 Thus we read in Jer 31.34: “A man will not need to teach
his brother and his neighbor, saying: ‘Know the Lord,’ for all
will know me, from the least of them to the greatest.”

But in what way do the saints have God to know? I say that
two things accompany this knowledge: (a) a clear and direct vi-
sion and (b) a perfect similarity with God.

(a) First, I say that this knowledge follows from a clear and di-
rect vision. 37 For we see God only through things remote from
him, through a similarity of the creatures and in things that we
cannot explain. 38 Hence it says in Jb 36.25: “All people see him;
everyone looks up to him from afar.” The Apostle [formulates
it in this way] in Rom 1.20: “The invisible things of God are
observed as we understand them, through the things that are
made.” But in the heavenly home the saints see God clearly, not
in a mirror or in an enigmatic way [cf. 1 Cor 13.12].

Well, in order to see God clearly we must have pure eyes. If
eyes have darkness or if they are turbid, they are not sufficient
to see the clarity with your mind; it is proper to the fire of con-
cupiscence, to the fire of anger, or to the fire of desiring evil
things, that you are prevented from the vision of God, 39 as we
read in Psalm 68: “Fire,” that is, the fire of concupiscence, “had

35. After all, in this life we cannot fully know God as he is; cf. ST I 1,1, 1,9,3,
2,1,1, 3 intr., 13,2,3, 13,11-12. Yet we can live with him and thus get to know
him better.

36. ST I 12,1 and 5; I— II 69,2,3.

37. Cf. ST I 12,7. The following text breathes 1 Jn 3.2, cited further down,
in (b).

38. Cf. ST I 12,11-12.

39. Respectively, ST I— II 77,5 and 82,3; 48,3; 33,3, and II— II 15,3.


304


THOMAS AQUINAS


overpowered them, and they could not see the sun” [Ps 58.9],
that is, God. 40 So this knowledge is accompanied by a clear and
direct vision.

(b) In the same way, this knowledge is accompanied by a per-
fect similarity with God, since knowledge does not come about
unless through an assimilation of the one who knows with the
thing known, as the Philosopher puts it. 41 Well, the saints in the
heavenly homeland have a perfect similarity with God. As we
read in 1 Jn 3.2: “When he appears, we will be similar to him,
and we will see him as he is.” 42

If you want to arrive at similarity with God in the homeland,
you ought to apply yourself to becoming similar to him in good
works here, [on earth]. 43 Christ came to give peace to the world.
Eph 2.14 reads: “He himself is our peace, who has made both
one.” So do not sow strife, but bring disagreements back to
peace if you want to be similar to Christ here on earth [cf. Eph
4.11-16]. Hence it says in the Gospel according to Matthew 5_g:
“Happy the peacemakers, because they will be called children
of God.” A son bears a perfect likeness to his father. Thus in the
heavenly homeland we will have God to know and to see. There-
fore, Augustine says in his commentary on Psalm 119: “That vi-
sion ( contemplatio ) is promised as the end of all our actions.”

(2.3.2) It is written in Dt lo.g that the sons of Levi did not
have a portion [of the land] among the brethren, since the
Lord was their possession. The saints have God in their pos-
session, and that is enough for them. Ps 16.6: “The ropes (that
bound me) have fallen for me (when I saw) the very bright
things, for my heritage is very bright to me.” [Ps 16.5:] “The
Lord is the portion of my heritage and my cup; (you are the
one who returns my heritage to me).”

But in what way do the saints possess God? I say that they are
happy in possessing God, since Jn 4.14 reads: “Happy the one
who fears him.” 44 And how have they arrived at possessing him?

40. Cf. ST I— II 36,2. 41. ST I 14,2,2, 85,5,3, an d 88,1,2.

42. Throughout ST I 12 Thomas is explaining this text. He cites it explicitly
in 12, isc, 12,2,1, 12,5, and 12,6,1.

43. Mt 5.48 (cf. ST I— II 61,5; II— II 184,2), 1 Pt 1.16; Eph 5.1.

44. Cf. Ps 112.1. Thomas distinguishes between fearing God as God’s gra-


SERMON 20


305


I say through love ( dilectio ). Thus we read in 1 Jn 4.16: “Some-
one who remains in love ( caritas ), remains in God, and God in
him.” And in Tb 13.18: “Happy all who love ( diligo ) you.” 45

But what do you possess in possessing God? I say that by pos-
sessing God you possess what is in God [cf. Mt 23.20-22]. And
what is in God? Glory and riches, as we read in Ps 112.3: “Glory
and riches are in his house.” The saints in the heavenly home-
land have glory and honor. All are kings, as we read in Rv 5.10:
“You have made us” kings, “a kingdom for our God.” This glo-
ry is promised to the humble, because it says in Jb 22.29 (Vg):
“The one who is humbled will be in glory.” And in the Gospel
according to Matthew 5.3 we read: “Blessed the poor (in spirit),
because theirs is the kingdom of the heavens.” Again, the saints
have infinite 46 riches, for they have anything that someone can
desire.

But to whom is that possession given? To those who quar-
rel? 47 Surely not. In the world man acquires something at times
by quarreling about earthly things, and through fraud. But the
heavenly riches are acquired by mildness. 48 Hence we read in
Jas 1.21: “Receive in mildness the word that was planted.” And
in the Gospel according to Matthew 5.5 it says: “Happy the
meek, for they will possess the earth.” Thus the saints have God
to know and to possess.

(2.3.3) Third, the saints in the homeland have God to enjoy
and to delight in. Jb 22.26 reads: “In the Almighty you will over-
flow with delights.” The saints in the heavenly homeland do not
delight in a temporal thing, but in God, the fountain of every
good. Thus the Lord says in Lk 22.30: “that you may eat and
drink at my table in my Kingdom.”

What is eating at God’s table? It is to delight in and to be re-

cious gift of a holy reverence for him, and fearing what is not God. The lat-
ter is not a virtue and not part of eternal life: ST I— II 67,4,2 and II— II 19,11.

45. In view of the Scripture texts cited here, we see that Thomas speaks of
a union with God which is a union through love; cf. ST I— II 25,2,2, 26,2,2, and
68,4,3.

46. For Thomas’s understanding of infinity: ST I 7 (God’s infinity), 14,12
and 86,2 (knowledge), 25,2 (power).

47. Quarreling is a sin, opposed to friendship: ST II— II 1 16.

48. ST II— II 157 on clemency and mildness.


306


THOMAS AQUINAS


freshed by the same thing by which God is refreshed. And what
is the thing by which God is refreshed? It is his goodness. When
you are refreshed by the goodness of God, you eat at God’s ta-
ble — and this is the happiness of the saints. Hence it is said in
Lk 14.15: “Happy the one who will eat bread in the kingdom of
the saints.” 49

And see: this delight has three characteristics: 50

(a) This joy gives consolation. Through that joy a man los-
es all sadness, 51 as we read in Is 65.16: “The earlier fears are
relegated to oblivion; they are neither in the memory nor will
they rise over the heart, because you will see and exult in these
things that I have made.” Augustine says in The City of God, Book
22, chapter 30, that in one way the learning and the teaching of
pain is forgotten, and in another way its infliction and experi-
ence. The learning and the teaching of pain is forgotten when
someone neglects it [cf. Is 2.4]; the infliction and experience of
it, when the pain is transformed into joy. The saints also forget
all pains because of joy. And so thatjoy brings consolation. 52

(b) Furthermore, it [the joy] is complete. Why is it complete?
Because it concerns the Creator, whereas concerning all crea-
tures nothing will come to your mind that will not make you re-
joice. For this joy will lead to the contemplation of the Divinity,
and from there to a contemplation of the creatures, and thus it
will find refreshment in God and creatures everywhere. There-
fore, the joy is complete [cf. 1 Jn 1.3-4]. Hence we read in Jn
16.24: “Ask, so that your joy may be complete.” And Augustine
says: “No one can arrive at this satisfaction, except by hunger-
ing for justice,” as we read in the Gospel according to Matthew
5.6: “Happy those who hunger and thirst for justice, for they
will be satisfied.”

49. God’s goodness is for all people (ST I 19,4,1, 23,4,1); it is abundant (ST
I 21,4, 25,5) and without end (ST II— II 24,8, 27,5; cf. Ill 23,1). For the theme
of the refreshment at God’s table, see also Sermon 13 Homo quidam fecit, the
Sermo.

50. Cf. ST I-II 4,1-2, 31,3, 32,4-5, 34,1-3, 35,1-6.

51. According to ST III 84,9,3 consolation mitigates sadness, but does not
take it away completely. At least, that is the case as long as we live on earth; in
this sermon Thomas speaks of the hereafter.

52. Cf. ST II-II 9,4,1.


SERMON 20


307


(c) Moreover, that pure joy is not mixed with mourning and
anxiety, 53 as the joy of the world is. 54 Concerning this joy of the
world Prv 14.13 says: “A laugh will be mixed with pain.” In Is
35.10 [we read about the heavenly joy]: “They will obtain joy
and gladness, and pain and sighing will flee from them.” And
in Prv 1.33: “He will thoroughly enjoy abundance, after the en-
durance of the fear of evil things.” 55 The merciful will have that
joy, because [it is promised] in Mt 5.7: “Happy the merciful, for
they will receive mercy themselves.” Augustine says: “He him-
self is our end, whom we will see without end, whom we will
love ( amo ) without disgust, and whom we will praise without get-
ting tired. But what will be in that end? We will become empty
without end; by becoming empty we will see; by seeing we will
love (amo); by loving we will praise. Happy the one who will be
in that end,” for Psalm 36 says: “Happy those who live in your
house, Lord” [Ps 84.5].

May we be guided to that happiness by the One who lives
and reigns with the Father and the Holy Spirit, et cetera.


pars 3: Collatio in sero

“Happy the nation whose lord is its God” [Ps 33.12], et cete-
ra. In view of that glorious company of the saints, whose feast
we celebrate today, we spoke about (1) the dignity of the saints
and about (2) their leader. Because of the shortness of the
time, we must say just something about (3) how this group is ar-
ranged, which is signified by the term “people.” 56


53. In conformity with Rv 21.4; the inhabitants of the heavenly homeland
will not experience sadness or anxiety, even not by reason of the people on
earth for whom they care and who pray to God; cf. ST I 1 13,7 and II— II 83,1 1.

54. Even our spiritual joy, which comes forth from love ( caritas ), can be
mixed with sadness, as we do not fully participate in it: ST II— II 28,2. Christ’s
spiritual joy, however, was always complete, even in his Passion; cf. ST III
46,7-8.

55. Cf. the references mentioned in note 13.

56. Thomas does not mention point 4, which he announced at the begin-
ning of the Sermo. The election of the saints is discussed, however, together with
their distinction, in 3.2.


308


THOMAS AQUINAS


(3) What is a people? Augustine introduces this definition of
“people” in The City of God, Book tg, chapter 31: 57 “A people is
a multitude of men and women together, united by a consensus
of law and by a common purpose.” So, according to this defini-
tion, three things can be observed in the term “people”: (3.1)
the great multitude, (3.2) the ordered distinction, and (3.3) the
harmonious union.

(3.1) First, I say that for a people a great number is required,
because one or two do not make a people. Does this nation
consist of a multitude? It certainly does. Hence it says in today’s
Epistle reading: “I saw a great crowd which no one could count”
[Rv 7.9].

(3.1.1) It pertains to the dignity of a king, and especially of
this king, that he has a great people. Hence it says in Proverbs 5:
“The dignity of a king is found in the multitude of his people”
[Prv 14.28]. And Boethius says that a king boasts of the mul-
titude of his citizens. In comparison with heaven the earth is
nothing [cf. Wis 11.22, Is 40.15-17]. Dionysius says in The Heav-
enly Hierarchy, chapter 14, that a multitude of material things is
nothing in respect of a multitude of spiritual things. And it is
said about the Lord: “Thousands of thousands serve him and
ten thousands times hundred thousand stood by him” [Dn 7.10,
Rv 5.11], and after that the multitude of all the saints [is men-
tioned] [Dn 7.27, Rv 7.4]. In 1 Samuel we find: “Israel and Ju-
dah, innumerable as the sand of the sea, eating and drinking
and praising” [1 Kgs 4.20]. Only God knows how big the mul-
titude of the saints is [Rv 7.9]. Thus it says in Ps 147.4: “Who
would count the multitude of the stars?” 58 So the multitude of
the people pertains to the dignity of the king.

(3.1.2) Furthermore, it pertains to joyfulness. A human be-
ing is of a corruptible nature. The multitude of the people
pertains to the greatness of the joy. 59 Hence it says in Is 22.2:
“crowded town, exulting city.”

57. It is in fact chapter 24.

58. The inference of this rhetorical question follows in verse 5: “our Lord is
great and mighty in power.” In Jb 38.7 the stars are identified with the sons of
God. Thomas refers to this explicitly in SCG IV 6.

59. For the more people there are in heaven, the more people are with-


SERMON 20


309


(3.1.3) Moreover, the great multitude pertains to our safety.
Many are the saints who are with us. 60 Hence it says in Jgs 5.20:
“The stars that remain in their path and in order fought against
Sisera,” that is, against the devil. And Elisha said to his servant
in 2 Kgs 6.16: “Fear not, for there are many more with us than
with them.” 61

Thus the multitude of the saints in the homeland brings
joy to the saints (3.1.2), honor to God (3.1.1), and safety to us

♦♦♦

(4) 62 We must speak about the election of the saints. (3.3)
The distinction of the saints is handed down to us on the basis
of the knowledge in the Epistle reading [Rv 7.5-8], but that di-
versity is in the world, not in heaven. 63 Hence the Apostle says in
Col 3.11: “There is neither barbarian nor Scythian, neither Jew
nor Gentile.” 64 And St. Peter says in Acts 10.35: “In every nation
someone who fears God and does justice is received by him.”

(3.2) Therefore, we hear in the Gospel about a difference be-
tween the saints that will be in the homeland in the glorious
people.

(3.2.1) It has been handed down to us that some will be


drawn from corruption; cf. ST I 75,6. In death the corruptible body is separated
from the incorruptible soul; cf. SCG II 57.

60. The saints in patria are concerned with people on the way, in via, viatores ;
they pray with us and for us (ST II— II 83,1 1) and help and protect us (cf. ST II-
II 17,4) — whence we speak of guardian angels (I 113) and patron saints.

61. In verse 17 it shows that this refers to the heavenly hosts.

62. Apparently Thomas had very little time (maybe because of other festivi-
ties that were planned) : this Collatio in sero is relatively very brief; point 4 is only
mentioned (and in a way incorporated in 3.2); point 3.3 is reduced to a prelim-
inary — although not unimportant — remark of 3.2.

63. So we make the distinctions for our sake, in order to know them better,
whereas these distinctions are as such not in heaven: it is “a harmonious union.”
In other words: these distinctions are not in re (in the thing itself) , but in ratione
tantum (in our thinking only); they are made on the basis of their lives on earth;
that is why these people are “elected.”

64. Cf. ST III 36,3. Even on earth there is not such a distinction as for man
and woman, Thomas says; both are image of God insofar as they are rational
creatures; cf. ST I 93,6,2 (where he refers to Col 3.10-1 1, but cites in fact Gal
3.28); cf. also III 67,4: also, women can baptize as a servant of Christ, under spe-
cific circumstances.


310


THOMAS AQUINAS


kings. It is true that all the saints reign with God [cf. Dn 7.27],
but the apostles reign in a special way. Thus it is said in Lk
22.29: “I prepare a kingdom for you, just as the Father has pre-
pared it for me”; and just as they were leaders of the Church, so
they have in the homeland a regal dignity. And how have they
acquired that reign? Surely through their poverty. Others ac-
quire a kingdom through riches. Let us hear Peter, who says in
Mt 19.27 about the acquisition of the kingdom: “Behold, we left
everything behind.” And the Lord says in Mt 5.3: “Happy the
poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of the heavens.”

There are newfangled debaters who do not know what they
say. They say that virtue consists in keeping the middle and in
such a way that every renouncement, even virginity, does not
belong to the virtues, because renouncement does not keep
the middle. The Philosopher says: “Those who have a smatter-
ing of things, because they turn their eyes only to a few things,
speak out easily.” Virtues should not keep the middle accord-
ing to quantity, but according to a right ( rectus ) way of reason-
ing. The Philosopher says in Book 4 of Ethics that in extraor-
dinary situations someone is magnanimous through extreme
greatness, but in such a way that he must keep the middle — be-
cause he is magnanimous — where he ought to, in accordance
with what ought to be and because of what ought to be. 65 Phi-
losophers have laid aside all their belongings, so that they can
make themselves free for the philosophy and live moderately. If
this was the case with the Gentiles, it well ought to be the case
with Christians. But if a man wanted to renounce when his wife
asks him for what he owes her, renouncement would be a vice,
even though we find the highest virtue in virginity. 66


65. Cf. ST I— II 64. It is as such remarkable that a Christian preacher explic-
itly refers to a pagan philosopher in a sermon (so, in the liturgy) in order to
make something clear about Christian virtuosity; cf. ST I— II 55,4. See also Ser-
mon 06 Celum et terra. Thomas’s point of departure for explaining what a virtue
is, is Peter Lombard’s definition (which is based on Augustine’s). In this sermon
Thomas refers to Aristotle as he reacts against a movement that rejects the pur-
suit of perfection in virtue and that calls for this upon Aristotle, unjusdy, as Tho-
mas contends.

66. Cf. ST II— II 152,4.


SERMON 20


311


Thus the apostles have acquired the kingdom through pov-
erty. 67

(3.2.2) We find victorious martyrs, who, as Heb 11.33 [formu-
lates it], “conquered kingdoms by faith,” 68 and those are happy,
meek people, because “no groaning resounds (from their lips),
no complaint.” 69 About them the Gospel according to Matthew
5.5 says: “Happy the meek, for they will possess the earth.” 70

(3.2.3) Likewise, we find some who live in solace, like the
holy confessors who mourned while they were in the world and
did great penance. You have seen Anthony [of Egypt] and Ben-
edict, who lived in tears and great, austere penance, and who
now experience joy and consolation. Thus it says in the Gospel
that they will be consoled [Mt 5.4]. 71

(3.2.4) Likewise, we find in heaven most righteous judg-
es, namely, the prophets who preached justice; these were the
ones hungering for justice, and therefore they are satisfied now.
Thus it says in the Gospel: “Happy those who hunger and thirst
after justice, for they will be satisfied” [Mt 5.6]. 72

(3.2.5) Likewise, we find in the homeland a group of patri-
archs who fervently applied themselves to the works of mercy;
the dignity of receiving others is now kept for them in heaven.
Hence Abraham, who received everybody in his hospitality —

67. In this way Thomas has interpreted Mt 5.3 (“Blessed are the poor in spir-
it”) in the light of Lk 6.20 (“Blessed are the poor”), as he does in ST I— II 69,3.

68. Cf. ST II-II 124,5.

69. From the hymn Sanctorum mentis inclyta gaudia, sung at the office of the
feasts of martyrs. (For the complete text of the stanza quoted, see Sermon 19
Beati qui habitant, note 42 ) . This phrase also occurs twice in the Legenda sanctae
Clarae virginis. This may indicate that (also) Franciscans were present as Tho-
mas preached this sermon.

70. In ST II-II 121,2 Thomas links meekness with God’s gracious gift of de-
votion ( pietas ), on the basis of Augustine’s exposition on the Sermon on the
Mount.

71. In ST II-II 9,4 this beatitude is linked with the gift of knowledge, also on
the basis of what Augustine says in his exposition on the Sermon on the Mount:
“Knowledge befits those who mourn, because they have learned through the evil
things that overcame them what they will endeavor to achieve as good things.”

72. In ST II-II 58,7 Thomas cites Chrysostom, who sees justice as especially
opposed to greed; in 58,1 Thomas defines justice as “the constant and lasting
will to give to everyone his/her due.”


312


THOMAS AQUINAS


even angels, according to Gn 18.3 — has the dignity in heaven
that all are received in his bosom [cf. Lk 16.22]. And therefore
it says in Heb 13.2: “Do not forget hospitality.” Abraham receives
at his bosom all who are chosen. Thus it is said in Mt 8.11: “They
will come from the East and the West, and they will recline at
the bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.” About these it is said
in Sir 44.10: “These are the men of mercy, who were always liv-
ing devoutly” [cf. Mt 5.7, Lk 6.38].

(3.2.6) Likewise, we find in the homeland the group of vir-
gins, who preserved their cleanness. This is the chaste nation.
About these the Gospel says: “Blessed are the clean of heart, for
they will see God” [Mt 5.8]. 73

(3.2.7) Likewise, we find in the homeland the choir of angels
who strive for peace. And about them we read in the Gospel ac-
cording to Matthew 5.9: “Happy the peacemakers, for they will
be called children of God.” 74

It is clear now how the poor have acquired the kingdom; the
meek, the earth; the mourning, consolation; those who hunger
after justice received satisfaction; the merciful gained mercy;
the clean, the vision of God; and the peacemakers are called
children of God. 75

May we be led to that community by him who with the Fa-
ther, et cetera.

73. In the ST Thomas does not exclusively connect this beatitude with vir-
ginity, but with the good disposition of the will which is required for attaining
happiness (ST I— II 4,4), with the gift of understanding ( intellectus , in ST II— II
8,7), and with cleanness ( mundicia : of body and mind), in particular for those
who live a contemplative life (ST II— II 180,2).

74. In ST II— II 19,12, Thomas connects this beatitude with the gift of fear of
God, and in II— II 45,6 with the gift of wisdom, both on the basis of the same text
of Augustine. Cf. Sir 1.16 (a text not cited in the ST).

75. For Thomas’s numeration of the Beatitudes, see ST I— II 69,3.


SERMON 21
BEATUS VIR

Sermon on the Feast of St. Martin,
the Eleventh of November


Psalm 83.6-7 (Vg): Happy the man whose help is from you:
he has set his heart on ascending while in the valley of tears,
in the place which he has built.


part 1 : Prothema

appy the man whose help is from you: he has set his
heart on ascending while in the valley of tears, in the
place which he has built” [Ps 83.6-7 (Vg)]. The pro-
claimed words show explicitly enough that St. Martin has ar-
rived at the glory of highness through divine help. That help is
ready for all people. And just as St. Martin needed divine help
in order to arrive at the glory of highness, so we, too, need di-
vine help so that we can arrive at glory. 1 Therefore, in accord-
ance with the exhortation of the Apostle in Heb 4.16: “Let us
approach with confidence to the throne of his grace, that we
may receive mercy and obtain grace in the favorable time,” so
that he may give me something to say, et cetera.


part 2 : Sermo

“Happy the man” [Ps 83.6-7 (Vg)], et cetera. It is a custom
that when someone is promoted to a great status or to a great
dignity, he and his relatives and friends commemorate this ex-


1. ST I 73,1,1; cf. I— II 3,1.


313


314


THOMAS AQUINAS


altation. This day St. Martin is promoted to the highest dignity
and the highest place, namely, to the kingdom of the heavens.
Therefore, Mother Church commemorates his happiness.

Concerning his happiness three things come up that we must
consider on the ground of the words proclaimed. First, we can
consider the beginning of his happiness [in this part, the Ser-
mo | ; second, the progress [in the Collatio in sero\; and third, the
endpoint of his happiness [touched upon in the final sentence].
The origin or cause of his happiness was divine help, which is
mentioned when it is said: “Happy the man (whose help is from
you).” He has made progress in ascents: he advanced from one
virtue to another, which is mentioned when it says: “He has set
his heart on ascending.” The endpoint of his happiness is the
gain of eternal happiness, which is mentioned when it says: “in
the place which he has built.” Why? The Psalmist explains im-
mediately 2 what he has said, as he adds: “The Giver of the Law
will also give a blessing”; see: the divine help. [He continues:]
“They will go from one virtue to another”; behold: the ascent
from one virtue to another. “The God of gods will be seen in
Zion” [Ps 83.8 (Vg)]; 3 lo: the place that he has built.

❖

First, I say that the origin or the cause of arriving at a partic-
ular dignity is divine help. With our reason we find in creatures
that when something reaches something by its own nature, it is
the cause of it. As for those things that it does not reach by its
own nature — like fire: it is warm by its own nature, and there-
fore it is the cause of the heating in those things which it does
not reach by its own nature. 4 Well, God is happy by his own na-
ture, and thus he is the cause of happiness in others. 5 Hence
the Apostle says in 1 Tm 6.16: “(our Lord Jesus Christ,) whom
the happy and only powerful King of kings and Lord of lord-

2. In verse 8, not in verse 3 as the Latin text says.

3. Zion is the mountain on which Jerusalem, the city of God, is built, whence
the use of the verb ascendere, to ascend, to go up (cf. Is 2.3, for example).

4. ST I 108,5,5 ( Secundo . . .); Ill 7,9.

5. ST I 26,1-4, resp., I— II 2,8; others are not happy by nature, but participate
in God’s happiness insofar as he gives us a share in it. In this context Thomas
refers to Ps 103.5.


SERMON 21


315


ships will show.” So no one can arrive at happiness unless by di-
vine help.

Let us see what help the Lord grants us, so that humankind
may arrive at happiness. I mention a triple help: (t) first, God
chides mankind; (2) second, he teaches us; and (3) third, he
takes us up. 6

(1) That God chides us is a way to happiness. Jb 5.17 reads:
“Happy the man who is chided by God.” This correction per-
tains to being called. 7 Humankind is chided only because of sin.
Being called happens from afar; through sin it happens that
someone is far from God, as it says in Is 59.2: “Your sins cause a
division between you and your God.” 8 The Apostle shows us the
blessing of being called when he says in Rom 8.30: “The ones he
has predestined he has also called.” 9 And St. Martin was called
by the Lord and was chided, that is, removed from original sin
and preserved from actual sin. 10

Is 41.2: “Who has raised the just one from the East and
called him to follow him?” Those who are raised from sin are
raised by God. Some are converted in the East — that is, in their
boyhood 11 — just like St. Martin; when he was ten years of age,
he became a catechumen, against his parents’ will. When he
was twelve he thought of how he could become a hermit.

See that help: it is necessary for man that God chides him [cf.
Heb 12.7]. You should know that no matter how often you are
chided by a human being, this correction is not worth anything,
unless you become more intimate with God’s grace, which is
calling you. Thus it says in Eccl 7.13: “Consider God’s works: no

6. In what follows Thomas expounds these three steps in view of Rom 8.30.

7. Vocatio : ST I 1 13,1,3. Correctio n etymologically connected with rectus: right,
upright, righteous.

8. Cf. ST I 48,4.

9. Cf. ST I 23,2.

10. ST I— II 1 13,1,3: “Being called” means that through God’s help our mind
is moved and excited to refrain from sinning. This is not the same as the for-
giveness of sins; it is its cause.

1 1. The East, from where the day (life) begins. See also Sermon 08 Puer Je-
sus, Prothema and under 1.3 of the Sermo, and Sermon 09 Exiit qui seminat, under
2.2 and 2.3 of the Sermo.


316


THOMAS AQUINAS


one can correct someone whom he has despised.” So it is not
worth anything that someone be chided by highly placed peo-
ple or by others, unless God works in him through his grace. 12

God’s chiding of man is a sign of his love ( dilectio ). 13 Thus we
read in Prv 3.12: “The Lord chides whom he loves ( diligo).” u

God chides man in three ways:

(1.1) Hrst, by inspiring fear. Hence we read in Sir 1.27: “Who
is without fear cannot be justified; fear of the Lord belongs to
wisdom.” So we must apply ourselves to having fear [of God].
This is the first step to happiness. 13

(1.2) Second, God chides someone by forgiving him his sins.
God is the only one who can forgive sins, according to Mk 2.7. 16
And in Psalm 27 we read: “Happy the ones whose iniquities are
forgiven (and whose sins are covered)” [Ps 32.1].

(1.3) Third, God chides someone by pulling him away from
sins. Isn’t it a divine blessing that, just as God forgives a man his
sins, he also preserves him from sinning? 17 Augustine says this in
Confessions, Book II, chapter 7: “I ascribe it to your grace and your
mercy that you have melted away my sins like ice. Also, the many
evil things I did not do I ascribe to your grace, because I was not
able to do them.” Ps 1.1 touches upon this happiness, saying:
“Happy the man who did not go astray following the advice of the
godless (and did not come to a standstill on the way of sinners).”
St. Martin did not need this grace of the removal of sins, since we
do not read about actual sins committed by him. But God chided
him in this respect: that he preserved him from sinning. 18


12. Cf. Is 26.12, Phil 2.13, Heb 13.21; we are just instruments ( instrumenta
separata, as distinct from instrumenta coniuncta : ST III 62,5) of his grace; we can-
not do anything apart from him, as in Jn 15.4-5.

13. For Thomas’s terminology of “love,” see Sermon 01 Veniet desideratus,
note 39.

14. This love is not only love out of justice (ST III 59,1), but also like the
love of a father for his son, as Prv 3.12 continues. Cf. ST I— II 69,3,4 (where Tho-
mas cites Jb 5.17: see note 7), 109,8,2; II— II 33,3,3; and III 59,1.

15. Cf. ST I— II 113,4,1; II— II 19,2 and 4-11: this fear of and reverence for
God is a gracious gift of the Holy Spirit.

16. ST III 3,8,3, 89,1; cf. I— II 113,1-2.

17. ST III 88,1.

18. Thus — and in what follows — St. Martin, just like the Blessed Virgin (Ser-


SERMON 21


317


(2) Second, God offers his help to a man by teaching him.
In Ps 94.12 we read: “Happy the man whom you teach, Lord,
and whom you instruct in your Law.” This is not a teaching that
would only enlighten the intellect; it moves the affection as
well. 19 The art of oratory has an effect on a judge’s affection.
If this is the effect of human pleas, the effect of divine pleas 20
must be much stronger. Hence we read in Jn 6.45: “Everyone
who has listened to my Father and has learned, comes to me.”
Someone listens to the Father when he is inspired with a good
thing; someone who rejects inspired things does not learn.
Isaiah has not acted in the latter way; he says in 1.5: “God has
opened my ear, and I have not objected; I have not recoiled,”
that I may listen to him as to a magister. Someone who subjects
his heart to the divine inspiration learns. This pertains to jus-
tification. 21 The Apostle says in Rom 8.30: “Those whom he has
called, he has also justified.”

There are three stages in the divine teaching [cf. 1 Cor

1 3 - 1 3 ]-

(2.1) First, he enlightens the intellect through faith. 22 This
is the greatest teaching. Having a little bit of faith is more than
knowing everything that all philosophers in the world have
known. 23 Hence it says in Dt 4.6: “(Show) that wisdom and un-
derstanding of yours before the peoples.” And in Jn 20.29 it
reads: “Happy those who have not seen and yet believe.”

(2.2) Second, this teaching raises up the mind through
hope. When the mind believes through faith, it is then elevated
by hope. 24 This is the second stage of happiness. Ps 40.5: “Hap-

mons 17 and 18) and St. Nicholas (Sermon 16), is idealized in accordance with
the customs of that time. But since he is depicted as almost superhuman, it be-
comes almost impossible for him to be an example for people who are not as
“perfect.”

19. God as well as creatures can enlighten and change a person’s intellect
and affection, but in different ways: ST I 1 1 1,1-2; cf.107,2 and I— II 79,3.

20. Cf. Ps 4.2, 43.1, 1 19.154; also Rom 8.26.

21. ST I— II 100,2,1, 111,2,2: God does not justify a human being without
his/her co-operation and obedience (II— II 104).

22. ST I— II 62,4 (in quaestio 62 Thomas distinguishes the theological virtues
of faith, hope, and love); cf. ST I 12,5; II— II 2,1, 6,1-2, 8,2 and 4.

23. See also homily 14 Attendite afalsis, under 1.2.2 of the Sermo.

24. For the relation between faith and hope, see ST II— II 17,7.


318


THOMAS AQUINAS


py the man whose hope is the name of the Lord and who has
not looked at vain and unhealthy things that are false.” Some
do not trust in God, but in vain things. Which are vain things?
Temporal goods, riches, honors, and the like. 25 Ps 39.6 says:
“But still total vanity is the living man.” 26 So you should not put
your trust in those things. 27 Some, and that is worse, trust in un-
healthy things; they turn to the interpretations of omens, pre-
dictions, and the superstitions of black magic. 28

(2.3) The third stage of this teaching is that it changes the
affection through love ( dilectio ), because it says in Tb 13.17:
“Happy all who love ( diligo ) you.” St. Martin's father and mother
were pagans, yet still his soul did not sense anything but spiritu-
al things [cf. 1 Cor 14.1], and he was so erudite that he has writ-
ten a book on the Trinity. 29

♦t*

(3) The third divine help is that God takes us up [cf. Ex
19.4]. Ps 65.5 reads: “Happy the one whom you have chosen
and taken up; he will live in your forecourts.” This action of tak-
ing someone up pertains to the third blessing of God, namely,
magnification. The Apostle says in Rom 8.30: “The ones whom
he has justified, he has also magnified.”

And how has the Lord magnified St. Martin? Surely with a
triple step.

(3.1) First, through the holiness of his works. If someone
reads St. Martin’s biography, he will discover how grand he has
been: how great his virtue, his abstinence, and his chastity have
been. Gn 26.13 says of such a magnitude that “Isaac advanced
and increased until the effect was great.” St. ( Beatus ) Martin
has been great in the observance of the Commandments. Thus


25. ST 1-112,1-7.

26. Cf. ST I-II 4,8.

27. Fiducia, confidere. deeply rooted belief that precedes knowledge in some-
one or something who/ that can and will help you (ST I-II 40,2,2). Eventually
only God is to be trusted in this way, according to Psalms 49 and 146; cf. ST II-
II 129,6,1.

28. All these are to be repudiated: ST II— II 92-96, 122,2,3, an d 122,3.

29. Together with St. Hilary of Poitiers he strongly opposed Arianism, a pop-
ular heresy in early Christianity which denies the divinity of Christ.


SERMON 21


319


we read in Proverbs 28: “Happy ( beatus ) those who hear your
Law and guard it in their whole heart.” 30

(3.2) Second, St. Martin has been great because of the great-
ness of [his] miracles, (a) He has raised up three dead peo-
ple. (b) His garments [cf. Acts ig.12] and the letters he sent
cured those who were ill. About this magnification we read in
Sir 45.2: “He has made him great in the fear of enemies,” 31 (c)
that is: of his enemies, the pagans [Sir 45.2 (Vg)], “and by his
words he has tamed monsters.” For once there was a tree cut
down, and he had placed himself in the path of its fall, and
the tree fell over to the other side. 32 (d) Likewise, he wanted to
penetrate the troops of the enemies unarmed, and subsequent-
ly he tamed the monsters, because his enemies sent peace ne-
gotiators. Because of these miracles St. Martin must be mag-
nified, like the Blessed Virgin, who has said: “Because he has
done great things for me” [Lk 1.49], namely, the greatest mir-
acle of the miracles: that in her womb God became man and
that she gave birth and yet she remained a virgin. 33 Also for St.
Martin he has done many great things. Because of this he must
be magnified by all people.

(3.3) The third step is proper to the magnification of the
happiness of St. Martin, found in the spreading of his fame, all
over the earth. For which is the devotion and which is the city
where the name and the fame of St. Martin are not renowned?
Ps 137.2 (Vg): “You have magnified your holy name above eve-
ry name.” Although a gloss relates this to Christ, still it could
be said of St. Martin. Think about the miracles he has done.
So many kings, so many emperors have applied themselves to


30. This quotation is from Prv 29.18 (= Ps 1 ig.1-2, Prv 8.32).

3 1 . It is God who made him great, for it was through grace that Martin could
work these miracles: ST I 43,3,4, 104,4, 1 1 7 > 3 T-

32. Here Thomas refers to the event when druids whom St. Martin tried to
convert offered to cut down their sacred fir or pine tree, if he stood in the path
of its fall. He agreed. The tree was cut. But as it was about to crush St. Martin,
he held up his hand and made the sign of the cross. Subsequendy it fell the op-
posite way (according to the dramatic account of Sulpitius Severus in his biogra-
phy of St. Martin, chapter 13).

33. ST III 28,1-3.


320


THOMAS AQUINAS


making a name for themselves on earth: some have built trium-
phal arches; others, houses and castles; and still “their memory
has perished with their sound” [Ps g.7] . There are only a few
who know who Trajan and Octavian were. 34 But St. Martin, who
was lowly on earth — the effect [of his life] is great. It says in To-
bit 29: “Upon hearing (my name) the ear has blessed me” [Jb
29.11]. All who hear the story of St. Martin bless him.

The first point is clear now, namely, the beginning of how he
became happy, which is the divine help, and how God chides
and teaches man and takes him up.

part 3: Collatio in sero

We continue with the progress of St. Martin to happiness,
where it says [in the Psalm]: “He has set his heart on ascend-
ing.”

Whoever wants to ascend to some high state must ascend lit-
tle by little. Because St. Martin realized that he ought to ascend
from the low state of misery to a high state, he prepared for
himself the upward steps towards happiness. Well, in regard to
St. Martin, we can consider a threefold ascent. (1) The first is by
means of the sacrament of regeneration; (2) the second is ac-
cording to the state; and (3) the third is according to merit.

(1) First, I say that St. Martin has prepared for himself the as-
cent by means of the sacrament of regeneration. 36 And anyone
on whom this benefaction of being regenerated in Christ is con-
ferred, does not go up a little step. The Apostle says in Gal 3.27:
“All who are baptized in Christ, you are clothed with Christ.” It
is not a little thing to be clothed with Christ and to be strength-
ened by him. 36 Song 4.2 says about this ascent: “Your teeth are

34. Trajan was a mighty Roman emperor at the beginning of the second cen-
tury CE who extended the boundaries of the empire, undertook an enormous
building project in Rome, and enlarged social welfare. Octavian is the name of
the first Roman emperor, Augustus, who ruled from 23 BCE until 14 CE. So
both were very famous and great in the eyes of the people there and then.

35. Which is baptism: Jn 3.3-5. ST III 66,1,1, 66,3, 67,3, 68,2,1.

36. The effects of baptism: ST III 69,1-8.


SERMON 21


321


like a shorn flock.” Hairs are sins: 37 the shorn flock that ascends
from the bath consists of those who have been cleansed from
sin through Baptism, and these ascend. This is signified in Mt
3.16, where it says that Christ after being baptized ascended
from the waters. St. Martin has thought much about how he
could arrive at that benefaction, and later on he has carefully
thought about how he could keep himself clean, free from sin.

(2) The second ascent pertains to the state. Hence it says in
Ex 24.1: “The Lord said to Moses: ‘Go up the mountain, you
and the seventy elders of the house of Israel.’” The Lord said
that the others should stay down and that only Moses should
ascend; ordinary people do not ascend, because they do not
reach for the state of highness. The elders ascended a little bit,
but only Moses went up [all the way] onto the mountain [Ex
24.1-2].

There are different states. If we consider the ascent of St.
Martin in this respect, I say that he has ascended in three ways:
(2.1) first, from the military to the clerical state; (2.2) second,
from the clerical to the religious state; and (2.3) third, from the
religious to the pontifical state.

(2.1) First, I say that St. Martin ascended from the military
state to the clerical state, because the clerical military force 38
is higher than the worldly one. For worldly soldiers wage wars
against enemies of flesh; we, however, wage the Lord’s wars
against spiritual enemies. Hence the Apostle says in 2 Cor 10.4:
“The weapons of our military force are not of the flesh,” but
spiritual, 39 given by God for the destruction of errors, vices, and
sins. About this ascent Is 2.3 says: “Come, let us ascend to the


37. Note that we still associate a baby’s skin with innocence and that in car-
toons “the bad guys” are often the unshaven: a villain’s face.

38. Militia clericalis, militia saecularis. This imagery is also found in texts like 2
Cor 10.4 (quoted in the text) and in 1 Tm 1.18-19 and 2 Tm 2.3-4 where the
Apostle Paul addresses Timothy, a cleric or bishop (to say it anachronistically) ,
as a soldier of Christ. Cf. the image of the Church Militant in Sermon 1 7 Lux
orta, under 1.11 of the Sermo, and in Sermon 1 g Beati qui habitant, under 1.1.1.

39. Cf. ST II— II 40,2. See also, however, how Thomas defends the existence
of religious orders whose members are Crusaders, in ST II— II 188,3.


322


THOMAS AQUINAS


mountain of the Lord and to the house of Jacob’s God, and he
will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his ways.” The clerical
state is a certain mountain. 40 We ought to ascend to the Lord’s
house and serve there and be taught in the teachings ( dogmata )
of the Church [cf. Mt 5.1-2]. Hence it says: “He will teach us his
way,” 41 and we should not allow a contrary way. The Apostle says
in Eph 5.3: “Let it not be mentioned among you”; and that we
ought to walk in the way of the Lord [cf. Eph 5.2, 8, 15]. Some-
one who goes up onto the mountain of the Lord is chosen in
the Lord’s rank [cf. Wis 5.5]. So St. Martin ascended, because
he was taught by St. Hilary, and was made a cleric by him.

(2.2) Second, St. Martin ascended from the clerical state to
the religious state, since he became a monk in Italy. “Some-
one who strives to win a match abstains from all things” [1
Cor 9.25]. How much further does someone go in abstaining
from things that hinder his duties? He would go as much fur-
ther as his strife is more legitimate. Secular clerics have tem-
poral goods, but religious do not have these, that they may not
hinder them. 42 About this ascent Gn 35.3 says: “Let us ascend to
Bethel 43 and live there, (abiding).” “Abiding” is added, mean-
ing: in no way going out of there. Religious ought to stay in the
religious life and not leave it, unless for reasons that pertain to
the salvation of souls. 44

(2.3) Third, St. Martin ascended from the religious state to
the pontifical state. This is the right ascent. 45 For what did he
ascend? Surely for the service of the altar and for administering
the sacraments of the Church. Concerning this ascent Sirach 1

40. In Scripture the mountain is a place where people meet God; someone
who lives in the clerical state wants or is to live in a closer relationship with God;
cf. ST I-II 98,5,2.

41. Is 2.3 reads “ways,” vias (not singular: viam).

42. ST II— II 186,3: possessions can be an obstacle, especially for perfect
love.

43. The Hebrew name Bethel means “house of God.”

44. Cf. ST II— II 189,4 (where Thomas does not explicidy mention this ex-
ception). Cf. also 185,4: whether a bishop could step down and become a re-
ligious.

45. It was the right ( rectus ) thing to leave the religious life in order to be-
come bishop: ST II— II 184,7.


SERMON 21


323


says: “In ascending to the holy altar, he has made his garment of
sanctity glorious” [Sir 50.11]. Has the Lord magnified St. Mar-
tin in this way? Yes, he surely has, when a fiery ball appeared
above him while he offered the sacrament of the altar.

Furthermore, he ascended for the salvation of the peoples.
Thus we read in Prv 28.42: “There is much glory in the exalta-
tion of the just ones, whereas the reign of the godless will ruin
the people.” One bad bishop, for sure, means ruin in many
[people and things]. It is said in Obadiah 27: “As the saviors
ascend the mountains (in order to administer justice)” [Oba-
diah 21], meaning: prelates ought to ascend for the salvation
of souls. But the Lord complains about the evil ones in Ezek
13.5, saying: “You have not ascended, away from the enemy; you
have not placed yourselves upon the wall to defend the Lord’s
house,” namely, against the heretics and all who are evil.

So St. Martin ascended in a threefold way according to his
state.

(3) But ascending according to one’s state would not be
worth anything, unless someone ascends according to merit. 46
Therefore, St. Martin ascended three times according to merit.
Thus says Pope Symmachus: “Someone who is more important
in dignity must be considered most worthless unless he excels
in knowledge and holiness. Being a cleric does not amount to
much if that man does not surpass a layman in virtue. In a simi-
lar way it does not amount to much being a monk or a bishop,
unless one surpasses others in holiness of life.” 47 So it is neces-
sary that someone who ascends according to the state also as-
cends in merit. About this ascent it is said in Song 3.6: “Who is
she who ascends through the desert, like a little twig of smoke
from the scents of myrrh and frankincense and every powder
of the merchant?” “Who goes up like a twig of smoke,” not of
terrifying smoke, but of fragrant smoke. But whence does that
smoke come? Certainly “from the scents of myrrh,” that is, the


46. Cf. ST II— II 185,3. Good works that establish justice for a fellow human
being are meritorious: ST I— II 21,3-4.

47. ST I— II 98,5, respectively, II— II 186,1.


324


THOMAS AQUINAS


mortification of the flesh [cf. Mt 2.11, Jn 1 9.39] , “and of frank-
incense,” that is, devotion [cf. Ps 141.2, etc.], “and of every pow-
der of the merchant,” namely, all virtues.

(3.1) In every state whatsoever someone ought to apply him-
self to advance. We will consider how St. Martin applied him-
self to advance in every state.

(3.1.1) In his military state he applied himself to advance in
mercy and devotion. 48 He also applied himself to advance in a
reasonable way, because soldiers are eager to plunder. 49 By do-
ing so he wanted to show that he was immune to this offense
in his military state, and therefore he applied himself to mer-
cy and devotion. Hence it is said in Lk 3.14 to soldiers: “Do not
ransack anyone; make no false accusation against anyone (and
be satisfied with your wages).”

(3.1.2) Likewise, in the state of a cleric he applied himself to
obedience. 50 He was most obedient: he gave up everything at a
nod of St. Hilary. Hence it befits him what is said in Sir 3.1 (Vg):
“The children of wisdom form the Church of the just ones.”

(3.1.3) Likewise, in the religious life he excelled in poverty
and austerity. 51

(3.1.4) Likewise, in the pontifical state he excelled in humil-
ity; 52 thus he has maintained the same humility in the pontifi-
cal state as he had maintained before, in accordance with Sir
3.18: “No matter how great you are, be humble in everything.”
Sir 32.1 reads: “They have made you the leader; do not want to
be exalted; but be among them as one of them.”

(3.2) See how St. Martin ascended [from state to state]. I say
that he ascended with (3.2.1) prudence, (3.2.2) humility, and
(3.2.3) fervor.

48. Resp., ST II— II 30 and 101. All the virtues Thomas mentions in this sec-
tion 3 are central in religious life too; cf. ST II— II 186,1-2.

49. This is a very grave sin: ST II— II 68,8-9. Even among the gentiles plun-
dering is not allowed according to Thomas in I— II 103,4,3; an d Christians are
supposed to give the good example.

50. ST II— II 104, 186,5 an d 8.

51. ST II— II 186,3 an d more elaborately in Siwmna Contra Gentiles III 130-
135. As for Christ’s poverty during his life on earth, see also ST III 40,2.

52. Cupidity, ambition, and being presumptuous do not befit a bishop: ST
II— II 185,1; cf. 143, 160,2, 161.


SERMON 21


325


(3.2.1) First, I say, he ascended with prudence 53 from the mil-
itary to the clerical state; a war is initiated with preparation [cf.
Lk 14.31]. And he prepared this ascent well. Still, it was pleas-
ing to him not to ascend on high; when St. Hilary wanted to
make him a deacon, he did not want this, but he remained an
acolyte.

Likewise, he ascended from the clerical state and became
a religious. Also he prepared this ascent well in his heart. But
the ascent from the religious to the pontifical state he did not
prepare in his heart, because he was promoted to be a bishop
while he himself resisted. I say this with emphasis, because the
pontifical state, although it is great, still must not be aspired
to. 54 If someone said: “I want to apply myself so that I can gov-
ern the Church well later on,” he has not spoken well. 55 Thus
Augustine says in Book tg of The City of God, chapter tg: “The
higher place, without which a people cannot be governed, even
though it serves the Church as it is proper, is yet indecently
sought after.” He continues: “And if no one put on this burden
to acquire and examine the truth, it must remain vacant.”

(3.2.2) Likewise, St. Martin ascended with humility. Thus it
says: “in the valley of tears” [Ps 83.7 (Vg)]. In the Gospel ac-
cording to Luke 14.11 we read: “If someone humbles himself,
he will be exalted.”

(3.2.3) Likewise, he has made that ascent with fervor. 56
Hence it says: “of tears”; because of the greatness of the desire,
he applied himself to shedding tears. Thus he could say with
Ps 42.2, 4: “Just as a deer desires the fountains of the waters (so
my soul desires you, O God)”; “my tears have been my bread day
and night,” et cetera. 57


53. The first of the cardinal virtues: ST I— II 61; II— II 47-51 (-56).

54. ST II-II 185,1.

55. For the conditions that make an act right or wrong: ST I— II 18-20; and
what the consequences of this are: I— II 21.

56. In ST I— II 28,5 and 48,2,1-2, Thomas sees such fervor connected with
love.

57. Cf. ST I— II 32,4 and 38,2.


326


THOMAS AQUINAS


So, because the saint we celebrate today has well prepared
his ascent in the progress of happiness, he has arrived at the
endpoint of happiness , 58 which is eternal glory , 59

to which may we be led by him who with the Father and the
Holy Spirit, et cetera.

58. Here Thomas just mentions the endpoint of his happiness, announced
at the beginning of the Sermo.

59. It is perfect happiness: ST I 73,1.


APPENDIX


BEHIND THE NAMES


st. Ambrose (ca. 340-397): one of the four Western Doctors
of the Church in Thomas’s time. He was Bishop of Milan from
374 to 397, when the heresy of Arianism (the denial of the
divinity of the Son) was rampant, although not really popular
in Milan itself. He was known as an able administrator and
an erudite theologian who was able to translate wisdom into
practical advice in his writings and his sermons, as well as
for his devout and very simple life style. The influence of his
writings was and is enormous.

st. anselm (1033-1109): Doctor of the Church since 1720
(Pope Clement VII). He was a Benedictine monk (1060) and
abbot (1063) and became Archbishop of Canterbury in 1093.
He did not have the authority of Augustine or Peter Lombard
in Thomas’s time, but he was an important precursor of
scholastic theology. His so-called satisfaction theory and his
proof of God’s existence are revised by Thomas (cf. respectively
ST I 2,1-3, and III 46,1-4).

Aristotle (in these sermons referred to as “the Philosopher”):
Aristotle’s approach and ideas entered the Christian world
in three phases. The initial entry was through Boethius, who
translated two of his logical works ( On the Categories and On
Interpretation). In the 12th century other logical works, known
through contact with Arab culture, were translated. These
two groups of formal works were called the logica vetus (“the
old logic”) and the logica nova (“the new logic”). The question
for Christian theologians and philosophers was whether
Aristotle’s approach could be used: a formal question. But in
the 13th century, when the content of Aristotle’s ideas became


329


330


APPENDIX


known, the problems were quite different, since the content of
some of Aristotle’s views concerning god and the world were
incompatible with the Christian view of God and creation.

arius: see Sermon 14, note 15.

st. augustine (354-430): one of the four Western Doctors
of the Church in Thomas’s time. For Thomas, Augustine was
the highest authority after Scripture. He became the Bishop of
Hippo in 396. As such he promoted religious life (by writing
a rule and living according to it) and dedicated his life to
building up the Church by preaching, writing letters, taking
part in councils, and fighting all kinds of errors concerning
the Catholic faith, such as Manichaeism (a syncretistic,
dualistic religion), Donatism (which held that efficacy of the
sacraments depended on the holiness of the minister: ex opere
operantis instead of the Catholic ex opere operato), Pelagianism
(which overreacted against the determinism of Manichaeism by
promoting so much confidence in human ability that it denied
the necessity of grace in order to live a Christian life), and
Arianism (which denied the divinity of the Son).

st. basil the great (ca. 329-379): one of the three Eastern
Doctors of the Church in Thomas’s time and one of “the three
Cappadocians” (the other two are his brother St. Gregory of
Nyssa and his friend St. Gregory Nazianzus). He lived as an
ascetic monk and wrote, together with St. Gregory Nazianzus,
two rules aimed at a life in union with God. In 370 he became
the Bishop of Caesarea. He fought the Arians, and sought and
found the support of the Pope. One of his great achievements
is that he clearly described the terms “nature” and “person” in
divinis.

ST. BERNARD OF CLAIRVAUX (logo-1153): Doctor of the
Church since 1830 (Pope Pius VIII). As the founder-abbot of
Clairvaux (1115) he became a leading figure in spiritual as
well as political matters, not only within but also outside the
Cistercian order and even outside the Church. He laid the


BEHIND THE NAMES


331


foundations of the Order of the Knights Templar and took
the initiative for the Second Crusade. He was involved in two
controversies (the first about the Trinity) with Abelard, who
advocated a rationalism in theology through which the Catholic
faith would not be the norm. St. Bernard had a special devotion
to the Blessed Virgin Mary and the Child Jesus. Thomas quotes
him frequently in Sermon 02 (on Advent) and elaborately in
his sermons on the Feast of the Birth of the Blessed Virgin and
also in Sermon og in regard to the Trinity.

boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus (ca. 480-524 or 525):
a well-educated Roman statesman. He translated Aristotle’s
logical works On the Categories and On Interpretation, and thus
prepared the way for scholastic theology. The two quotations
from him in Thomas’s sermons (tg and 20) have been drawn
from his On the Consolation of Philosophy, his most famous
work, which he wrote while he was imprisoned: in view of the
instability of the favor of princes and the inconstancy of friends,
he contemplated the value of wisdom and the nature of true
happiness. It is remarkable that Christ is not mentioned in this
work. It is not certain that Boethius was or became a Christian,
yet in Thomas’s time Boethius was regarded as a martyr in the
Arian controversy.

st.john Chrysostom (347/34g-407): generally considered
the greatest of the three Eastern Doctors of the Church in
Thomas’s time. Thomas quotes him frequently. He led an
ascetic life and became Bishop of Constantinople in 3g8. He
disputed with Jews and all kinds of Christian heretics, but he
also took action against abuses and wrongs within the Church,
especially excessive luxury. By reason of his eloquence he
has been called “golden-mouthed” since the 6th century.
Already during the Council of Ephesus (431) Chrysostom was
commonly looked upon as an authority.


st. dionysius: see pseudo-dionysius.


332


APPENDIX


pope st. Gregory i, “the Great” (540-604): one of the
four Western Doctors of the Church in Thomas’s time. He was
a Benedictine monk. In 590 he became Pope. Because of his
teachings and the way in which he governed and organized the
Church (clergy, episcopate, liturgy), he is regarded as the one
who led the Catholic Church into the Middle Ages. Thomas cites
him in ten of the sermons, usually concerning the moral life.

st. Hilary of poitiers (d. 368): Doctor of the Church
since 1851 (Pope Pius IX); Bishop of Poitiers since about 350.
He was famous as a devout and erudite bishop and theologian
who opposed Arianism (a popular and widespread heresy in the
early Church that denied the divinity of the Son). After baptism
St. Martin went to Poitiers to become a disciple of his. In 361
Hilary gave permission to Martin to live a solitary life. The
legendary incident of Martin sharing his cloak with a beggar by
cutting it in half took place before he met Hilary; according to
the story, Martin was still a catechumen then.

iovinianus: see JOVINIANUS.

st. Isidore of Seville (ca. 560-636): Doctor of the Church
since 1722 (Pope Innocent XIII). He was a source of inspiration
in the Middle Ages because he had given the order to compile a
summa of universal knowledge. Already in his time he promoted
the study of Aristotle.

st. jerome (ca. 340/342-420): one of the four Western
Doctors of the Church in Thomas’s time. His commentaries
on the Scriptures were quoted frequently in the Middle Ages;
he was known as an ascetic and erudite hermit. He corrected
the Latin version of the Psalms and of the New Testament
(382-390), and he translated the Hebrew Scriptures into Latin
(390-405). Jerome was involved in many conflicts with Arians,
Pelagians, and others. He defended the life-long virginity
of the Blessed Virgin Mary and promoted celibacy as a state
of life preferable to marriage — issues at stake also in some of
Thomas’s sermons.


BEHIND THE NAMES


333


jovinianus or iovinianus: a monk of the 4th century,
condemned as a heretic in 390 for his anti-ascetical preaching.
Almost all we know about him comes to us through the writings
of St. Jerome. Jovinianus held that married life is not inferior to
virginity, that abstinence is not better than eating and drinking
(with the right disposition), that someone baptized in the Spirit
and with water cannot sin, that all sins are equal, that after this
life there will be only one punishment and one reward, and
that Mary did not remain a virgin after Christ’s birth.

manichaeus orMANi (ca. 216-ca. 277): The Persian prophet
Mani taught that everything originated from two eternal
principles: a good god and an evil god; light and darkness. His
movement, Manichaeism, was able to become popular among
Christians because he not only derived his ideas from Zoroaster
and Buddhism among others, but also incorporated a version
of Christian teachings on original sin and Christ (having only
a virtual body) as the light. In the Middle Ages a form of these
dualistic ideas appeared again among Albigenses (Cathari).

st. martin of tours (ca. 316-ca. 397): after the Blessed
Virgin Mary the most popular saint in the Middle Ages in
France. There are many reasons for his popularity, as Sermon
21 shows. He, a pagan soldier, was converted to Christianity and
eventually became a wise and devout bishop. He was zealous in
converting pagans and in fighting heresies within Christianity
(in particular, Arianism). Through the story according to which
he cut his cloak in two and gave half to a semi-naked beggar,
he became the example par excellence of Christian love (caritas).
He is depicted as such in many churches and on many altars
dedicated to him (and in churches and on altars dedicated to
other saints as well). In medieval Italy, 143 villages were named
after him; in France, more than 500. Also many miracles were
ascribed to his intercession. (See also above: st. Hilary of
POITIERS.)


334


APPENDIX


st. Nicholas (d. 345 or 352): Bishop of Myra. More legends
than facts color his biography. Sailors spread his popularity
throughout the centuries. Many miracles are ascribed to his
intercession. His relics are preserved in the San Nicola church,
Bari (Italy). Up to the present time oil flows from them; Thomas
refers to this in Sermon 16. St. Nicholas, mentioned several
times in Thomas’s later theological writings, was a very popular
saint in the Dominican order; in fact, the second priory, at
Bologna, was attached to the church dedicated to San Nicolo
delle Vigne.

ORIGEN (185-253/254): theologian of Alexandria, Egypt, who
settled in Caesarea, Palestine, where he was ordained a priest.
Although he was condemned posthumously by a synod in 403,
he was still well respected in the Middle Ages. In Sermon ig
Thomas points out one of Origen’s errors in view of a platonic
theory. The controversies around Origen’s teachings as well as
teachings attributed to him are very complicated (e.g., on the
allegorical interpretation of Scripture, subordination of the
divine Persons, the eternity of creation), because his ideas were
often used and abused in personal rivalries.

“the philosopher”: see Aristotle.

pseudo-dionysius (probably 5th or 6th century): The
writings of this unknown author were very influential in
the Middle Ages because he was identified as the Dionysius
mentioned in Acts 17.34, who was converted on hearing
Paul’s speech at the Areopagus. In Paris he was even more
popular, because some identified him in the gtli century as
the Dionysius who came around 250 from Rome to (what is
now called) France and became the first Bishop of Paris. His
writings are influenced by Neo-Platonism (which includes an
emphasis on the ecstatic union with God), and his Christology
by Monophysitism (according to which there is only one nature,
not two natures, in Christ).


BEHIND THE NAMES


335


pope st. symmachus (d. 514): became Pope in 498. He is
reputed to be a defender of Christian orthodoxy during the
Acacian or Laurentian schism (498-506). He built asylums
for the poor near the three churches outside the city walls of
Rome.

vigilantius, or vigilancius (d. ca. 400): a priest of Gaul
(now France) whose ideas we know through St. Jerome’s Against
Vigilantius. He allegedly denied the efficacy of relics and of
prayers to the saints and did not consider almsgiving, celibacy
of the clergy (promoted since the 5th century by Pope Leo I and
others, but only obligatory since the Second Lateran Council,
in 1139), and the religious life to be virtuous.


INDICES


GENERAL INDEX


Abraham, 2491128, 269, 2771171,
2881138, 311-12

abundance, 61, 102, 127, 132, 181,
184, 211, 214, 220, 228, 250, 268,
2721157, 273, 299, 307
accountability, 94, 225-26
active and contemplative, 50, 246,
298. See also religious life
adultery, 115, 204
Agnes, St., 55

almsgiving, 55, 1 13, 133, 137, 207-8,
2211139, 2291172, 231-32
Andrew, St., 62m, 78
angels, 25n6, 27, 29, 36-37, 41,
72-75, 85-86, 106, 109-10, 112,
133, 141, 169, 184, 196, 19704,
1991113, 206, 2i6ni2, 223-25,
2371121, 243, 245, 251, 261, 263,
280-81, 286, 287030; of darkness,
248; defects in, 164-66; food of
*e, 53, 175-76
Anthony of Egypt, St., 311
Anthony of Padua, St., 276067
apostles, 50-52, 110, 138-39, 149,
156-57, 160-62, 224054, 245,

292, 310-1 1

Arianism, Arians, Arius, 68, 166, 199,
20oni6, 330, 332

ascension, ascent, 33, 129, 155, 269,
313-26; improper, 261, 321. See
also Gn 28.12 (Index of Holy Scrip-
ture)

Augustine, St., 97
Augustine’s mother. See Monica, St.
attribution, 60, 164-66, 27on5i
Aurora, 24304, 249


Auster, 250

awe, 24n4, 39, 62, 233

Benedict, St, 1 17, 31 1
benefit of the doubt, 54
bishop, 72, 124, 136, 203, 238, 241,
3221144, 323-25
Blessed Virgin. See Mary
body, care of the, 90, 124-25, 172,
198, 220-21, 242, 292
brother, 74, 136, 149, 167. See also
neighbor

called, being, 27, 181, 183-85, 189-
94, 225, 315; to the religious life,

1 19, 122-24
celibacy, 266-67

chastity, 55, 96033, 113015, 125,
151-52, 248023, 250, 26on6, 312,

3i8

Christ, the four comings of, 63-65,

66; the divinity of, 25-26, 39-41,
59, 62-63, 1 73’ 215-16, 269; as
doctor, 30, 9ini6, 239, 272; as
example, 87-88, 112, 117, 278; as
friend, 30, 41, 68, 71, 217-18, 278;
generation of, 25-26, 40; generos-
ity of, 131-32, 171; grace of, 173;
humanity of, 23-107, 171-73,
215-16, 269; image of God, 60, 62,
71-72; king, 27, 68-74, !93> 217-
18, 231, 308; knowledge of, 40-41,
88-90, 166; lowliness of, 24, 56, 59;
mercy of, 38; mission/sending of,
29, 42, 72, 114-15, 145-46, 161;
the name of Jesus Christ, 46, 59;


339


340


GENERAL INDEX


Christ (cont.)

necessity of his coming, 23-30,
46-57, 74, 145, 270; Passion of,

30, 64, 67022, 75n6t, 78, 1 15,
240, 272-80; poverty of, 107, 113,
288; power of, 40, 59-61, 68-6g,
174; reconciliation brought by, 43,

45, 75, 279-80, 292; sanctification
by, 37119, 64, 74, 238, 279-80;
Savior, 23-24, 30, 34, 39, 46-50,
80, 85, 120, 130, 133, ig6, 219,
2621113, 2701150; teaching from
the Cross, 278-79; unity of, 26, 36,
62, 66ni6, 147; warrior, 38, 58,
276-77

Christian faith, 159
Church, 32, 97, 108, 113, 123, 177,
192, 210, 236, 251, 281-82, 295,
324; Militant, 32, 251, 2g8n8,

32 m3 8

conscience, 48, 84, 95, 106, 124,

154, 230

consolation, 36, 203, 250-51, 276,
306, 311

contemplation, 35-36, 50, 61, 99-
100, 102, 113, 120, 243-46, 257,
29c 293, 306

contemplative life, 50, i2on46, 246,
298, 3121173
courage, 50-51
covenant, 122-23, 227
creation, 62, 71-72, 103, iogn3,
1191136, 138, 140-41, 148, 168-
69, 1 78-79> 233, 2831110
Cross, exaltation of the, 274
crucifix, 216
custom, 97, 206-7, 267

David, the image of Christ, 27, 32,

4 6 , 57-59- n8n35

desire, of Christ’s coming, 23, 30-31,
34; fulfilled by God alone, 48-49,
74-75. 143. !4 6 . l8 4> 220, 249,
273, 284-85, 288, 290, 293, 298-
9g; to be saved, 31, 56
desires, earthly, 82-84, g6, 101, 111,


125-26, 136, 151-52, 172, 186-

8 9. 195-96, 3°2

despair, 93-94, 222044, 278078
devil, 30, 37, 38, 45, 49, 58046,
67022, 92, 187, 193, 201, 229,

309. See also Satan
devotion, 48-49, 81, 105-6, 137,
1541176, 180, 2061143, 219, 236,
238, 240, 279, 295, 319, 324
distinction, between the divine Per-
sons, 60, 169-70; between people,
53, 80-84, 96-97, 185; between
pride and cupidity and lustfulness,
189; between the saints, 309
dogma, 178, 322

enlightenment, 43,45, 143, 19604,
248-49, 257, 317
example, the good, 53-54, 55, 57,

86, 87, 104, 1 12-13, 117, 122,

202, 2iin63, 243n5, 26on6,
26m8, 278, 296

faith, 23, 27, 52, 541134, 75, 122, 126,
135, 140, 159, 177, 188, 202-3,
251, 253, 278, 317; faith, hope,
and love, 317-18
fasting, 96-97

fear, 48, 84, 94, 116, 137, 144, 177,
250, 252, 276, 284, 299, 307, 309,

316, 319

figures, in the Old Testament, 58n45,

131-32, 1551182, 1741114, 192,
198m 1, 243-45, 247, 277
Filioque, I47n48, 161
foolishness, 84, 104, 118, 166,

273-74

Francis, St., 224, 240
freedom, 23, 64, 67, 75, 147, 157,
169, 200, 225, 227, 266, 310
friendship, 30, 32^9, 41, 68, 71, 98,
101, 132, 150-51, 175, 179, 185,
217-18, 278, 305n47

God, anger of, 76-77, 189; as doctor,
23, 47, 220-21, 260, 264-65, 272;


GENERAL INDEX


341


freedom of, 23, 1 18, 140, 149;
generosity of, 32, 133, 221-23;
happiness of, 281, 314; help of, 37,
6306, 136, 157092, 240-41, 271,
313-20; immutability of, 60054,
119036, 146-47, 164-65, 284;
justice of, 28-29, 39, 228-29, 286;
knowledge of, 40-41, 145-46;
mercy of, 29-30, 39, 41, 49, 94,
132, 137, 220-22, 237, 316; power
of, 169-70, 174, 179, 222, 225,
240-41; recognized in creation,

170 (see also Rom 1.20, Index of
Holy Scripture); special love of, 49,
72-73, 140-41, 21 7-19; Triune,

25, 68, log, 126, 159-70 (see also
distinction); wisdom of, 79-80,

102, 111, 178, 21 g, 222, 272, 290,
299; word of, 66, 104, 1 10-14,

160, 166, 170, 269 ( seealso]n 1.14,
Index of Holy Scripture)
good works, 76, 92-93, 97-98, 109,
149-5°. 2°5. 239-4°. 280, 304,
3231146

grace, 26, 32-33, 36-37, 45, 76,
94-99. 119. 164. 177. 181, 214,
228-29, 242, 259, 315-16. See also
Holy Spirit

grace, full of, 37, 89, 173, 249, 261,
267

grace, justifying, 64, 154, 233

Hail Mary, 1 2g, 249
happiness, 33, 78, 100, 106, 123,
159112, 164, 176, 178, 181-82,
2211140, 2451111, 2481125, 2681147,
281-94, 295-312, 313-26. See also
Mt5.1-12.Jn 20.29 (Index of Holy
Scripture)
heaven, 81-82

heavenly bodies, 27, 72, 164, 244
heavenly homeland, 32, 42, 60-61,
106, 224, 296-312
heretics, 52, 56039, 113, 147, 192-
93. 323, 331. See also Alius, Jovin-
ian, Mani, Vigilantius


highly placed people, 105-7, l8 7,
192, 255, 298, 301, 316. See also
prelates

holiness, 82, 140, 163-68, 205, 269,
3 l8 > 323

Holy Spirit, 138-58; effects of the,
37.45. 94. L 39> i4 8 -!56, 162,

243, 3171120; freedom of the, 147,
162; gifts of the, 32036, 33, 37, 45,
II3III7, I56, l87, 2251156, 250;
inspiration of the, 121, 144, 156,
179, 184054, 201, 316-17; is love,
143, 268; mission/sending of the,
33, 37, 147-48, 151; sanctification
by the, 143-44, 161, 238, 260,

265; sin against the, 113, 256059
hope, holy, 250

hospitality, 24, 39, 77, 175, 311-12
human, being (interior, exterior), 54,
155, 206, 208, 210, 247, 252-57;
constancy, immutability, 45, 83,

9 8 . L53> L56-5 8 , 164, 234, 261,
285-86; knowledge, 28, 38, 45, 53,
74-75. 79- 8 °. 1 45-46> 151, 165-
66, 173, 178-79, igo, 227, 253,
282-83, 323; power, 28, 51, 68-6g,
165, 225, 26g, 289045; privilege,
74, 168-69, 185, 216-ig, 222,

225, 227, 286; thinking, 63, 91,
152, 201-2, 215, 227-28, 254053,
282, 284-86, 302
humanity, 218-19

humility, 42, 56-57, 59, gi, 106, 187,
21 1-12, 260-62, 278, 288, 324,
325

hypocrisy, 97, 136, 205-13

idolatry, 156, 188, 201
ignorance, 74, 95, 113, 152, 157,
1691161, 195, 2021125, 248,
253046, 2641128, 285
image, rational creatures as God’s,
71-72, 168-69, 216-17, 223,
3°9 n6 4

Incarnation, 33, 36, 47, 62-64, 66,
69^2, 90, 147, 172, 215-16


342


GENERAL INDEX


inferiority, feeling of, 114
iniquity, 31, 135, 200, 228, 231
intention, 153, 157, 189, 191, 203-4,
206-7, 208054, 252, 286
irony, 291053

Jews, 27, 5in2i, 6g, 122, 149, 192,
tgg, 247, 286, 309
John the Baptist, St., 67, 117, 266
j°y. 34-39.43. 108-9, 120, 129, 137,
i77-78, 182, 211, 239, 247-49,
252, 256, 268, 275, 286-87, 294,
306-9, 311

judge, 28, 42, 65, 69, 73, 101, 311
judgment, 28, 40, 66, 69, 80, 94,
98038, 102, 125, 178, 223, 225
justice, and mercy, 29-30, 38, 207,
219, 2291170, 290-91; as avirtue,
51-52, 108, 110, 154, 183, 207-8,
257-58. 309. See also uprightness

king, 27, 35, 50, 56, 58, 68-74, 131-

32, 2l7-l8, 274, 290-91, 308,
3O9-IC), 3I4, 319-20
knowledge, 38, 40, 53, 74, 79-80, 88,
100044, 103, 105, 111-12, 131,
145-46, 165-68, 173, 190, 219,
227, 230, 234, 252-53. 273. 283,
299. 302-4, 3111171. 323

Last Judgment. See judgment
Law, Old and New, 69n30, 119, 122,
!59> 277

life, everlasting/ eternal, 39, 73, 76,

93. 113. 123. 133-34. 136-37.

165, 178, 268, 280, 294, 297; of
grace, 76, 149-56

listening, 84, 92, 100-101, 105, 135,
205, 317

living together, 105, 279
Lord’s Prayer, the. See Our Father
love, 26, 28, 32, 41, 50, 52, 57, 72-
73, 76064, 81, 94, 110, 125, 131.
141-45, 149-53, i6on6, 167-68,
170, 177, 183, 186, 190, 211. 225,
250, 253, 257, 266, 268, 278, 284,


286, 294, 305, 307, 316, 318.

See also Gal 5.22 (Index of Holy
Scripture)

magister, 52, 101-2, 116, 199, 203,

2 55> 2 77> 3*7
mammon, 231
man. See human, humanity
manager, 222-25, 228
Mani, Manichaeans, 118
marriage, 53, 55, 127, i28n69, 205,
219, 286

Mary, as an example, 104, 21 m63,
26on6, 26in8; help of, 230, 265;
Maris Stella, 247n20, 249; mercy
of, 249-50; prefigured in Old Tes-
tament, 243-45; sanctification of,
243, 249, 260; virginity of, 243-44,
260, 266-68, 319; without sin and
ignorance, 247, 249, 268
meditation, 35, 104-5
mercy, 29-30, 38, 41, 49, 81, 94,

132, 136-37, 154, 207, 219-21,

237-41. 250, 291, 307. 311.313,

316, 324

mildness, 58-59, 76-78, 218, 249,
289, 292, 305

miracles, 33, 193, 198-99, 233, 241,

319

Monica, St., 97
Muslims, 286

mystery, 5oni5, 62n4, 145^7, 160-
63, i82n46, 20oni6, 214, 259^

natural, 141, 145, 159, 165, 172,

218, 225, 262, 267, 285
negative theology, 163
neighbor, 98, 106, 112ml, 1 36-37,
*53> x 57> 21 1 > 21 9> 2 47> 2 55> 2 5 7-

See also brother

obedience, 48ng, 98, 106-7, 1 5 t 7 >
263-64, 272, 278, 324
old age, 93, 117, 121, 193, 202-3, 236
open-heartedness, 100, 105
Our Father, 129


GENERAL INDEX


343


peace, 28-29, 42, 45, 62, 75, 94-98,
105, HO, 112, 128, 152-53, 167,
292, 304. See also Gal 5.22 (Index
of Holy Scripture)
peace, sign of, 65-66
people, a, 308

perfection, 24-26, 35, 40, 53, 55, 57,
59, 60, 77, 81, 86, 8g, g8, 1 16-17,
123, 126-28, 132, 139, 150, 163,
222, 238, 242, 251038, 252-53,
263, 283, 285-90, 299, 301, 303-
4, 316m 8; of Christ, 72, 91, 117;
of God, 1 19036, 163022, 219, 242
perseverance, 83026, 97, 100, 118-
19, 152065, 153072, 158, 207, 210
philosophers, 15, 8107, 178-79,
1881172, 202-3, 291-92, 310, 317
philosophy, 15, 146038, 179, 202-3,
3 10

Plato, platonic, 202, 284
poor, the, 50, 53-54, 130-31, 137,
183, 190, 193, 219, 229, 237, 312
power, as a gift of God, 51, 241
Praesentia realis, 177025
praise, 35-39, 46, 49, 175, 183, 196,
255, 296, 307. See also Ps 84.5 (In-
dex of Holy Scripture)
prayer, 31, 109, 120, 129-37, 192,
206-7, 210, 233, 236, 238, 243,
289

preachers, preaching, 35, 50, 53,
114-16, 120-22, 126058, 185,

192, i99> 203, 223, 255
predestination, 931120, 123, 184054,
191. 3L5

prelates, 185, 323. See also highly
placed people

pride, 29, 56, 59, 94, 106, 111, 186-
87, 189, 2im65, 215, 222, 227,
254, 260-62, 302
prodigal, 226, 229

prophets, 40, 118, 156085, 160, 197-
99, 226, 239, 311; false prophets,
95. 1 95-2 13

providence, 32, 73, 168, 2221145,

224, 260


prudence, 44112, 55, 57, 103-5, 257.
290, 325

re-creation, 138, 149-56
reincarnation, 284-86
religious life, 52-55, 93^5, 105-7,
116, 123-24, 185, 26on6, 322,

324. See also active and contempla-
tive, vows

revelation, 146, 151, 159-62, 179036,
1 97 - 99’ 202027, 214, 237
riches, 131-32, 183, 214, 219-22,
227-32, 236, 270, 288-89, 293,
299. 3°5> 3 to, 3 18
rich people, 53-55, 113, 131, 137,
190, I96, 219-22, 226, 228, 230,
26l

Sacrament, of Baptism, i26n6o, 154,
193, 206, 320-21; of the Eucharist,
108, 174-78, 181, 323; of Ordina-
tion, 238-40, 321-23; of the Unc-
tion, 239
sacraments, 322

saints, 57, 59, 61, 65, 93, 1 14, 154,
183, 224, 230, 232, 233-312; their
knowledge of God, 303-7
salvation, 31, 47, 59-61, 73, 80, 88,
126, 130, 133, 143, 172, 223-24,
2621113, 270, 287, 296, 322-23;
our need of, 47-57
Satan, 196, 229. See also devil
selfishness, 166-67, 187-88, 215,
226-28, 238, 290, 319-20
sharing, 103, 167, ig2, 218, 228,

249, 281

sin, 23, 30, 38, 47, 49, 51, 72, 75, 83-
84, 98, HO, 122, 124, 154, 189-90,
192, 195, 229, 250, 252, 262, 271,
279-80, 315, 321; against the Holy
Spirit, 113, 256059; mortal, 47,

131, 265; original, 23, 126, 154073,
315,321. See also Holy Spirit, Mary
slave, of the devil, 31, 38, 49, 92,
187-88; of idols, 188; of sin, 38,

75> 235


344


GENERAL INDEX


solidarity, 143025. See also sharing
spiritual, goods, 73, 128, 221, 225;

pleasures, 171
stewardship, 56, 214-32
stigmata, 240
Stoics, 302

study, 101, 107, 202-3, 239
tepidity, 34, 39

Testament, Old and New, 57, 174,
192, 243,

thanks, thanksgiving, 35, 39, 120,

187, 258

theft, thief, 52, 209, 226, 231
truth, 29, 44, 59-60, 74-75, 77,

88-9O, IOI, HO, 114 , I38, I5I,

1 7 2 ~73, 178-80, 192, 201-2,
252-53. 255, 285, 291

unbelief, 123, 256
unbelievers, 95, 191-92, 193, 19809
union with God, 25, 26, 36, 144, 148,
167, 177, 183, 281, 305
unnatural, 262
uprightness, 157, 246-58


vainglory, 208, 255

virginity, 53, 55, 113, 127, 266-68,

3 1 o, 3 1 2

virtue, 54, 83-84, 89, 112-13, 131,
177, 190-91, 221, 227, 235, 250,
262-63, 273, 283, 287, 292, 302,
310,314,323

vocation, 123, 181, 183-94, 266039,

VOWS, 113015, 200-201, 263,

267043. See also religious life

warfare, 128, 251038, 289, 298
wealth. See riches

wisdom, of Christ, 79-81, 89-90, 99-
105, 1 1 1-12, 173, 178; divine, 32,
in, 151-52, 155, 185, 272, 290;
human, 44, 107, 111, 302, 316
woman, 104, 202-3, 234-35, 247,
262, 264, 309064

youth, 92-93, 107, 116-19, 235, 2 ^3
Zacchaeus, 54


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


Genesis (Gn)

1.1: 169

1.2: 62n2, 71, 82,
141, 169

1.3: 170, 245, 249
1.4: 249
l.lO: 83

l.li: 111, 112, 113,
259-80

1.26: 62112, 216, 223
1.28: 216, 225054
1.31: 170
2.7: 156
2.17: 29, 273
2.18: 218
3:11 ing, 264030
3-5 : 2 73

3.6: 272, 273, 274
3.8: 249
3.17-18: 125
3.22: 275
3.23-24: 275
5.24: i55n8i
6-8: 275
7.4-8: I3gn6
9 a 3 : 6 5

12.1: ll6

12.3: 269

x 5- l: l6 9
18.3: 312

2 4-34~35 : 288038
26.12: 127
26.13: 318
26.13-14: 288038


Old Testament

28.12: 85, 106, 280

32.2- 3: 86n6
32.6: 288038
32.27: 243, 249

35-3 : 3 22

41.2- 7: 197

Exodus (Ex)

1.8-22: 276
3.14: 40
4.13: 29
7-12: 276
7.1: 223, 292
13.21: 248
14.21: 276

15.1- 2: 38
15.2: 47
1 5- 2 3 -2 4 : 275

19.4: 318
21.24: 27mg

21 -33-34 : 202
23.2: 97
23. 2°: 193

24.1- 2: 321
25.6: 238
28.41: 239

3 0 -3 1- 3 2: 2 3 8
33.19: 60, 220033,
300

33.20-23: 300
35-9: 238
35.28: 238
40.9: 238


Leviticus (Lv)
19.12: 128
24.20: 271119
25-36-37: 136

Numbers (Nm)
12.6: 198
i5-3° : 29
20.6 (Vg): 214
24.17: 244, 276

Deuteronomy (Dt)
4.6: 317
4.7: 177

5-5: 43

10.9: 304
17.12: 29026
1I-15- 73
19.21: 27nig
21.23: 273
32.7: 102
32.13: 240
3313-15'- 277
33.24: 240

Joshua (Jos)

5.14: 30,42

Judges (Jgs)

5.20: 309
8.23: 52
17.6: 27
19.4: 42


345


346


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


1 Samuel (1 Sm)

1.18: 157
1.19: 157
2.1: 6l
2.1-10: 157
4.7: 276
8.20: 28

1 3 - 1 4 : 5 2 * * 5 * * 8
15.22: 264
16: 58
16.12: 236
1 7 - 34 - 3 6: 236
17.45: u 9

26.7- 8: 1 19
29.10: 115
31.9-10: 119

2 Samuel (2 Sm)

3.12-13: 218
22.36: 78
23.7: 274

1 Kings (1 Kgs)

2 - 36 - 37 : 9 8
4.20: 308
5.25: 238
8.11: 33
8.12: 265
10.8: 300
10.22: 2541154
18.12: 1441132
18.2 1 : 191 , 256
19.5: 110

19.7- 8: 1 10
ig.8: 178
19.12: 249
22.30: 25

2 Kings (2 Kgs)

2: 155081

5.8: 198

5 lo: 231

6.8-10: ig6

6.16: 309

13.21: 198


1 Chronicles (1 Chr)

1 7 1: 32
2 9 1: 32
29.14: 227

2 Chronicles (2 Chr)

2.4: 32
2.9: 238

6-4: 33

6.41: 239030
13.1 1: 84030
35 -! 5 : ! 9 8

Nehemiah (Neh)

4.10: 191
8.5: 258
8.6: 258
8.8: 258
8.12: 258

Tobit (Tb)

3 a 2 : 157

3.22 (Vg): 289

4 - 7 : 157

6.7 (Vg): 26005
13 -U: 3 l8
i 3 - l8: 3°5

Judith (Jdt)

8.17: 57
9 -! 2 : 7 1

16.I4: I48

Esther (Est)

1.7: 185

2-15 (Vg) : 251

5 - 3 : !32
6.6-1 1: 56042
8.16: 247, 248
! 3-9 (Vg): 69, 142

2 Maccabees (2 Me)
l.n: 38
1.24: 29


Job (Jb)

1.1: 252
1.6: 109114

I. 21: 230
4.18: 164

4 1 9 : 232
5 - 3 : 273
5.9: 62
5 -! 7 : 3 J 5
7 - 1 : 297
7.9: 66m 5
8.8: 102
8.11: 31
9.11: 63, 67

II. 6: 143
11.12:215
11.15: 157
12.7: 103
12.1 1: 101
14.1: 283
14.2: 284

1 4 - 1 4 : l6 9
14.15: 184
15.2: 104
! 5 - ll: 3604

15.15: 164

15- 27: i 57

17.3: 177
20.6: 261
21.12: 289
21.15: 215, 227
22.18: 227
22.21: 280
22.26: 182, 305
22.29 (Vg): 305
23.16: 263
23.17: 157
24.5: 21505
24.23: 94
25.3: 169
27.6: 97
2g.2-io:

29.1 1: 2go, 320
29.14-16: 207
29.20: 154


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


347


30.2: 191
31.12: 266

3 x - 3 l: 05
32.8: 155-56
32.22 (Vg): 66
35.5: 821118

35 a 5 : 7 6
36.12: 84
36.25: 303

37 - 5 : 233
37.15: 661115
38.7: 3081158
38.33: 821115
38.37: 82
39-5 : 215115

39.2i: 50-5 1
41.26: 111

Psalms (Ps)

1.1: 316

I. 3: 1 141120
2.7: 25119
2.8: 70
4.3: 124
4.4: 241
4.7: 71

5.4: n6

5 - 12: 43
6.3: 264
6.5: 1201145

7 - 5 : 58

7.10: 233, 241
8.6: 36

8.6- g: 216
8.7: 226

8.7- 9: 287
8.8: 223
9.7: 320
9.21: 28

10.7 (Vg): 140
10.8: 196

I I. 5: 48
12.5: 227
*5: 2 54
16.5: 304


16.6: 304

16.1 1: 182, 218, 286,
2 99

17-15: 2 93
19.7: 81111 2
19.15: 104
21.7: 247
22.4: 166
22.27: 183
23-2-3: 171
23.4: 276

2 3 - 5 : i 77
24.1: 221
24.7: 50
24.9: 50
25.2 i: 257
27.4: 99, 123, 143,
218, 293
28.7: 271
31.20: 183

3 2 -i ; 3 i6

3 2 - 9 : i 93
33.2: 120
33.11: 119

33- i 2: 295-312
33.16: 56
34.6: 220

34 - i 9 : 5 6

35- i3:57
35.28:40
36.7: 59, 287

36.7-8: 73
36.8: 287
36.9: 61, 293
36.10: 142
37.17: 274
37.35: 260
39 - 6: 3 i 8
40.5: 317
40.9: 183
42.2: 31, 325

42- 4: 325

42.6: 1671148

43 - 3 : 271
43.4: 183


44.25: 83
45.5: 77, 81
45 - 7 : 277
45 - 8 : 239
45 -ii: 99
45.12: 268
45.17: 161
46.6: 265
47.8: 69
49.7: 221
49.11: 224
49.18: 230

50.8- 13: 1411111
50.16: 1 16
51.12: 156
52.10: 49
55.22: 238
58.9: 304

60.5: 2391129
63.2: 36

63.6: 2201134, 236
63.9: 220

65-5: 271- 293, 318

65.9: 276
65.10: 270
65.1 1: 270
66.12: 84
66.18: 135
68.1 1: 160114
68.36: 233
69.5: 3 °. 3 8 > 272

69.1 1: 208

73 -i: 253
73.20: 72

73.28: 107, 123, 143,

145

75 - 3 : 40
76.5: 278
76.12: 200, 203
77.7: 105

77.8- 9: 29
78.24: 175
79.2: 291
80.3: 31
80.4: 60


348


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


Psalms (Ps) (cont.)

80.8: 60
80.20: 60
82.6: 173117
83.6-7 (Vg): 313-26
S3- 8 (Vg): 314

84.5: 281-94
84.12: 66ni4, l8l,
242

85.6: 29
85 - ll: 29
87.5: 270
88.16: 107
89.9: 165
89.10 (Vg): 77
89.21: 58
89.2 1-22: 233-41
89.42: 125
8948: 223
go.6: 263
94.12: 317
96.1: 1551183
97.11: 242-58
98.1: 1551183
99 - 3 : l6 4

IOO.3: 223
102.27: I4I
102.28: 165
IO3.5: 2201134, 3OO
103.20-21: 206
IO4.I4: 2l6
IO4.I5: 108, I78,

239

IO4.24: 222
IO4.28: 167
104.30: 138-58
106.1: 120
IO7.25: 140
IO7.30: 60
109.3 (Vg): 112
112.3: 33, 221, 293,
3°5

113.4: 88
115.3: 140
1 17.2: 88
1 18.8-9: 221


1 19.1-2: 319030
119-7 (Vg): 58
119 32: 154. 298
119 - 37 : 254 H 53
1 19.90: 88
119.99: 104
1 19.103: 180
119.130: 239
119155: 47
1 19.160: 88
122.1: 37
122.3: 97
122.6-8: 48
122.7: 95
i25-4 : 253
130.6: 35, 2471120

131- 1: 59
131.2: 52
1321: 59

132- 9: 239
132.1 1: 3001118
133.1: 67, 177
137-2 (Vg): 319
138.17 (Vg): 299
139.14: 62
139.16: 283
141.2: 324

143.10-1 i: 142, 144

i43-i3-i5 a (Vg)

143- 13-14 (Vg): 301

144.1: 58

144- 5 : 3i
144.7: 241
144.15: 288
144.15b: 302
145: 227

145- 9:49. 219, 237
145.18-19: 49
146.3: 56, 302
146.3-4: 221
146.4: 139

147: 227
147.4: 308
148.3: 27
i49-i: i55 n8 3


Proverbs (Prv)

1.5: 100

I. 24: 185

1-33: 299, 307

2.4: 102, 234
2.9: 68
2.16: 262
3 - 5 : 57

3.1 1-12: 1681159
3.12: 316
3.15: 101, 1821148
3.16: 127
3.18: 275
3 - 34 : 289
4.18: 248
4.19: 192
4.20-27: 254
4.25: 254
5 - 9 : 229
5.9-10: 92
6.16-19: 254
6 23: 45, 239
8.6: 179
8.8: 112
8.15: 290
8.21: 220
8.31: 73, 217, 236

8 - 32 : 319113°

8.34: 100

9 - i: 321135 . 270

9.1-6: 84
9.2: 178
9.5-6: 178
10.16: 212
10.20: 1871169
10.24: 298

I I. 16: 251
1 1.26: 227
12.12: 108
13.9: 108, 248
13.12: 30
13.25: 290
14.13: 284, 307
14.16: 84, 250, 25
14.28: 308
14.34: 131, 190


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


349


i5- 6 (Vg): 212
15.28: 252
18.4: 299
18.10: 59
18.20: 211
19.6: 288
ig.12: 76
20.3: 104
21.29: 257
22.6: 93, 117, 236
22.21: 103
23.23: 2291171
25.3: 270
25-4: 143
25-27 (Vg): 226

26.4: 104
26.5: 104
28.9: 137
28.15: 219, 290
28.25: 152
28.42: 323
29.4: 70
29.5: 122

29.18: 196, 3191130
29.21: 96

3 llo: 234

31.10-31: 2091158,
2641130

3 la 5 : 09
31.21: 205
31.25: 209

Ecclesiastes (Eccl)

1 -4 : 83
1.13: 102

I. 16: 99
2.2: 274
5.4: 201

5-9 : 3°2
6.12: 301

7.i3 : 315

7.26: 235, 264

9- 8: 239

9.10: 230
10. ig: 288

II. 6: 121


1 1.9: 281122, 94, 1 18,
225

11.10: (Vg): 118, 235
18. 1: 1 18

Song of Songs (Song)

1.4: 257
1.8 (Vg): 114
1.14: 106

2- 5 ( v g) : 101
2.8: 39
2 . 10 : 121
2.106-13: 106
2.16: 120

3- 6: 323
3-9 : 277

3 ll: 3 6
4.2: 320
4.7: 268
4.12-16: 250

4 i3 : 279

4.16: 278

5.1: 4in2g, 181

5-!5 : 3 1
6.2: 106
6.1 1: 278
7.1 1: 120, 121
7.14: 277

Wisdom (Wis)

1.4: 292
i-5 (Vg): 120
1.7: 166
1.14: 149
2.22: 284
2.23: 62n2, 153
3.6: 238
3.15: 280
5.4-5: 114

5-5 : 322

5.6: 114
7.8: 80, 101
7.9: 1821148
7.10: 251
7.1 1: 220
7.13: 103, 228


7.14: 218, 220
7.22: 142, 143
7.23: 143, 145
7.24-27: 143
7.27: 146, 147
7.29: 251
8.16: 218
8.18: 218
8.21: 267
gao: 147
9.17: 138, 146
11.1: 204035
1 1.22: 308
1 1.24: 141
1 1.25: 261114, 167
12.1 (Vg): 168
12.13: 73
12.18: 73
14.3: 222045
14.4: 222
14.7: 272
14.22: 95, 152
16.12: 264
16.20: 176
i7-3 : 44

Sirach (Sir)

1.5 (Vg): 80, 111,
2191130, 299
1.9: 102
1.14: 94
1.21: 250
1.27: 316

3- 1 (Vg): 324
3- l8: 324
3-!9 : 77
3-25: i79
3.27: 125, 263
4.8: 30
5T: 115

5.12: IO3
6.18-37: l87ll68
6.33: 100
6.34: IOO

7.15-17: 212Il68

10.12: 26in7


350


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


Sirach (Sir) (cont.)
10.15: 1 1 ing,
261117, 262
10.31 (Vg): 193
11.29: 196
12.4: 229
14.14: 92
14.20: 291
15.3: 181
15.5: 101

i 5 -!° (Vg): 38
i5-!4 : 2 25
18.30-31: 1 18
20.14: 132
21.1: 115
24.3: 40
24.4: 81

24.5 (Vg): 40, 81
24.11: 95
24.17: 106
24.18: 250
24.19-20: 249
24.21: 293
24.25 (Vg): 265
24-33 : 198
25.8: 300
26.19: 84
26.28: 84, 97
27.9 : 49
28.3: 136
28.25: 255
29.26: 84, 174
31.10: 238
31.28 (Vg): 237
32.1: 97, 324
36.6: 155
38.4: 260
40.16: 266
40.22: 267
43.1: 82

43-3 : 270
43.22: 265

43- 29: 38

44.1: 296
44.8: 237

44- lo: 237


45-2: 3 J 9
47.2: 236
48.14: 198
48.23 (Vg): 204
50.5-1 1: 2061144
50.8: 106
50.1 1: 206, 323

51.11- 12: 38
5!-!3-3 1: 93 n2 i
51.17: 227

Isaiah (Is)

1-5= 3*7
1.6: 30, 51, 238
i.g: 270

1.1 1- 20: 264

i.i5 : 135

I. 19: 122, 159
2.3: 3221141
2.4: 306

3.8: 227
3-!2: 283
6.2-3: 159-70

6.7: l601l7
6.13: 269
7.14: 268
8.1 1: 241
9.2: 248
9-3 : 37
9-5 : 89

IO.I-13: 21 II165
10.12: 211

II. i: 244
12.3: 240
12.3-4: 120
12.6: 43

14-3: 31

15.6: 268
16.1 (Vg): 29, 34
17.10: 1 10
19.4: 300
21.8: 35
21.10: ig7
22.2: 308
22.12: 188
22.13: 188


24.4: 164
24.5: 227
25.4: 140
25.6: 179

25-9 : 39
26.8: 31
26.9: 31
26.12: 59, 316
27.5: 96
27.6: 121
27.6 (Vg): 156
27.9: 279
28.5: 298m 1
28.19: 193
29.13: 136
30.10: 200
30.27: 76
32.17:48
32.20: 1 14

33-5: 33

33-7 : 291
33.8: 192
33.15: 2541153
33.22: 28, 69
35-i: 36
35-2: 37
35.4: 58, 67
35.6: 138, 191
35.10: 37, 294, 307
40.3: 85
40.6: 273
40.15-17: 308
40.20: 276
40.31: 154
41.2: 315
42.2: 77
42.8: 52

43- i9 : 25, 39

44- 23: 39
45.7: 40
45.14: 83
45.15:46
45.17: 60
48.17: 180
48.22: 95
494: 94


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


351


49- 2 4 : 49
50.4-5: 116
51.7: 116
51.23: 124
52.6: 40, 67

52- 7: 35

53- 2: 3 1
53-4 : 3°

53.7: 77, 78
53-8: 2 59
53-9 : 2 75
55.8: 201
55.10: 270
56.7: 321137

57-i9 : 157
58.7: 174
58.14: 300
59- 2 : 315
59-9 : 4 2
59.19: 144
60.1: 48
60.18: 48
61.1: 239
61.3: 239
61.8: 231
61.11: 38
62.4: 37
62.1 1: 26, 36
63.1: 38,40
63.13-14: 154
63.15: 72
63-19: 3i- 34. 290
64.3: 145, 184
64.4: 299
65.13: 181
65.16: 306
65.17: 156
65.20: 94

Jeremiah (Jer)

2.8: 201
2.21: 109
4-3 : 125
4.23: 270
5.5: 186
6.14: 95


6.16: 97
9-3 : 98
9.23-24: 302
11.19: 78
12.4: 266
15.18: 31
16.13: 92
17.8: 268
17.9: 172
23-5: 57’ 67, 290
23.1 1: 204

23-15: i97

23.16: 201
23.24: 63
23.28: 199
25-15-38: 2391129
29.23: 28
31.3: 167
31.20: 29
31.22: 26, 34, 8g
31.33: 28, 2271161
3i-34: 3°3
44.2 1: 2721159
51.45-46: 262

Lamentations (Lam)
1.22: 289
2.14: 200
2.16: 67
3.19: 176

3-24: 145

3.27: 93, 117, 235
3-42: 135
4.1: 190
4.21: 36

Baruch (Bar)

3.11: 94

3-24: 33

3.38: 42, 90, 217
4.22: 311129
5.4: 48

Ezekiel (Ezek)

1.12: 142
1.25: 166


2.2: 153
3.14: 241
5-5 : 36
10.3: 33
13.3: 201

13- 5: 323
13.19: 204
16.15: 188
17.24: 274
22.27: 209
234i: 84030

28.12: 169
28.17: 186
33-31-32: 124
37-5 : 144
37.22: 27, 68
37.23-24: 27
43-4: 33
43-5 : 33
47.12: 114, 279

Daniel (Dn)

2.31: 197
2.35: 26m 1
2.45: 26111 1
4.1-24: 260
4.24: 231
7.10: iogn4,

3° 8

7-i3: 39
7.27: 308, 310
10.1: 197. 199
12.3: 811112, 165,
278074

14- 33: 179

Eiosea (Hos)
i-7 : 59
2.8: 187
3.4: 27m8
4.7: 274
8.3: 31
8.5-6: 194
9.10: 235, 277
1 1.8: 29
12.5: 236, 243


352


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


Hosea (Hos) ( cont .)
14.4: 601150
i 4 - 9 : 237

Joel (Jl)

1.17: 228

Amos (Am)

2.9: 261

3 - 7 : 197
8.5-6: 227

Obadiah (Ob)

l T - 5 °

21: 323

Jonah (Jon)

3 - 8: 59


Matthew (Mt)

1.1- 17: 269
1.21: 46

2.1- 8, 16: 192

2.1- 1 1: 1931196
2.3: 1671148
2.6: 32034

2.1 i: 27, 324
2.l6: 1671148
3.2: 28, 295

3 lo: 10 9
3.16: 146040, 321

3 - J 7 : 5 8n 47
4.1 1: 86
4.16: 24304

5.1- 2: 322

5.3: 132, 183, 288,
292, 310, 31 II167
5.4: l88, 289, 311
5.5: 78, 289, 292,
3 ° 5 > 3 1 1

5.6: 183, 290, 306,
3 1 1

5.7: 291, 307, 312


Micah (Mi)

5 l: 32
7- 1 : 235
7.2: 191
7.6: 98
7 - 7 : 3 1
7 -i 7 : 3 1

Habakkuk (Hab)
2.3: 66
3 l8: 27

Zephaniah (Zep)

3.3: 210

Haggai (Hg)

2 - 7 : 23-33
2 - 9 : 33


New Testament

5.8: 2 16015, 292,

3i2

5.9: 292, 304, 312
5 - lo: 292
5 - 12: 297
5 a 4 : 245

5.15-16: 228
5.16: 109, 237, 255
5 -! 7 : J’ 9 n 3 °

5.21- 22: 69030

5.21- 48: 126063,
206049

5.24: 153071
5.34: 128
5.38: 271119
5.48: 304
6.1: 208, 238
(i-i-4 : 97
6.4: 206

6.12: 136016, 137
6.14: 136, 291
6.16: 97, 208
6.17: 156
6.18: 97


Zechariah (Zee)

2.10: 43035
2.14: 34-43

4 - 9 : 32
4.14: 239
5.4: 66

9 - 9 : 27. 35 . 3 6 > 39 >
50, 63, 66, 67
9.11: 58
12.10: 32
13.4: 208

Malachi (Mai)

2.3: 63
2.15: in

3 l: 39 . 8 5
3.20: 24304


6.19-20: 220039
6.22: 257
6.33: 221
7.6: 229
7.14: 248

7.15- 16: 195-213
7.16: 210

7.16- 18: 2691148
7-0 : 269

7.21: 2301177
8.7: 30, 4I
8.1 1: 312
g.n: 78
9.22: 47

9-32-33: !3 8

10.8: 51
10.26: 230
11.10: 85-86
11.19: 54034
11.25: 151
1 1.28: 151
1 1.28-30: g2in8
11.29: 56, 59, 77
ii- 3 o: n 9


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


353


12.30: 210
12.31: 1 13017
12.34: 211
12.39: i 93
13.8: 127

13.10-1 1: 1781134
13.23: 114

13-25-30: no

13.32: 269
13.43: 2781174
13.44: 220, 235
13.47: 124
16.4: 193
16.19: 51
17.5: 581147
18.3: 91
18.20: 431136

18-23: 94

1 8 - 32 - 35 : i 3 6

19- 12: 55

19-14: 119

I9.I7: 126, 2191130
19.21: 55, 116,
2211139, 289
19.27: 310
ig.29: 128
19.30: 190
20.1: 115, 121
20.6: 248
20.14: 123
20.16: 185, igo
20.22: 134

20.22- 23: 135
20.28: 70, 210
2 1 . 1 : 48, 49
21.2: 51
21.3: 52, 56
2 i- 5 : 35 . 39 - 5 °.

62-78
21-7: 52- 5 6
21.8: 57
21.9: 46-61
21.13: 321137

21.23- 27: 104
21.30: 257
21.33-36: 226


22.2-10: 1891180
22.4: 174
22.30: 286
22.39: 1431125

23.6: 211

23 - i 3 -1 4 : 209
23.14: 207, 210
23.15: 121, 122
23.20-22: 305
23.23: 2071153
23.25: 209
23.27: 209
24.13: 158
24.29-30: 274

24- 35: 233

24.42: 66nig
24.45: 224
25.1-13: 1011148

25 - 6 : 39
25.10: 230

25.10-n: 133
25.14: 225

25.14-30: 1851129
25.2 1, 23: 2381124
25.29: 130
25.30: 223
25.31-46: 1011148


25-34

132

25.46

28, 285

26.20

1 7411 1 6

26.26

174

26.41

195

27.38

275

27-45

i 93 n 96

27.46

278

27-54

i 93 n 96

28.18

401124, 69,

i 74


Mark (Mk)
1.2-3: 85114
1.33: 220
2.2: 220
2.7: 51, 316
3 - 27 : 49
4.20: 1271165


10.40: 135
11.10: 59
11.17: 321137
11.24: 135
16.15: 28, 121

16.15- 16: 50
16.20: 51, 1211147

Luke (Lk)

1-4: 75

1.10-20: 85113
1. 24-25: 85113

1.26- 27: 266

1.26- 38: 85112
1.28: 267
1.30: 267

1 .32: 58, 3001118
1.34: 267
I.38: 26HI9, 263
1.42: 268
1.46-55: 611157,

2 1 11163
1.47: 61
1.48: 260, 262
i-49 : 3i9
1.52: 288
1.55: 269
1.70: 204

1 - 73 : 269

1.78: 41,

1.78-79: 243114
1 .80: 117

2.7: 107
2.13-14: 27
2.14: 75

2.15- 16: 27
2.41-43: 117

2- 42: 93.96,97
2.43: 98

2.46: IOO, 1 17
2.47: IO3, 104
2 . 49 : 107
2.51: 771170, 104,
107

2.52: 87-IO7
3 1 4 : 324


354


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


Luke (Lk) (cont.)

3.21- 22: 126

4.18: 11,37, 2391129

5 ll: 232
5.27: 1141119
6.20: 31 11167
6.35: 1681159

6 36: 49
6.38: 312
7.16: 199
8.5: 108-28

8 - 56 - 7 : 109

8.7: 125
8.8: 126
8.1 1: 1 10, 269
8.15: 114
10.1: 50
10 . 5 - 9: 121
10.7: 298
10.17: 51
10 . 27: 50
10.28: 181, 231

10 . 33:49

i°- 34 : 239
10.38-42: 2461118
n.g: 130
1 11 3 : !57

11- 39 - 52 : 115
1 1.46: 204

12 - 35 - 48 : 6 6
12.47: 189

14.11:325
14.15: 306
14.16: 171-94
14.17: 185
14.18: 186, 187
14.18-20: 183, 193
14.19: 188
14.20: 188
14.21: 189, igo

14.2 1- 23: 1811145
14.22: lgi
14.23 (Vg): 191,

192, 193

1 4 - 3 l: 325

15- 3: 229


15-8-9: 234
15.10: 109
16.1: 214-32
16.2: 226, 230
16.3: 230
16.4: 232
16.9: 231, 232
16.10: 238
16.13: 57

16.19-26: 137, igO

l6.22: 312

17 - 7 - 8 : 57

17.20: 66

18.1- 9: 1011148
18.3-8: 2021128

19.1- 10: 541132

19.2- 10: 54
19.10:41,46, 75
19.13: 225
19.16: 92
20.36: 73

21.2- 3: 2021128
2 i- 33 : 79-84
22.19: 176
22.29: 310
22.29-30: 182
22.30: 305

23 - 34 : 279
23.42: 137
2343 : 279
23.46: 279
24.36: 431136

24 - 39 : 139

John (Jn)

11: 521129, 53
1.1-18: 26g
i- 3 : 174
1.5: 44
1.10: 174
1.11: 63
1.12: 269
1 - 13 : 155

1.14: 25,42, 52n2g,
53, 64, 89, 112,
173, 217


l.l6: 173117

1.17: 88
1.26: 43, 174
1.29: 67
2.5: 263

3 - 3 - 5: 320

3 . 8 : 1 18 , 140 , 147 ,
162

3.12: 160
3.14: 276
3.16: 41
3.17: 42
3.27: 187
4.10-15: 83
4.13: 96, 172
4 . 14 : 172, 304
4.20-23: 27
4.24: 711142,

2161113, 236
4.28-29: 115
4 . 34: 182048
4.36: 280
4.48: 188072
5.22: 69

5 - 25 : 65

5.27: 28
5-35: 45

5- 43 : 42

6 - 35-5 1 : 4°n 19

6.37 : I5I, 286
6.41: 175
6.45: 184, 317
6.50-51: 183
6.54: 176
6.57: 177
6.66: 123
6.68: 181
7.38: 214

8.12: 41, 243114, 245,
248

8.31-59: 269

8-32: 75

8 - 34: 49. 75- 921118
8.36: 75

8.42: 40

9- 29: 174


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


355


10.1: 521126
10.10: 521126, 64, 76
10.1 1: 401119
10.12: 210
10.13: 80
10.16: 191
10.27: 205
10.30: 68
io- 3 !- 39 : 2 6 9
10.35: 114
1 1.25-26: I981II 1
11.34-44: 1981111

12.15: 39 nl6
12.31: 37, 276
12.32: 277
12.35: !92, 248
12.45: 62
12.46: 42
12.46-47: 601155

1 3 - 1 5 : 8 7
14.3: 64

14.6: 88, 1 10115,
i 73 n11

14.9: 601155
14.23: 261115, 64,
150, 218


14.24: 150


14.26: 148,

151

14.27: 152,

153

14.31: 1421120

15.1: 108


15.2: 109


15-4: 59


15-4-5: 3 i 6n i 2

15.5: 242


15.6: 268


15.9-10: 26015

15-11: 35


15.13: 278


15.15: 151,

179

15.18: 51


15-19: 51


15.26: 148


16.12: 179


16.14: 161


16.23: 130


16.24: 129-37* 3° 6

16.28: 115
17.3: 76
17.6: 59, 161
17.17: 291124
17.22: I48

18.37: 75
1 8.37-38: 88115

19.9- 10: 103
19.25: 271
19. 26-27: 279
i 9 - 39 : 324
20.19: 43, 75
20.23: 51
20.26: 75
20.29: 188, 317
21.4: 1811144
21.11: 123
21.12: 181

Acts of the Apostles
(Acts)

1.1: 204
1.4-5: 158
1.9: 66
2.1: 157
2.2: I4O, I44
2.3: I461I4O, l6l

2-4: 33 * 37 * i 3 8
2.13: 178
2.37: 1561189
2.41: 192

2 - 43 : 33
4.12: 56, 270
4.30: 241

4 - 3 i : 37
4.32: 1501161
5.29: 107

5 - 32 : i 57

8.9- 24: 123
8.32: 78

8-34: 49 * 75 . 92 , 100
10-35: 3°9
10.38: 37
13.26: 224
13.47: 224


14.27: 37
15.10: 119
17.28: 142, 144
19.12: 319
20.29: 210

Romans (Rom)

1.4: 143, 162
1 .7: 1 10115
1.14: 162

I . 20: 601153,

102055, 162014,

179. 237. 303

2.5: 125
3-3 : 123
3.8: 201
3 - 9 : 51
3-23: 51

3.26: 80115
4.15: 27
5.2: 2gn23
5-5 : 150
5.9: 264

5-i° : 43* 75* 280
5.18-19: 2721156
6.4: 154
6.6: 1 15

6.22: 38, 106, 212,
279* 297
6.23: 165
8.1-17: 267045
8.12: 196
8.13: 273

8.23: l6l
8.26: 3171120
8.30: 154074, 184,
315, 317, 318
8.35: 286
9-5 : 269

II. 33: 219

1 I.36: l6gil60
12.8: 228
12.12: 130
12.16: 56
12.17 (Vg): 109

12.2 i: 2011122


356


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


Romans (Rom) ( cont .)
13.1: 68

13.12:44-45, 119
1 3 - 1 4 : 72 . 155
14.8: 226
16.18: 238
16.19: 106

1 Corinthians (1 Cor)

1.9: 281
1.23: 274

1.23- 24: 1 1 1117
1.24: 178

I. 28: igo

2 - 9 : 42 . 73 . 92 > 145 ,

159

2.9- 10: 184
2.10: 146, 161

2.10- 13: 1451137
3.1-2: 521129, 162
3.8: 298

3.9: 2231149
3.16: 48
4.1: 224
4.2: 237
4.5: 28n2i
4.7: 131, 187
4.12: 289
7.7: 266
7-25: 55
8.5-6: 68

8.6: 26013, 30030,
i6gn6o
9 - 9 : 73 . 225
9.22: 143

9.23- 25: 224
9.24: 298

9-25: 55. 298, 322
9.27: 125
10.17: 177027
10.26: 141111 1
10.31: 2271161

II. 16: 292
1 1.25: 176
1 1.29: 178


12.3: 138, 199
12 . 4 : IOO, 173
12.8-10: I98
12.12-27: 277n73
12.2 1-26: 228
12.23: gini6
12.27: 1771127
12.31: 156
12.31-13.13: 32039
i 3 -i- 3 : ' 49 . 240
i 3 - 9 : 283

1311:91

13. i2: 165, 294, 303
i 3 -! 3 ; 30
14.1: 318
1 4 1 3 : 203
14.20: gi
14.29: 198
14.32: 226
14.33:48, 152
15.11: 162
15.2 1-22: 272056
15.24: 301
i549 : 72
15.52: 65
15-54-57: 277

2 Corinthians (2 Cor)
1.10: 38

2.17: 36118, 204

3-5: 63

3.18: 157
4.6: 45
4.1 1: 237022

51: 33

5.2: 285
5.16: 42

519: 43. 292

6.1: 229074
6.2: 132
6.17: 115
7 -i: 195

8.9: 107072, 113,
221, 288

10-3-5: 92


10.4: 321
10.4-5: ng
1 1.14: 196
12.4: 162
12.7: 125, 135
12.19: 3608
13.11:48

Galatians (Gal)

2.19: 278
2.19-20: 275
2.20: 278

3 - 3 : 53
3.11: 76
3.17: 206
319: 85
3.27: 320
3.28: 309064
4.4: 147044

4 - 5 : i 47
4.6: 147
4.8: 75
4.26: 36
5.2: 192

5.17: 95, 189, 195

5- 22: 33, 94, non 5 ,
211, 268, 280

5.22-23:45
5.25: 144
6.2: 122
6.8: 268
6.14: 275
6.15: 122, 149

Ephesians (Eph)

1.10: 27

1.13-14: 156087
2.2: 58046
2.4: 220
2.10: 150
2.14: 30,42, 304
2.15-16: 30
2.16: 43
2.17: 42, 75

219: 37. 931119. os


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


357


3- 8 -9 : 2391128

3-9 : 140
3.15: 251110

3- l6: j 53
4.3: 148, 152
4.7: 1731110
4.10: 269
4.1 1-16: 304

4 i3 : 39’ 72, 91, 117

4 a 4 : 209
4 21-31: 3 6
4.23: 2051142
4.23-24: 205
4.24: 72, 155
4.26-27: 211

4- 29: 255

5.1: 177, 2171120,
3041143
5.2: 322

5- 3 : 322
5- 8: 322
5-15: 322
5.20: 187
6.1 1: 2051137
6.17: 771171

Philippians (Phil)

1.1: 2371127
2.5: 56

2.5- 8: 2371122

2.6- 7: 47, 172

2.7: 25, 39 m8 > 9°

2.8: 56, 106, 2621115,
271, 278
2-9 : 59. 271

2- 13: 59’ 1511163’
i 8 4 n 54. 3 i6

2.21: 166

3- i°: 57

3- 14: 297

3.19: 287
4.4: 48

4- 7: 3 8


Colossians (Col)

111-13 : 39

1.15: 60

1.15-16: 301130,
140

1.16: 30, 62
1.18: 2031131
1.19: 173
1.24: 1151125, 275
1.25-29: 2231149
1.28: gi

2.3: 1 12, 173, 214
2.4: 214111
2.8: 203
2.15: 276
2.18: 56

2.18- 19: 203
3.1: 36, 84, 295

3.1- 17: 127
3.2: 82
3.4: 214
3.9-10: 217
3’ 9 b— 10: 155
311: 309
3-12: 155
3.15: 187

1 Thessalonians (1 Thes)

2.6: 52

2 Thessalonians (2 Thes)

2.3: 111
2.13: 160-61

1 Timothy (1 Tm)

75

1.18- 19: 321038

2.4: 69, 701133,

741156

2-5: 43

3.2- 13: 238
4.1-2: 205
4.8: 240

4.12: 1 151123, 204

5-i: 193


6.15: 281
6.16: 314

6.17: 222, 228, 261

2 Timothy (2 Tm)

1.8: 2241151
1 -9 : 301130
1.10: 381113
2-3-4: 3211138
2.5: 298
2.13: 29

2- 15: 255

2.21: 2131169
3.4: igo

4.7- S: 92

4- 8: 297

Titus (Ti)

2.7- 8: 204
2.7b: 1 151123

3- 1- 263
3.2: 2i8n26
3.4: 219
3-5 : 49 > 1 54

Hebrews (Heb)

15: 36

1.14: 74, 223
2.10: 261113,

1691160, 3011122
2.11: 74
2.12: 74
2.16: 74
2.17: 47
4.10: 84
4.13: 230
4.16: 941126, 221,
265, 313
5.4: 1851159

5.8- 9: 106

5- 12: 53
7.14: 36
7.ig: 116, 117
7.26: 238
8.8: 36


358


INDEX OF HOLY SCRIPTURE


Hebrews (Heb) (cont.)

9 a 5 : 43
10.19: 280
10.35-38: 1681159
ll.i: l 88 n 72
11 - 3 : 23 , 140
1 1.6: 52, 1681159
1 1.26: 1681159
11.16: 169

1 1 * 33 : 5 °’ 3 1 1
12.2: 56
12.3: 275
12.5-7: 1681159
12.7: 315
12.13: 256
12.15: 2291174
12 . 22: 36116
13.2: 312
13.12: 280
13.13: 115
13.14: 296
13.15: 211
13.21: 3161112

James (Jas)

1.2: 275

1.5: 132, 220, 222
1.6: 135

1-7: 135

1.17: 132, 242
1.18: 149
1.21: 76, 305
1 . 22: 1801140
1.26: 256
2.10: 131
3.15: in
3.17: 77, 112, 151
4.1: 921118
4.2: 289
4 - 3 : i 34
4 - 7 : 92
4.8: 48
4.12: 28
5.1: 226


5.2- 3: 228
5.9: 226

5 i 4 : 239

1 Peter (1 Pt)

1.16: 269, 3041143
l.ig: 1761120
123: 155
2.2: 521129
2.5: 32, igonSi
2.21: 56
2.23: 78, 278
2.24: 279
3.18: 273
4.1: 275
4.10: 228
5.4: 224

2 Peter (2 Pt)

1.21: 201

2 - 4 : 37
2.12: 75
2.19: 49

3.3- 4: 66

1 John (1 Jn)

1 * 3 : 35

1 . 3 - 4: 306
1.7: 281
2.1-2: 130
2.14: 1771129
2.15: 144, 186
2 . 16 : 186, 288
2.27: 151

3 . 1 : 179 , 294, 300
3 . 2 : 151 , 182 ,

3031137. 304

3.9: no

3 - 13: 51

3.14: 76, 149
3.16: 301130
3.17: 167
3.22: 133
4 .i: 199


4.12: 75
4 . 16 : 150, 305
4 . 20 : 1531170 ,
2561163

5-4: 92

5. 1 1-12: 301130

Jude (Jude)

10: 152
18: 66

Revelation (Rv)
i-7 : 34
1.8: 162
2.4: 98
2.7: 275
2.12: 981I38
2.17: 171

3 - 4 = 57
3 11: 93
3.12: 286
3.16: 34
3 . 17 : 131, 190
3 . 20 : 179, 218

4- i- 37

4.1 1: i4onio
5.10: 293, 305
5.1 1: 308
7.4: 308
7.5-8: 309
7.9: 282, 308
7.16: 293
12.1: 247nig
12.10: 37
12.12: 37
19.9: 181
21.4: 307
21.5: 25n7, 391117
21.6: 214
22.2: 275
22.1 1: 220
22.13: 162
22.20: 41
