Harold leisberg


AU0TH1R HflME FOE MOHAMMED
or

OM EL AVERT TO A HAME

If the near heavyweight champion of the world ever wants to change
hie name, I have a good suggestion for him. That is, if he .wants a distinc-
tive name, one that befits his pugilistic accomplishments and. glorifies his
jrinciplss .

Aftef all, there are many Muhammad Alins in' the world. There are
no current statistics on how many have adopted this ’’non— slave' 1 ’ name in the
United States, but in the original Muslim landt,*' Muhammed All is no more
unusual than John Smith is here * And the world te boxing champion is , as he
says, ’"the greatest" , and be may decide he should have a leasts ordinary
moniker, one more suggestive of a! the greatest" and what h® stands for.

y;hc-n that day comes, aid. because he certainly -rants a name that
connotes anything but slavery, I have just the name for. hi,mr.

Cassius Mareellt® Clay

TOiat a man I *

If anybody in the middle of the Issst century had a jvoprr claim
to being '’’the greatest", it was Cassius Marcellus Clay. In fighting, that
is - any bind of fighting. When it came to serious fighting, the original
Cassius Marcellr® Clay was what you might call a triple— triple—' threat man.

He may have had a fourth forte; the records are not conclusive on this point
But in those three, as I said, what a man. I

As a physical fighter, he excelled in three division ® z ffete,
Bowie "knives and pistols . His other categories were editorial® and htssbands


2


Unlife ns more famous relative, Henry Clay, there whe no eompro-

^ 1x1 n 7 * } 7*3 ]Ws,T s f :fc <2i'T 1 itt 1 TT * I _

•TCS — L/12!S « HlL 53 l 303 ! a y Q.0¥5iS T^prrrr! +‘h«D+ •

" ^ raeora tiist in comta?omiEes, Hemcy

- -«» «*.■. Htator; , ^ to ^ w Tlolencej ^ for
*° thB C1 ' y Th ° the **&• "vmtm#- to to well knom.

For anyone anting a name, tot history *» tell «

to that in this department, if not tove^, <M» Flareellus Clay was ^
tainly ontof -the greatest". 0f ^ ^ ^ ^

Could. m? 5 J , ~ n ll; i~n hir ^-o-tr +■'5

‘ l "~ y ' ■'* t,n “ re i5SE non » more fraught with peril than

i>f the original Cassius Marcel Ins'll ru , -,. L .

u*. mu reenuus*^. ffe rss an abolitionist editor in

slave territory. Do°s thi- -<r+-r»ow ~

-- strike your fancy, Muhammad Ali? How's that for

guts. Champ?

The original Cassius Marcellus atoo set tbs style for the as-yet-
hhborn sto of the Westerns. Then be left hto «p, wr . a! otfixx te

fitocSy, he took one step, looked straight ahead, then carefully examined the

terrain on both .sides before proceeding. In ^aet it's a wW >,*

c= in lUGr, it s a wonder has: descendants

naven t ..nefi Malt Du. ion and hto colleagues for infringement of copyright.
Mensem practically standing in line to kill hto. Sometimes he «, eto am-

bashed, including inside hto office. That was a little rougher than 16 -ounce

gloves .

In those clays they to no books on such fights so no count ran ever
of the number of mortal combats (thfe Mai to not tote the same as the
butoouldar variety, Marcelto the Original Clay fought, but they sere

®ny. In a, earlier day, there ware no knockouts against him, although ton
he it £ an old man, one count did seem to haunt him. More of that later. But
m -ato, he son every fight. His rules sere tot might be termed "’The Marrams
of Ctoito. The man to came at hto to ftoto got fists,- the knifetoeto
got 8 knife , and the gunman got bullets.


3


All of his Eteris fights - I use this term to distinguish them
from his later, or Moscow, fights — were fought on principle, or at least
it is presumed, they were. The nature of the Moscow engagements tend, to
-question this: presumption, but there ir no conclusive contrary evidence.
Generally, the Paris fights followed the appearance of his newspaper. His
naaBSpaper -was characterized by eloquent, unquenchable attacks on the insti-
tution of -slavery, real legal slavery, not the figure-of- speech kind.
Abolitionism was the bed-rock of his editorial policy and his personal creed.
This vigorous paper, as was its editor, xas dedicated to the scourging of
this, inhumanity.

Each issue had its new condemnation, its new criticism, its -near
reporting of facte and names. In an area ^rbere mast men held different
opinions and in which opinions . were strongly held, the paper wa; practically
the repeating jpitereontinental Promotions, Inc. There were no Sonny Listons
to hold stock In It, but it served the same purpose r it promoted Cassius's
fights.

Nobody was a morejrabid fan of Cassius Marcellus the Original Clay
than President Abraham Lincoln. Mr. Lincoln had no actuarial tables to con-
sult, but common sense told him that, -with all the u®n his man had splattered
over the Bluegrass, sooner or later that number would come up. He mas very
fond of hir fighter and wanted to harm to befall him, so be decided to get
Clay out of the country by making him an ambassador. Maarco® was about as far
away from Kentucky as It was possible to get in those days, so the silver—
to(u(nj^ed, marathon-talking, as yet (presumably) only double— threat crusader
was sent to the Imperial Court of Russia.

Here he soon established bis pre-eminence in his third forte —


4


amour. IShether his uualif icatioas in the fourth forte, diplomacy, were great
enough to warrant calling him 31 the greatest™ in that field may be debatable,
but his- survival, in view of his amatory exploits, strongly support- ssueh a
claim.

Amorous competition was tough and the nev Ambassador had a couple
of strifes against him to begin rath. He wasn't rich, and the locals were
loaded. He raE! a small I! «l" democrat and they all claimed their blood wses
blue. They sported noble titles, which recent history suggests was a very
strong advantage . Ordinarily , it would seem that a man who inveighed against
royalty and nobility would not be welcome in their beds . The opposite was-
true, on the distaff side.

Of course, the fear, some princes, counts and dufes were not hapiy,

but they were husbands and fathers anyway. Those noble, royal Russian -jrornen

virtually (or should I say virtue lens ly$ threw themselves at the American

ambassador. The more lie preached democracy and equality, the more he fasei—

%

nated the royal nomen. Unless you .subscribe to the '’’where there is smote there
is fire 11 school, you might have trouble believing it, but there were stories
galore of princesses panting after his carriage, uttering the nineteenth century
equivalent of the Beatle ^allr of duchesses pounding on the Embassy door late
at night demanding entrance j of countesses grabbing and smothering him with
ktesse® in public. One account had to do with a love-smitten lady throwing
hezsself in front of his carriage j another had a beautiful prineess hiding in
it, waiting for him to leave the Royal pdlace. There eertainly was no such
thing as a language barrier. "Whatever Russian the American ambassador learned,
it didn't include the word 31 nisi?’ . He preached democracy and the Russian women
treat?ed him royally.


5


Finally , a member of the Csar's immediate family became involved 1 .
The Osar seemed willing to tolerate democratic preachings in hie court and he
found, it possiole to live with an ambassador who had. no inherited titles, no
royal blood. But the prospect of an abolitionist Ivanov or Romanov was too
much.

So, having probably established a ns* and still-s landing record
for both royal and diplomatic bed-hopping, this romantic figure in a court
renowned for its moral flexibility, having survived the wrath of cuckolded
princes , counts and duksss , found his political principles an insurmountable
obstacle to his continued ambassadorial function. He was called home. Earli-
er, I suggested ssome might find his Moscow campaigns not fought on principle.
This is ’-Quibbling . I believe 3 , shat*ss good enough for a -prince is good enough
for me” to be a sound, egalitarian precept.

In any event, by the time the royal Moscow mascara had dried,
Cassius Marcellus the Original Clay iras back in the Blue grass and the Civil
Fas was over. Historically, his career jurt peters out at this point.

Some yeans later, according to Clays I know whose probity has never
been rcjusstioned, a foreign lady acco panned by a teen-age boy combed the Rue—
grass country looking for Cass ins . JEhe was variously called a princess, a
countess, or a duchess. Everybody presumed the obvious, ■•find here the story
of the first, the one and only "'greatest 01 Cassius Marcellus Clay ends, on a
note of mystery.

Hot far from Paris , in another city in Kentucky , twenty -three year®
age a young man of a different race was born. He had the gift of gab of the
former editor^ambarsador, his fighting skill, spirit and passion, and very
recently asserted a similar devotion to principle . This yo ung man claimed


6


that in fighting he was m tbe greater if" and then proved it, -which ie certainly
the hard may . He has just taken the name Muhammed • Ali because, he says, it
is not a ’•'’slave ’ 11 name, and he is loudly and properly against ’’slavery * 1 in any
form, even in names.

If he ever -want® to adopt a hers ordinary name than. Muhammad Hi,
one that truly honors his country and his pugilistic achievements, and one
that pre-eminently carries the very opposite of a "slave 11 connotation, I have,
as I began by saying, a good suggestion for himt

I recommend he call himself "Cassius Mareellus Clay 11 ’ *
