4/30/40
Dear Cameron,
Tills memo is a responds to Helen Kay's query.
Inclosed are two samples and s paid of the government-styled Hale Hose.
The samples are taken from a "Unveiling kit”, seven of which, each containitg
20»24 items, are constantly in circulation throughout the country among con-
sumer groups, extension groups, colleges, ate. Thera are two complete kits
la Hew fork City, each containing ell of the 142 items in their full color
range that are now developed. The complete exhibits in Sew York are at
the Cotton Textile Institute, 320 Broadway, and at the Mercerizers' Association
of Merlon, 470 4th. Are*
The paid or hose are made by the Gotham Gotham Silk Hosiery C0. ( Gotham
Gold Stripe}, axzxarexthsxonly 200 Madison Avenue* This company is the only
one which to dote has met the style specifications of the Home Economic division
of the Department of Agriculture.
Because, from what I was able to learn today, there seems to is a misunderstand-
ing on your pert of what this thing is I sm repeating what 1 fount out from
David B. Young, a specialist wall—known in the trade, who was brought into
the Department to take charge of the manufacturing and styling work under
Faith O'Brien, in the Home Economies section.
Various experiments have been conducted during the past year and nine months,
under a special appropriation for the purpose. In addition to improving the
quality and saleability of lisle hose one of the objectives le to:mke woman

--- PAGE BREAK ---past year and nine months,
under a special appropriation for the purpose. In addition to improving the
quality and saleability of lisle hose one of the objectives le to:mke woman

--- PAGE BREAK ---

"cotton conscious" to t%m the oat that they bay more cotton*
In the laboratories of the Depa tment the hose developed has been subjected to
every known physical test. In addition, nurses in one of the local hospitals
are participating in experiments and tests. They are supplied with hose and
the soiled hose are called for by ^apartment of Agriculture messengers who
take them to the labs where they are laundered by specialists. This
i
experiment is not completed, but thus far the results have been gratifying.
This test is in its ninth month.
As the work has progressed and as the appearance and quality of the hose ia a
improved manafa -turers have become increasingly interested. There are now many
in uirles from the trade. The project actually commenced &n July 1. 1938
To date 56 different types a her been styled hy the department. 31 are what they
classify as "novelties” and 21 are "plain knits". These range from heavy—we3ght
hose for rough wear-garden ana outdoor work, heavy work, etc., to sheer
hose suitable for formal wear. This hose is distinguished fro® the old type
of lisle hose which is tubular in design is tht it has been built up following
the technique of making full-fashioned silk, and the very same machines have
been employed. It, unlike the old ©tuff, fits the leg nfi has shape.
One of the experiments hss bo©n with exotic coloring-deep reds, etc, following
tee Schiaparelli’s recent French styling Illustrated in the 4/15/40 issue of
1-IFE.
The formal hose is now made in sheer of a two-thread knit.
Gotham was interested in this by Dean Hill, president of the Meroerlzers*
Association of tooriss. Itar ars coin, into sanction slo.ly, but thus far are

--- PAGE BREAK ---heer of a two-thread knit.
Gotham was interested in this by Dean Hill, president of the Meroerlzers*
Association of tooriss. Itar ars coin, into sanction slo.ly, but thus far are

--- PAGE BREAK ---

s
quite pleased with the results and response and expect, in the near future*
to distribute ths line through 10,000 accounts from eoast to coast. To date
they hare refraiadd from any promotional advertising, but in a few weeks will
start this, in Memphis, Tana., in connection with the Surplus Commodities Corp.
cotton program ( seo that mono, to follow.} The slowness in increasing production
is deliberate.
The sample paid inclosed, size 9*£, is what is known as w per tine t rib sash”,
light-weight.
These hose have also been styled in two-way stretch tops, etc* Gotham*s line
will sail for fl, and to those who participate in the cotton program ( sea
memo), they will, in effect, be 2 prs for $1.
also enclosed is a release by the division and several picture i of It
styles, etc., which I thought you eould use. At ached to the leg photo is sa
enlargement showing the stitch in greater detail* These people say it is best.
if yeu superimpose the enlargement, to do so in the toe*
There is no subsidization by the government of tfcimx manufacture of these
hose, except that the government has saved the me ufaeturers money in cnduction
the experiments and performing the tests. There is no connection between
this project and the stamp plan, as I will explain in that memo. I m rushing
this because Kay says she must have this today. The oil-filter memo will follow
later today. There is no subsidy under the stamp olan, also.
harold '^oisberg