failures,
like those of the cditors of all the Pentagon Papers, none of
whon fil
deliberate
gaps,
asa
all.
easily could have from news-
papermor
ues
as
Can
files like mine。HW
 Kennedy without
book is after the one I'll return to when I finish with PM. What JFK really turmed into hes to be destroyed, so
Don't lend ne yours if you get one, for I vill want to nark it up as I read it. My plans remain unchanged. This
Flease return. I hope you can keep your eye pealed for when this books is renaindered or cones out in paperback.
American scene.
Gerald W. Johnson is a long-time commentator on the
its shattering effect is considerable.
that assault,but it is in somerespects the best aimed,and
ing up.Richard J.Walton's salvo is not the first blast of
sand page,andnowthenevitable countratackissha
Meanwhilehis adorers have had their say in several thou
so horrifying that for a long time anything like a critical
President of theUnited States,met deathin circumstances
Even to a reader who thinks it rather overdone, this
Reviewed by GERALD W.JOHNSON
Viking.250pp.$7.95
By Richard J. Walton.
The Foreign Policy of John F. Kennedy.
Cold Warand Counterrevolution
A little more than eight years ago John F.Kennedy,
the charisma
counterrevolutionary,equestionariseswasheanything
conspircy-obsessed,and,like practically all Americans,
all counter-revolutionary.
opposedthe extension ofcommunismby force,wewere
perhaps,but not conspiracy.Then,to the extent that we
Granting that this president was,like most Americans,
conductcertainly,lunacyrobably,demonic ossession
thing exceptfurtive,undercover conspiracydisorderly
stentorian bellowing of Communist orators might be any.
headedminority towhom it seemedevident that the
sinker.But in 1960 so had all Americans except a hard-
whichnotevenWalton asserts,Kennedy had swallowed
pretty well established?Unlesshe was a master hypocrite,
along that line.
ton must be given credit for aremarkably skilful effort
witnesses isa forensic triumphof the first order,andWal
knows that toproveyour caseby the testimony of hostile
the writings of his friends and admirers.Every lawyer
selectedfrom public statements byKennedyhimselfand
evidenceall themore formidablebecause itisalmost all
and a counterrevolutionary,supporting the charges with
He cnargesKennedy with having been a cold war hawk
were of at least 10-karat gold.
real silk,and consignsto thedustbin some trappings that
notably selectiveHetearsdowsome rapesthatweref
the junwith a strongandruthless hand,buthe isnot
removed is a service to truth in history.Walton rips away
have thered plastic ribbonsand shredded aluminum foil
slashing attack is not alogether regrettable.After all,th
But has he really proved anything that wasn’t alreadytruth in history.Walton rips away
have thered plastic ribbonsand shredded aluminum foil
slashing attack is not alogether regrettable.After all,th
But has he really proved anything that wasn’t already

--- PAGE BREAK ---

else? He was, if we accept Walton’s judgment that
John Kennedy was a symbol of youth,of hope,of change
in a world that desperately needs change. He was a sym
bol ofenormous valueina drearyworld
endure unless it is based on substance.”Agreed,but there
is “the substance of things hoped for,” which is the def-
Unless he was a master hypocrite,
Kennedyhadswallowedthe
"Communist conspiracy"theory
"hook, line,and'sinker.
inition of faith,according to the Apostle. Many believe
that a statesman who can revive faith in the minds of a
despairing people, faith in the existence of better things,
although they are not seen,has accomplished a work of
such durability that the sum of his follies and errors cannot
destroy itutterly.
Walton ends his summary of Kennedy with the words,
“Cuba,Berlin,Vietnam-those are his monuments.Well,
that is one opinion, doubtlessa sincere one.But there is
another,quallyeyondproofbutquallycredible,which
is thatfaithandhope,althoughimponderable,intangible,
and invisible, are in truthmore substantial than the pyra-
mids and more enduring monuments.
口