1
PROLOGUE
are true.The world was hypnotized in August,1974 by thedrama
of a President being destroyed:Richard Nixon,the right-wing
dragon,slain bytwo scruffy>reporters at the Washington Post.
That's howit's recalled in the books and the moviethat have come
outoftheevent.
The historical truth may be that thefederal
courtsandthe Congress -- not to mention the ineptnessofthe
President's staff whohadinstalled avoice-actuated audiotaping
thePresidentthan the combined efforts of thenation'spress,
includingthetworeporters.
The American press believes it brought down aPresident.
It
has conducted itself since as if the techniques of Watergate,when
applied to every level of journalism,enrich and enlarge the final
product，even when the the sources and the motives are unknown.
Historians may find a rich vein of irony in the paradox that the
newspapers of America,
signing.onlateinthe
consumers'
rebellion,campaigned for truth-in-labelling in food
products,
whileinsistingon their own right to disguisetheoriginsof
their own contents.
The warm, self-congratulatory afterglow of the Watergate
episode,as the two formerly scruffy reporters weighed their book,
lectureandfilmoffers,
wasagoldenmoment.1
Butthecloudon
the horizon，
the hubris that preceded the nemesis,was the method

--- PAGE BREAK ---de,as the two formerly scruffy reporters weighed their book,
lectureandfilmoffers,
wasagoldenmoment.1
Butthecloudon
the horizon，
the hubris that preceded the nemesis,was the method

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2
ofthe dragon slayers.
Who were the"sources,"whichwere
the
"officials,"how did an incriminating set of facts "become known?"
Even those spare clues in that terminology were missing in the
case of The Post's"Deep Throat," the informative apparition
1who
talkedto reporter Bob Woodward in a parking garage butonlyon
"deep background," with no attribution at all.‘(The Post always
claimed it insistedon at least oneother source for itsWatergate
information,but that does not change the critical fact thatone
of the principaldriving sources for itsinvestigation
was
unknown.His motives were also unexplored.)
The cumulative effect of the stories in the press and on
radio and television was to create a consensus of indictment.The
identityof the source of the information and his credibility
became
less important than the snowballing revelations thatwere
beingput before the public in kind of ajournalisticfeeding
frenzy.
In a perverse way, the anonymity of the "source"
gave
credenceandweighttotheinformation;
surely the facts mustbe
important andtrue if the person who was saying it wasfrightened
of losinghis jobif he were tobeidentified;surelythesource
mustbe trustworthy andimportant if the hardnosed reportersand
editors permitted him to mask his identity and,in effect,
themselves took responsibility for the accuracy of the information
and giving it the prominence of the front page.
In the case of Nixon,a President left office before his term
wasoverwithout knowing who the faceless "officials"were
who
helpeddohimin.
Neither did the American public know;nor did
foreign officials，some of whom,such as the Chinese and
the

--- PAGE BREAK ---m
wasoverwithout knowing who the faceless "officials"were
who
helpeddohimin.
Neither did the American public know;nor did
foreign officials，some of whom,such as the Chinese and
the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
Soviets,still believe that Richard Nixon was driven from office
for establishing a system of detente with the Soviets,or opening
the door to China,rather than the absurd venality of spying on a
psychiatrist,ortrying to cover up a burglary that never
would
have been discoveredif theKGB hadbeenin charge.
The
use of concealed sources did not beginwithWatergate,
but
the
episodegavethetechnique
anew
journalistic
respectability.
Therewere attentive observers onthesidelines
of Watergate.As they watched,they drew some logical conclusions
abouthowthe game is played and howtheyintended to play itin
the future.
Some of these alert students，for example,were in
Californiaworking for the man who had almost snatchedthe1968
presidential nomination from Nixon,Ronald Reagan.
They did not
forget those lessons when it was their turn to move into the White
House.
Otherwatchers
wereinforeignembassies,
lobbying
groups，
in Congress,in corporations and the ubiquitous public
relationsfirms aroundtheworld.
They drew the obvious conclusion thatjournalists
are
intramurally
competitiveandthatoneofthethingsthey
compete
in is tapping better "sources" than their rivals.Not only is it
permissible, in the post-Watergate morality, to conceal
your
official identity when dealing with a reporter.
In some ways, it
is preferable to the reporter,because it gives him the mystique
of being plugged in to the sources of power.The multiplicityof
anonymous sources,in the world of big-time journalism,translates
directly
into editorialesteem,income andcompetitive
success.
So，why
not usethisjournalistic tribal custom toconceal
the

--- PAGE BREAK ---ymous sources,in the world of big-time journalism,translates
directly
into editorialesteem,income andcompetitive
success.
So，why
not usethisjournalistic tribal custom toconceal
the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4
identity of the president's own men when they arein thebusiness
of inflating,rather than deflating, the presidential reputation?
Apress release is normallythrown away by an self-respecting
is
reporter.In this new way of doing business the information
"leaked"
to a favored reporter,who understands verywell
that he remains in favor only so long as he successfully getsthe
story on the front page,or the evening news，or in his
magazine.Thus a routine State Department report summarizing anti-
narcotic operations can be expected to disappear on page 32 of the
importantpapersif it is handed out toeverybodyatthesame
time.
But suppose somebody at the State Department is thoughtful
enoughto provide The New York Times with a report of thereport
one day ahead of the rest of the mob.It has a good chance (as it
did）of popping up on the front page of that paper.
Meanwhile，editors at the other papers and the news agencies
to
are
gnashing their editorial and corporate teeth,demanding
know of their reporters why they were not favored with such a
scoop.
Itisunderstood by all concerned thatiftheleaked
information
doesnotget sufficiently prominent playinThe
Times, some other reporter is going to be chosen next time. Then it
will be The Times which will be grinding its corporate molars.
The Times wasfavored with a one-dayjump on the State
Department's routine semi-annual report two years in arow,even
though,in both cases, there were ludicrous errors,including the
reporter getting the year of the report wrong.In both cases
Errors
The Times gave the prosaic report spectacular play.
in the articles notwithstanding,there was front-page evidence in

--- PAGE BREAK ---orter getting the year of the report wrong.In both cases
Errors
The Times gave the prosaic report spectacular play.
in the articles notwithstanding,there was front-page evidence in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5
America's journal of record that the State Department's Bureauof
NarcoticsControliscertifiedas anactive
memberofthe
President's army which is energetically battling drugs.
In a kind of cumulative campaign of disinformation,the front
page stories based on (leaked) self-serving State Department press
releases give the impression that something important is being
doneaboutstopping the flow of drugs intotheUnitedStates,
whilethedrugs continuetorollin.
Theeffect of leaks and backgrounders isamplifiedbecause
newspapersand other news organizations are prideful and inthis
competitive worldthey have a tendency to preen andstrut when

inside
stuff. Such prominently displayed stories in important newspapers
starting point for the planning of the day's television coverage.
not
createnewsoreventsthat
：neverhappenedbutadvance
the
President's goals,
competitive press? So it happened， in August， 1986， that a
National Security Council Directive suggested a"disinformation"
campaign to suggest to Col.Moammar Ghadafi through leaks in the
Americanpress
that he was abouttogetbombedagain.
Itis
after all, more cost-effective to conduct a campaign against
Ghadafiin the columns of the Wall Street Journal or onthe
CBS
Evening News than to actually send planes or agents to Libya.
As
Secretary of State George Shultz told a group of reporters in
New
York，who were complaining about their being misled by
the

--- PAGE BREAK ---News than to actually send planes or agents to Libya.
As
Secretary of State George Shultz told a group of reporters in
New
York，who were complaining about their being misled by
the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6
administration,
"you're predictable." He was referring totheir
habit of uncovering ship and troop movements and reporting on them
buthewasalsodefending
theadministration's practice
of
deliberatelystagingsuch
maneuverssothattheywould
be
reported,giving U.S.adversaries some sleepless nights.
There
was no trace of false remorse from Shultz,who also insisted that
he，
personally,did not lie but did not dispute the institutional
fibbing.
Such candor is rare.
The
process of using the intramural
press competition
to
further
the specific policy goals of the administration inpower
is not
rareandhadbeen goingonlongbefore
theReagan
administration.
WoodrowWilson'sadministration
anonymously
leakedthe famous Zimmerman telegram to the AssociatedPress
1917in order to dramatize the German villainous designs.This
brothersexperimentsin aviation.
The
Reaganadministration's
public relations juggernaut techniques,with whole floors ofthe
OldExecutive OfficeBuilding given overtopublicrelations
factories,would be the equivalent of a Boeing
747.
Since
each
successive administration appearstohave absorbed thelessons
of
thefailures
andsuccesses'of itspredecessors，
we
can only
imagineand tremble at the efficiency of thenext generation
of
political
creaturesnow hacking their way throughtheDarwinian
jungle to the White House.
Whatismosttroubling aboutthisapparently
inexorable
process
is that the members of the press,.like the Germans
and
the Japanese in World War II，have not discovered that their code

--- PAGE BREAK ---.
Whatismosttroubling aboutthisapparently
inexorable
process
is that the members of the press,.like the Germans
and
the Japanese in World War II，have not discovered that their code

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
hasbeenbrokenand their competitive drivesarebeing
used
against them.The journalistic rivalry for inside stuff is being
used against the democratic process,which requires
thatthe
votershave as much relevant information aspossible,
including
the sources of the news andtheirmotives.
If information is silver for officials in Washington,it is
reputation and income to be able to quote"a seniorofficial" and
to
predict accuratelywhatthePresidentisgoing
to
do
tomorrow.
The somewhat removed editor and reader do not realize that it
not all that difficult for a reporter with a large organization
to
beinvitedtoaWhiteHousebackgrounder.
The system of pretend
insiderjournalismgetsthe information out andit gives
the
flavorofbeing exclusive,
Sort of afast-foodequivalentof
genuine
investigativereporting.
Everybodywins，except
the
reader
andthe voter，
whose abilitytojudgethetruthofthe
its sources.
Controlling the information in Washington (one can applythe
same lessons to any other governmental body,foreign or domestic)
means
the press is also controlled,since it depends on the
informationit receives.
A samplingof atypical front pageof
any American newspaper (and the same holds true for theeditorial
page,
and the op-ed page,which has become the preserve of the PR
hiredgun） shows that a vast majority of the news comes
directly
or
indirectlyfromgovernmentpolicy
makers.
Lastyear's

--- PAGE BREAK ---age,
and the op-ed page,which has become the preserve of the PR
hiredgun） shows that a vast majority of the news comes
directly
or
indirectlyfromgovernmentpolicy
makers.
Lastyear's

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
smuggling problem,uncovered by a few reporters with great effort
and personal bravery,becomes this year's War on Drugs,with
networks and thenews magazines saluting and snapping to attention
as the governmental press machine runs the flag up the pole.The
administration's 1983 insistence on dealing withthe urgent Middle
East problem turned into an unwillingness to talk about it in 1984
whenit became apparent the United States had run outofideas.
Sothe previous year's Big Story disappearedwith hardly abubble
in Washington,althoughthe killing in Lebanon went on in the
vacuum created bythe American diplomatic failure.
Alwaysparamount in the administration strategy is theneed
Charge, he is Right. The carrier of the myth is a compliant press,
dependent on government officials to providetheinside stuff.
The methodof building a presidentialreputation
ncanbe
refined by turning leaks in daily dribbles.On Monday, the reader
finds out that officials are telling The Washington Post thatthe
President is reluctantly considering ways to punish the Canadians
fortheir unfair trade practices and is considering a newtariff
oncedarshingles.
OnTuesday（following abackgrounderbythe
Canadian embassy,which has closely followed American techniques),
welearnfrom U.S.sources that atroubledbut determined
president has made up his mind and is expectedto announce
a
punitive dutyon Canadian cedar shingles.
The next day ， the reporter's prescience and ability
to
cultivateinsidesources is confirmed as thebaredetails
are
announced.
Thereare detailsof the actual
announcement,plus

--- PAGE BREAK ---ingles.
The next day ， the reporter's prescience and ability
to
cultivateinsidesources is confirmed as thebaredetails
are
announced.
Thereare detailsof the actual
announcement,plus

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
outragedreactionfrom the Canadian government,together
with
soundsofsatisfactionfrom
American
manufacturers.
The
cumulative effectof the week-longcontrolledtrickle and counter-
trickle of information is togive theimpression that the
presidenthas been a terribly busy,concerned man.
Clearlyno
sparrow falls and not a pound of cedar shakes enters thiscountry
withoutthe President knowing about it and weighing itsnational
way of portraying the way a hugegovernment works,but theReagan
administration became expert at it and its methods will be refined
bythose other administrations coming along.
Weare approaching the bi-presidential system:one man who
runs
foroffice.largely because of hissuccessatavoiding
journalism and appearing directly before the public only on his
termsontelevision.Thereis another presencewhoruns
the
government,a series of technicians who create the holograph of an
operating president,who does not exist except in the calculated
image
intramurally competitive,cooperative press.
MikeDeavermaybe
gone, but Deaverism, like McCarthyism after Joseph McCarthy,
remains afundamentaloperatingtechnique.
Althoughthere are occasional cries of outragefromthe
President and his men about how they are cruelly used andplagued
by anonymous leaks (not all leaks are planned;many do happen as a
result of journalist enterprise)，the federal government is by
large margin the most incontinent of all.When a foreign visitor
arrives at the White House to talk to the President, it is usually

--- PAGE BREAK ---urnalist enterprise)，the federal government is by
large margin the most incontinent of all.When a foreign visitor
arrives at the White House to talk to the President, it is usually

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
anassistantsecretaryof state whobriefsreporterson
1the
meetings,but only under the strict condition that the briefer not
beidentified..When the visitor is European and the brieferis
Assistant Secretary of State Rozanne Ridgway,even the feminine
pronoun is forbidden on second reference,lest the world be given
a hint of the briefer's identity.The reason for this travesty on
secrecy is that everything must be suppressed that does not
directly
contributetotheessentialmythof
presidential
omniscience and activism.
By using the techniques ofauthentic
the"sources"and
the
investigative
journalism
unnamed
"officials"
the government benefits from thepublicrespect
created by the real investigative reports.
All use the same kind
of protective concealments of the sources,an example of art
imitating nature,just as some good-tasting butterflies extend
their life spans by emulating the color of foul-tasting relatives.
The
of
selectively releasing secrets in order to enhance thepresident
and his policies.
In some cases the information is legitimately
classified，but is unveiled to make a point in support of a
political
direction,
evenatthe.costofdryingup
the
intelligence channel,as President Reagan did when he announced
theintercept of coded messages from the Libyan embassy
in East
Berlinin order to inculpate Libya in the bombingof LaBelle
Disco in West Berlin.
Occasionally,high-ranking policy-makers
areproduced before groups of reporters at the White House orat
the Pentagon to reveal the deployment of new Sovietweapons,
and
sometimeseven to show satellite photography,a disclosure
that

--- PAGE BREAK ---ced before groups of reporters at the White House orat
the Pentagon to reveal the deployment of new Sovietweapons,
and
sometimeseven to show satellite photography,a disclosure
that

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
wouldlanda lower-ranking government employee in'theslammer.
The result is not only the debasing of classified informationbut
aresulting climate of skepticism about the system used toguard
realsecrets.
The method combines the disclosure
offormerly
secret information withthe holdingback of another vitalpiece of
information:whosaidthis? what was his motive and his authority?
whatis his track record for credibility andobjectivity?
David Brinkley,then of NBC,once foolishly said,whether out
of pride or desperation is not clear,"News is what I say it
is."Thatis flat wrong.
NewsinWashington andthusinthe
UnitedStates is what the government determines ittobe.
The
threebranches of the federal government determine mostofwhat
tomorrow's newspapers willreport and what will lead the tonight's
television newscast.A television newscast on a federalholiday
has an odd, aimless quality.Newspapers, when the White House is
out west on vacation,exude a sense of desperation,running
interminablefeatures anduninformedspeculations aboutwhatthe
executive branch and Congress might or might notdowhen theyget
backfromthebeach.
Barringtheoddearthquakeand flood(even
there,the government will take over by the president declaring it
a disaster,as if a natural cataclysm cannot achieverecognition
without the federal seal of approval）it is the giant bureaucracy
Qf:.the executive and legislative branches which not only decide
whatwillhappen，
but alsohowitwillbereported
and
when.
The most important overall result is thatthe American
press has become part of the information engineering system run by
the U.S. government the press is supposed to be balancing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---The most important overall result is thatthe American
press has become part of the information engineering system run by
the U.S. government the press is supposed to be balancing.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
Other
branchesofstateandlocal
governments，
foreign
embassies,
even corporationshavebegun topick up the technique,
Coca-Cola,
forexample,"leaking"
themomentous news
aboutthe
birth of New Coke one day early to the Wall Street Journal,
which
reverently treated the scoop as Really Big News,setting the tone
for
therest of the nation's business press,
andthe
national
general press,as well.
Thewatchdog has been muted bythe simple device of giving it
afew
bones.
The adversarial relationshipbetweenpress
and
government has become a romance,a partnership in which they work
hand in glove.
The reporters may have different motives, aims or
beliefs than the officials theytalk to.
They may even
disagree
orarguepublicly.
But by dutifully using the "source"
material
put
out
calculatedly by the government,reporters
have
become
transmission
1beltsforagovernmentwhichhas
analyzed
the
competitive,
sometimes mindless,nature of the American press
Governmentofficials,
some
them
former
reporters,
have
discoveredhow the press works andnowthey aremaking it work for
thepolitical leadership.
That means it is not working for
the
people,not the way it supposed to.
11-1-86 proofed