REBUTTAL TO RAMSEY: an independent researcher's 
critique of the NAS Committee on Ballistic Acoustics 
W. Anthony Marsh 
August 1983 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---Preface 
Although this critique is written for other researchers and laypersons, the subject 
matter deals with the disciplines of acoustics and statistics.

Therefore, I have had to 
compromise by sometimes using scientific wording unfamiliar to the layperson in order to 
strengthen or clarify a point addressed to the scientific community and yet other times 
oversimplify, draw analogies, or omit scientific notation.

A thorough working knowledge 
of the basic facts of the assassination of President Kennedy and of the issue of the 
acoustical analysis done for the House Select Committee on Assassinations(HSCA) is a 
prerequisite for understanding this critique.

Summary 
A police escort motorcycle’s radio, which was stuck in the transmit mode while 
accompanying President Kennedy’s motorcade through Dealey Plaza in Dallas, Texas on 
November 22, 1963, transmitted the sounds of the gunshots which killed JFK and wounded 
Gov.

Connally to the Dallas Police Department where they were recorded on a Dictabelt.

One of the shots originated from the grassy knoll.

The Report of the National Academy of 
Sciences which refuted that fact is invalid due to bias, improper applications of method, 
careless errors, and deliberate misrepresentations of fact.

History 
Under contract by the HSCA, the firm of Bolt, Beranek, 6, Newman(BB&N) analyzed a 
tape recording of the JFK motorcade in Dealey Plaza and found 4 possible shots.

The most 
controversial was the shot from the grassy knoll, which would imply that a conspiracy was 
involved.

Because BB&N could only state the probability for that shot was 50%, HSCA asked 
acoustics experts Weiss and Aschkenasy (W&A) to refine the data on that shot in order to 
reduce the uncertainty either way.

W&A stated with a 95% confidence that the impulse on 
the DPD tape recording was a gunshot fired from the grassy knoll.

The HSCA relied quite 
heavily on that conclusion in issuing its finding of a conspiracy.

The U.S.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The HSCA relied quite 
heavily on that conclusion in issuing its finding of a conspiracy. The U.S. Justice Department (DOJ), instead of then investigating the conspiracy, 
attempted to discredit the HSCA findings. Its first attempt using the FBI bugging experts 
failed due to the lack of competence in the necessary disciplines. DOJ then had to assign 
the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) the task of discrediting the HSCA’s acoustical 
findings. To be sure of the outcome, only government connected scientists, most with ties 
to the intelligence community, were selected and they worked in total secrecy without any 
challenge from independent researchers. It was hoped that their prestige would end the 
debate and their mandate was only to discredit the acoustical analysis of the HSCA, not to 
find the truth. The budget they were given was so limited that they could not do the 
necessary tests beyond those needed to discredit the HSCA. The DOJ was highly successful. It's been over a year since the issuance of the NAS Report and not one scientist has 
dared challenge it. It’s a national disgrace for a country which prides itself on 
freedom of thought that the challenge has to come from an ordinary blue-collar worker, 
rather than the scientific community. Areas of criticism 
I. Secrecy 
II. Transcripts 
III. Timing 
IV. Voiceprints 
V. Unanalyzed sounds 
VI. Statistics 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---I.

Secrecy 
The NAS committee worked in total secrecy without dialogue with critics.

I had 
written to them on December 1, 1980 suggesting several solutions and points that had to 
be addressed.

Not only did they ignore them, they didn't even acknowledge my letter.

Phone calls went unanswered.

If this treatment was typical, it shows a bias that is 
unmistakable.

Many of their glaringly obvious errors could have been avoided simply by 
accepting help from outside researchers.

To me, the most shocking aspect of their report is that no one had the courage to 
accept responsibility.

You'll notice that throughout this paper, I attribute all the 
committee's actions to Ramsey.

This is not an ad hominem argument.

This is primarily 
by default as he chaired the committee, but also because the members who actually did 
the work would not claim responsibility for their contributions.

To guess from 
appearances, it would seem that the entire committee met only a few times, pro forma, 
and that the bulk of the work was done independently by one biased, pro-Warren Commission, 
CIA-contract consultant with the help of his blindly loyal students.

I even doubt that 
the individual members took the time to read and understand the work.

We'll probably 
never know due to the extreme secrecy imposed by the NAS.

Little more of substance was 
accomplished than Luis Alvarez could have done on his own.

The most amazing aspect of 
this charade is that it is almost unheard of in the scientific community, except in 
totalitarian regimes, that one biased researcher publish his work unattributed under the 
cover of a government-supported agency and then refuse to defend it or present any 
counter-arguments to its critics.

This is not merely scientific arrogance, it is truth 
by fiat.

I suppose that we should next expect the NAS to declare that the world is flat.This is not merely scientific arrogance, it is truth 
by fiat.

I suppose that we should next expect the NAS to declare that the world is flat.

Another example of the secrecy is the fact that Ramsey did not release copies of 
the evidence along with the report so that someone else could try to duplicate their 
results.

For instance, one of the major points of the NAS thesis is that Jesse Curry's 
message,"Go to the hospital." occurred at least 20 seconds before the shots that were 
identified by BB&N/W&A.

They based that on a tape recording provided by DPD Capt.

Bowles.

Given the fact that NAS and the DOJ have kept the tape secret, how do we know that 
someone didn't splice in 30 seconds of Lawrence Welk music in order to pad it?

It 
certainly doesn't match the tape that I have and I doubt that it matches the tape that 
was given to the HSCA.

Withholding of raw data is the first indication that the researcher 
has something to hide.

II.

Transcripts 
As other researchers have pointed out , there have never been accurate transcripts 
prepared of the DPD tapes.

Ramsey made no exception to that rule, relying on DPD Capt.

Bowles' latest disinformation.

There is a wealth of information on the tapes themselves 
if anyone just takes the time to transcribe all the sounds on the tapes, even the 
silences.

Most inaccuracies on the Bowles transcripts are simply negligence such as not 
bothering to mark repeats, or note the source of a transmission, etc.

Sometimes Bowles 
intentionally rewrote a transmission to correct grammar or omit pauses in order to 
keep his fellow officers from looking like coyntry bumpkins.

Most such editing is 
inconsequential to the timing of the tapes.

Yet there are some which led Ramsey to draw 
false conclusions.

On channel 2 there are several repeats due to wear of the Audograph record which 
added time to the apparent duration during playback.

When comparing timing between the 
two channels, several seconds must be deducted from ch.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On channel 2 there are several repeats due to wear of the Audograph record which 
added time to the apparent duration during playback. When comparing timing between the 
two channels, several seconds must be deducted from ch. 2's timing (see timing chart) 
to account for those repeats. Between Jesse Curry's, "Go to the hospital." and 190's, 
"You want me to still hold this traffic..." which is crosstalked to ch. 1 and recorded 
simultaneously, there are 6 repeats, only 4 of which were deducted by Ramsey. The other 
two he might have missed, because the transcripts did not accurately record them. Repeat 
2 was of the dispatcher's message, "Parkland has been notified. 12:32.". Ramsey did not 
consider it a repeat, because only one word was repeated, "notified", which would not 
be of sufficient duration to be a period of rotation of the record. Yet, if 
Bowles had simply noted both times at which the "notified" appeared, he would have 
noticed immediately that there were 3.4 seconds between them, which is the correct time 
for a repeat. The mechanics of this repeat will be discussed in a further section. Repeat 4 is the most blatant example of error caused by Bowles transcripts. Ramsey 
considered it not to be a repeat on the basis that not enough words were repeated to

--- PAGE BREAK ---equal a period of rotation.

He based that conclusion on Bowles transcription of the 
messages between Deputy Chief Lumpkin and Chief of Police Curry.

In Bowles version, 
Lumpkins' question ends with the words, " men I have with me?M, then Curry breaks 
in with, "Just go on to Parkland Hospital with me.

Just go on to Parkland.".

Period.

Actually, the "with me." was the beginning of a repeat, which included part of Lumpkin's 
previous message ending with, "with me?" and continuing to repeat Curry's, "Just go on 
to Parkland Hospital." This repeat was also approximately 3.4 seconds in duration.

So 
that's a total error of 6.8 seconds or so in a very crucial area of timing, which was 
caused by inaccurate transcripts.

However, the most important error to me was that Bowles left out and Ramsey did 
not correctly include a message which I feel is the most important on the tape.

In my 
letter of Dec.l, 1980, I pointed out that there was a transmission on the ch.

I tape 
which proves that it was McLain's cycle with the open mike.

About two minutes after the 
shots, a fellow officer yells to the cyclist with the open mike, "Take off, Buddy.", 
whereupon the cyclist turns on his siren and speeds off to catch up with the motorcade.

I did not expect Bowles to include that, given the fact that the DPD has been a leader in 
anti-conspiracy propaganda and many of its officers have destroyed or manufactured evidence 
over the years.

Yet, Bowles does include a highly doubtful identification of the message, 
hold everything", which confirms the NAS thesis of a cross-talk, when that message is 
not at all clear.

In his report, Ramsey ignored the message completely.

A simple 
examination of the tape at that point would have shown that the voice was speaking 
directly into the open mike, confirmed by the lack of a heterodyne, which results from 
interference, and that the siren was on the open mike, confirmed by the presence of an 
interference arc.

H.B.A simple 
examination of the tape at that point would have shown that the voice was speaking 
directly into the open mike, confirmed by the lack of a heterodyne, which results from 
interference, and that the siren was on the open mike, confirmed by the presence of an 
interference arc.

H.B.

McLain was the only DPD cyclist named Buddy in the motorcade.

There was a Buddy Walthers in Dealey Plaza, but he was on foot directing traffic and stayed 
in Dealey Plaza.

Ramsey made no attempt to find the officer who yelled to McLain, 
because then he could have testified that it was indeed he who yelled to McLain, and 
then that proof that it was McLain's open mike might have required the NAS to actually 
look for the shots which would then have to be recorded somewhere on the tape.

This was 
unacceptable for scientists who were impanelled only to discredit the conspiracy 
finding.

Although there is no direct evidence of who is the unidentified voice, study of 
the movements of all the cyclists seen in films taken after the shots suggest fellow 
cyclists J.B.Courson, James Hargis, or Clyde Haygood as possibilities.

I tend to think 
it was Courson as he passed him halfway down Elm Street.

Haygood and Hargis parked their 
bikes on Elm St.

and went up the grassy knoll in hot pursuit of the assassin.

However, 
McLain could have slowed down to offer either one help and was yelled off.

I do not have 
the resources to investigate this aspect more thoroughly, but the DOJ does and will not.

It is hoped that someone will before more witnesses die.

Ramsey's omission of this vital 
issue is a clear example of the cover-up of evidence.

A related problem is the fact that there are so many versions of the tapes themselves.

The Bowles tapes, the Curry tapes, the FBI tapes, the Secret Service tapes, the Warren 
Commission tapes, the HSCA tapes, etc.

I have tried to get a copy from BB&N and from 
Ramsey.

They both declined to share it.--- PAGE BREAK ---

I have tried to get a copy from BB&N and from 
Ramsey. They both declined to share it. When I requested a copy under the Freedom of 
Information Act from the DOJ, FBI, Secret Service, and National Science Foundation, they 
all denied ever having or hearing of the tape. The HSCA records are locked up in the 
National Archives, safe from public access. Therefore, my studies are based on the 
version I bought from the Collector's Archives, whch I describe as the Canadian copies. I have no idea which other version they are identical to. If you wish to duplicate my 
research you can get copies from that source. III. Timing 
Ramsey's major thesis rests on the conclusion that Curry's message, "Go to the 
hospital." occurred before the purported shots. On this basis he concluded that there 
was no reason to look for shots. It's ironic that the NAS panel was called a "Committee 
on Ballistic Acoustics" when they didn't perform one such test or deal with the topic. They went to great lengths of propaganda to just avoid having to do any ballistic 
acoustics. Even if Curry's message came before the time that W&A found a shot, and 
Ramsey thought their and BB&N's methods flawed, there could still be shots on ch. 1 
before Curry's message that went undetected. After all, if BB&N's method could not find 
shots, then it might have missed them. Ramsey did not look, for his mandate was only to 
destroy, not seek. 2

--- PAGE BREAK ---As’ I pointed out previously, Ramsey failed to deduct time for 2 repeats on ch.

2, 
amounting to app.

6.8 seconds.

Further he based the timing on tapes which he and the 
government have kfept secret.

My Canadian tapes show marked differences.

The timing 
between ch.

1 and ch.

2 can be compared by identifying any messages broadcast 
simultaneously over both channels.

Ramsey spent a great deal of effort and money 
trying to do this for uncertain messages, but ignored an QbvioiBone, Henslee's 
simultaneous broadcast to all emergency equipment.

This one is unmistakable, well 
documented in transcripts, and needs no elaborate tests to confirm.

Comparing ch.

1 
to ch.

2 based on*that message as the benchmark and making the necessary adjustments 
for known factors produces the following results: Henslee's ch.

2 message at 324.5 
minus Curry's at 32.7 ■ 291.8 secs, between messages.

Deducting 31.1 secs, for the 8 
repeats = 260.7 secs, corrected.

Two corrections must be made for ch.

1.

First, 6 secs, 
representing a break in recording must be deducted from the 432.5 yielding 426.5.

Then 
the time must be corrected by .99 for the difference in recording speeds (confirmed by a 
comparison of the frequencies of Henslee's voice during the simulcast), yielding 422.2.

The grassy knoll shot at 143.2 corrected by .99 yields 141.8.

Then 422.2-141.8=280.4.

Then comparing the corrected times, 260.7-280.4= -19.7.

This would tend to confirm that 
Curry's message came almost 20 seconds after the shots, rather than a minute before as 
Ramsey has concluded.

These rough calculations were done easily with little expense 
and no need to rely on controversial tests.

But, can more accuracy be obtained by 
using as a common reference point a message earlier than Henslee's simulcast?

I believe 
that there is compelling evidence as presented by Ramsey to justify the opinion that 
the earlier message,"You want me to still hold this traffic..." transmitted over ch.But, can more accuracy be obtained by 
using as a common reference point a message earlier than Henslee's simulcast?

I believe 
that there is compelling evidence as presented by Ramsey to justify the opinion that 
the earlier message,"You want me to still hold this traffic..." transmitted over ch.

2 
was retransmitted via cross-talk on ch.

1 at the same time.

Using this message as the 
common reference point, the comparison produces the results I have listed in my timing 
chart.

In order to fit both channels in the same chart for easier comparison, I have 
omitted some of the calculations used for correcting the times listed as correct.

Arguments for those corrections and calculations used for them are found here and in 
other sections of this paper.

In the interest of simplicity, no speed of tape correction 
was made to ch.

2, but rather to ch.

1.

I have estimated that there is approximately a 
1Z difference in true speed between the two channels.

That estimate is based on a 
comparison of the frequencies of dispatcher Henslee's voice during his simultaneous 
transmission, "Attention all emergency equipment...".

After deducting 6 seconds for the 
break in recording to cassette,ch.

1 times were multiplied by .99.

However, the difference 
in corrected times for "Attention..." at 426.5 and "You want..." at 318.6 is only 107.9.

Ramsey's analysis of "You want..." proves that it is cross-talk, so the time for ch.2 of 
109 secs, should be the same for ch.

1, amounting to a discrepancy of 1.1 secs.

I have 
arbitrarily decided to add the 1.1 secs;'to ch.l to correct for that.

For one reason, 
it is possible that the 6 second break in recording chopped off some of the original tape.

Second, the corrected times fit the times given by BB&N.

Third, the corrections to 
ch.

2 are already complicated enough.

Fourth, deducting more time from ch.

2 would tend 
to take the corrected timing out of fit with tfie dispatchers' time notations more than 
adding the 1.1 secs, to ch.

1.--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 would tend 
to take the corrected timing out of fit with tfie dispatchers' time notations more than 
adding the 1.1 secs, to ch. 1. The major correction to ch. 2 consists of deducting time for repeats, which have 
added time to the apparent length. Arguments are presented for each repeat: 
Repeat 1 is the same as Ramsey identified. Since it is a double repeat, it is two 
times the period of rotation, 3.3 secs., for a total duration of 6.6 secs. My stopwatch 
timing timed on the word, "secure" agrees with Ramsey's corrected time. Repeat 2 is the one that Ramsey missed entirely, as I pointed out previously. Now, 
because the stylus on a Gray Audograph moves from inside outwards( opposite of the 
normal phonograph ), the period of rotation increases with time. Therefore, this repeat 
measures 3.4 secs*, which is confirmed by noting the difference in time between both 
"notified"s. An FBI technician probably lifted the stylus to get past the known repeat. Repeat 3 is the same as Ramsey identified. Because some of the message is 
unintelligible, it was impossible to tell if it was only one complete repeat or if 
someone had manipulated this repeat. The closest approximation by timing from different 
words was 3.8 secs. Although this is not a typical period of rotation, it agrees with 
Ramsey's uncorrected time. 3

--- PAGE BREAK ---Repeat 4 is another that Ramsey misinterpreted, as I pointed out previously.

Starting the stopwatch at the break after "hospital" produces a time of 3.4 secs., 
which is a period of rotation.

Repeat 5 is the same as Ramsey identified.

Regardless of the fact that the words in 
the repeat are unintelligible, the total duration is 3.4 secs., again a period of 
rotation.

This brings up an interesting observation.

Ramsey clearly labels this repeat on the 
strip chart, Figure C—2, but if you look closely, the decibel level is very low.

First, 
what could account for that, and second, what implications does that have.

It appears to 
me that the most likely cause is skating or "soft mistracking", where the stylus rides 
up one wall of the groove, but does not break away and jump out of the groove.

What are 
the implications?

Profound!

First, such mistracking can occur not only during a repeat, 
but also during sections without repeats.

Thus, the fact that this is a mistracking can 
not,not,also prove that it is also a repeat.

Second, Ramsey tried to pad the earlier part of ch.

2 with supposj/ed silences.

One 
of the criteria he used in establishing the existence of the silences was that the 
strip charts showed periods where the signal stayed below his arbitrarily imposed 
threshold of 10 decibels below peak voltage for more than 4 seconds.

He based that on 
the word of DPD Capt.

Bowles, with no hard evidence.

But even granting the possibility 
that there were hold relays of approximately 4 seconds, there is no firm evidence about 
the threshold at which they operated or that in fact that they were operating properly 
on Nov.

22, 1963.

Moreover, the fact that repeat 5 has a period of duration less that the 
estimated hold duration and the fact that its decibel level was much lower than the 
estimated hold threshold would suggest that such mistracking could be mistaken for a 
silence.

Thus it is possible that none of the silences identified by Ramsey were in fact 
silences.Moreover, the fact that repeat 5 has a period of duration less that the 
estimated hold duration and the fact that its decibel level was much lower than the 
estimated hold threshold would suggest that such mistracking could be mistaken for a 
silence.

Thus it is possible that none of the silences identified by Ramsey were in fact 
silences.

Further, it seems that the signal in every supposed silence remains higher 
than at repeat 5.

Ramsey then goes on to arbitrarily add 46 seconds to ch.

2 to account 
for his silences, justified by the specious argument that perhaps ch.

2 wasn't used 
much at that time.

This can easily be refuted by pointing to the fact that many officers 
were trying and unable to use ch.

I and switched to ch.

2 to report that fact, get orders, 
or try to find out what was happening.

Also, BB&N's study showed that ch.

2 was running 
"nearly continuously" during that time.

As pointed out before, ch.

1 and ch.

2 real times must be the same for "You want..." 
and "Attention...".

As you will remember, I arbitrarily chose to use 109 secs, for ch.

1.

It could be slightly less, but not by much.

The smallest corrected time was 107.9.

Ch.

1 
was recorded on a Dictabelt running continuously, in contrast to ch.

2's voice-actuated 
record.

So there is simply no way that the time for ch.

1 can be reduced further.

If 
anyone wants to quibble over the 1.1 secs., he can do the calculations the other way.

But if the corrected time for ch.

1 is 109-secs., what impact does that have on the 
corrections for ch.

2?

The uncorrected time of 324.5 minus 230.5 yields only 94 secs., 
not 109.

To make matters worse, 7 secs, must be deducted for repeats 7 and 8 yielding only 
87 secs.

The only way to account for such a large discrepancy is by the fact that there are 
22 secs, of silence somewhere during that period^on ch.

2.

This is the reason for the NA 
instead of a corrected time and the reason for the 315.4 instead of 293.4.--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. This is the reason for the NA 
instead of a corrected time and the reason for the 315.4 instead of 293.4. Without access 
to the strip charts which Ramsey has declined to release, there is no way to tell 
exactly how many, where, of what duration there are silences. If Ramsey had done this 
analysis, he’d have found the silences, analyzed their characteristics, and gone back to 
his previously suspected silences to do a more careful study. Just listening to the tape, 
it seems to me that there are much fewer messages during this period than the earlier one. Repeat 6 is the same as Ramsey identified. The duration,.of 3.5 secs., the same as 
Ramsey's, is a period of rotation. Repeat 7 was overlooked, because Ramsey was only interested in the period before 
"You want...". Like repeat 2,only one word was repeated and the time between each was a 
period of rotation. In addition, an analysis of the background frequencies between each 
word would show a complete match. Repeat 8 is a very clear example of a repeated phrase. The period of rotation is 
3.5 secs. It is so obvious that the only explanation for Ramsey's missing it is the bias 
he had for padding the earlier part of ch. 2.

--- PAGE BREAK ---IV.

Voiceprints 
Although I have no expertise in this field» several errors appear obvious even to 
a layperson.

The most controversial finding by Ramsey was his validation of Barber's 
subjectiveidentification of a simultaneous transmission of the words, "hold everything." 
I have never been able to hear any distinct words on ch.

I at that time.

Perhaps this is 
another example of the differences between various versions of the tape.

The correlation shown in NAS Figure 6 is misleading.

Here Ramsey uses a favorite old 
trick of changing the scale in order to create what Huff calls a "gee-whiz" graph.

Notice 
that although the horizontal scale is the same for both the "You want..." correlation and 
„hold everything", the vertical scale for "You want..." is about 19mm/.I, whereas the 
hold everything" is about 28mm/.1.

This exhaggerates the goodness of the correlation and 
distorts Che spike in order to make it resemble the "You want..." spike.

The actual 
numbers are more revealing.

The peak of Che spike is about .518, whereas even background sCatic reached .3, a 
difference of .2 18.

BB&N’scorrelation coefficient « 10*?12 • 14 = .77.

Yet Ramsey implies 
such a figure is unimpressive.

Then how could lie accept .518 as significant?

If there is 
a choice, logic demands that the source with the higher correlation be chosen as the 
true source.

Incidentally, Ramsey criticized W&A for choosing the correction factor 
which gave the best match and went ahead to do the same thing himself for this correla- 
tion.

Also, Ramsey criticized W&A for not considering alternative sources, but it would 
seem that the screening process and Ramsey's voiceprints rule out most other sources.

Comparing the grassy knoll shot pattern to other portions of the tape which included 
static, voice transmissions, etc., BB&N found that the correlation exceeded .6 only 
during the 9 seconds where other shots were identified.Also, Ramsey criticized W&A for not considering alternative sources, but it would 
seem that the screening process and Ramsey's voiceprints rule out most other sources.

Comparing the grassy knoll shot pattern to other portions of the tape which included 
static, voice transmissions, etc., BB&N found that the correlation exceeded .6 only 
during the 9 seconds where other shots were identified.

Now Ramsey has found a correlation 
of only .518, which would not have passed BB&N's screening process.

One weakness of his study, for which he had the gall to criticize W&A, was the 
failure to do a control.

Perhaps any voice—transmission could achieve a correlation of 
.5, but not even a known simultaneous transmission could achieave a 1.0 correlation, 
due to the static or background noise.

There are some examples on the tape where cross- 
overs from ch.

2 were recorded along with live sounds on ch.

I from the open mike.

Moreover, Ramsey does not offer any evidence that the message."hold everything" is 
unique and identical to Decker's known transmission.

If the message had been a very 
common one, like"IO-4." or a persistent one like"75.Signal 5?", there could be several 
such occurances and it would be difficult to prove which was the match.

Ramsey failed to 
look for other occurances of "hold everything" and do a control correlation for each.

If 
he had done the same comparison to Curry's "hold everything" message, the correlation would 
have been approximately .55.

The correlation for "You want..." was much better,.766 at the peak of the spike.

Looking at the actual voiceprints , the two channels look very much alike, unlike the 
hold everything which look nothing alike.

On hearing the two, it seems clear to me that 
they are the same message, though the ch.

I cross-talk sounds as if it has more background 
interference and that the last few words fade ^jt or get chopped off.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On hearing the two, it seems clear to me that 
they are the same message, though the ch. I cross-talk sounds as if it has more background 
interference and that the last few words fade ^jt or get chopped off. Ramsey also 
suggested the use of Bayes theorem, but gave no concrete examples, even though he had a 
perfect opportunity here. Using Bayesian logic, he should have noted that although the 
You want... is clearly and audibly a known match, the highest correlation he could 
achieve was .766, which represents a probability of 1.0, amounting to a difference of 
.234 due to inaccurate methodology, technique, and/or noise. Therefore, the highest 
correlation one could hope to achieve might be approximately .8. Adding this loss factor 
to BB&N's-77 results in an estimated .97, which is quite significant. Further, there is another simultaneous transmission that should have been analyzed. At the time of Henslee's simulcast"Attention..." there was very little noise. Why didn't 
Ramsey do a control on this message?Because it might achieve a correlation of only .8 
or less, which would show how imprecise and subjective his correlation method and 
technique was, casting doubt on the identification of "hold everything". Second, it 
would have increased the probability of the grassy knoll shot. In general the whole study was biased and subjective, relying on the FBI, Bowles, 
and the one member of the committee whose bias is well documented. Calling in outside 
consultants would not necessarily have guaranteed elimination of bias, but perhaps 
might have made the study more objective. As a recent article in "Technology Illustrated" 
5

--- PAGE BREAK ---pointed out, there are several researchers at MIT, Carnie—Mellon University, and IBM 
doing advanced work on speech recognition by computers.

Although they may have ties to 
the intelligence community, it is assumed that they wouldn't tinker with the basic 
computer program, so that the computer could do the same study completely objectively.

Ramsey failed to use the best resources available.

V.

Unanalyzed sounds 
Another area left uninvestigated was the analyzing of additional sounds on the 
tape, not just the ones Ramsey tried to use to prove Barber's thesis.

One such sound is the 
message which I point out to the NAS.

The fact that Ramsey did no study of the message 
proves how important it is.

A thorough study might prove that the arcing is a result of 
McLain turning on his siren.

This would put an unbearable burden on those who argue both 
that McLain turned on his siren immediately and that the open mike was stationary at the 
Dallas Trade Mart.

Also of interest is the nature of static and interference from the Dallas Electric 
radios.

Could such interference resemble gunshots?

Ramsey criticized W&A for not 
considering alternative sources, but failed to do any study himself.

Ramsey also 
criticized W&A for not using the same method as they did on the grassy knoll shot on 
the other shots as a control, but fails to point out that the HSCA's contract was only 
for the detailed analysis of the grassy knoll shot.

W&A were not asked to do the same 
work on the others and were so hard pressed for time that they could not have physically 
done it.

Since the HSCA expired, none of their acoustical experts has shown any 
interest in doing follow-up work on their own, offer help to other reesearchers, or 
vigorously defended their reputations.

I have attempted to do so in my limited way.

I 
have applied the method W&A used for the grassy knoll shot to the other 4 and offered 
to share my latest calculations with Ramsey, but received no reply.I have attempted to do so in my limited way.

I 
have applied the method W&A used for the grassy knoll shot to the other 4 and offered 
to share my latest calculations with Ramsey, but received no reply.

If Ramsey thought 
that the method W&A used was flawed, he should have shown that by applying it to the 
other shots.

VI.

Statistics 
This is the most crucial and yet perplexing aspect.

No scientist involved in any 
study to date can state with absolute certainty if there were or weren't shots recorded 
on the DPD tape.

Everyone talks in terms of probability and likelihood.

This is typical 
of scientists, but not comforting to the layperson who wants absolute truth.

But most 
people are perfectly capable of understanding simple odds and probabilities associated 
with everyday life such as games or the weather.

If there is a 99% chance of rain, you'd 
take your umbrella or postpone the picnic, whereas if there is only a 1% chance of rain, 
you wouldn t.

That s no guarantee, but at least it's a good guideline on which to 
base decisions.

15 matches between test shot patterns and DPD impulses had correlations exceeding 
.6.

BB&N noticed that the pattern of matches seemed to fit the path of the motorcade.

Viewing the dots representing the time from Ch?

first match to the last on one axis and 
the distance along the microphone layout on the other as a scactergram, there appears to 
be a definite non-random sequence.

This chart is based on the raw data, which included 
obvious false alarms.

At this point, there was no attempt to deduct them.

Mikes had 
been placed about 18 feet apart along the motorcade route as a compromise between the 
estimated acceptance windows and the need to cover as much of Dealey Plaza as possible 
with the fewest necessary mike locations.

The design of the test was adequate, given the 
constraints imposed.

The pattern of matches can be as important as the total number.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The design of the test was adequate, given the 
constraints imposed. The pattern of matches can be as important as the total number. A 
cluster of several matches from neighboring mikes matching the same DPD impulse not only 
tends to confirm the impression that the pattern of the DPD impulse is a shot, but also 
gives clues to the real location of the policeman's mike. If an early DPD impulse 
pattern matches with mikes 2(5) and 2(6), the true location might be somewhere between 
them, but if it matches mikes 2(5) and 2(2), the true location is more likely between 
them. If a DPD impulse pattern matches widely separated mikes, say 1(4), 2(10), and 
3(12), that would suggest that 2 or maybe all 3 matches are false alarms. To test whether there was any relationship between the time and distance coordinates, 
BB&N partitioned the matches into a .2 X 2 contingency table and used a generalized v2 
test with the null hypothesis that matches were independent so that the distribution in the 
6

--- PAGE BREAK ---cells should be random.

Using the data 1,6,8,0 produced ax2 =* 11.4.

For 1 degree of 
freedom, BB&N stated that the probability that this large a value could occur at random 
is less than 1%.

Ramsey failed to criticize 2 important aspects of this calculation.

First, the 1% level may be too high, because BB&N did not use a table extensive enough 
to give an accurate percentage level for such a large value.

The x2 value for the 1% 
level is 6.635.

More extensive tables, such as the Biometrika, show the value for the 
0.5% level is 7.879.

A Fisher and Yates* table shows the value for the 0.1% level is 
10.827.

Thus BB&N s stated significance would seem, to the casual reader or layperson, 
to be not as significant as the value really is.

Second, the x2 distribution for such a 
low total (N«15) tends to be skewed.

It might have been better to use an exact test.

As 
Langley points out, the recommended test for N<50 is Fisher's Test(1934), which makes use 
of the hypergeometric formula: (nj!

*il2 1 • n3 !

"n*,!

)T(N!

#al •b!

*c!

*d!

) , to derive the exact 
probability.

Although the computations can be more complex, because of the factorials, the 
fact that N is moderate and the importance of accuracy necessitates using Fisher's Test, 
For the data 1,6,8,0 the exact probability computed by this test is .0013986.

Ramsey attempts to criticize BB&N's highly significant result by arbitrarily and 
informally deducting 7 matches, saying that some of the alarms are dependent,because 
some of the microphone and rifle locations were similar.

Why should independence be a 
criterion for inclusion when that is what is being tested?

Ramsey cites no standard 
reference or test that advocates such a reduction in the individual cells.

Even if that 
were a valid approach, he'd have to go through the table match by match and justify each 
deduction.

Then we could challenge or debate each one.Even if that 
were a valid approach, he'd have to go through the table match by match and justify each 
deduction.

Then we could challenge or debate each one.

Due to the design of the test, we 
would expect patterns from neighboring mikes to be similar, but that does not mean they 
are dependent on each other.

How close or how far away from each other do the mikes have 
to be for Ramsey to consider them "independent"?

He cites no estimates for that.

Ramsey's 
criticism that rifle locations were similar seems to have more validity and should be 
studied more carefully.

BB&N designed the test so that rifles would fire at different 
targets, with the muzzle first in the plane of the window of the TSBD and then pulled 
back 2 feet inside to see if there was any significant difference in the patterns, and 
therefore the correlations.

Perhaps the pattern would be different if the shockwave 
trajectory were different.

Or perhaps the inside wall and window significantly reduced 
the decibel levels of the echoes if the gun were fired from well within the TSBD.

If 
a DPD impulse matched one set of conditions rather than the other, that might provide 
vital clues to the real conditions of the assassination.

Evidence from other fields contradicts the assumptions that Ramsey used to 
calculate the probabilities of the other shots.

Even Ramsey himself conceeds that his 
calculations may be too conservative, but fails to fully explain what assumptions he made.

He deducted 6 false alarms as BB&N had from the 15 matches to get the 9 remaining.

But one 
of those matches was incorrectly identified as a false match.

BB&N stated that the one at 
140.32 came too close after another more likely match to have been fired from the same 
Although that is a proper attempt to eliminate a false match based on corroborating 
evidence, the logic is flawed and the acceptance of the veracity of that evidence is 
biased.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But one 
of those matches was incorrectly identified as a false match. BB&N stated that the one at 
140.32 came too close after another more likely match to have been fired from the same 
Although that is a proper attempt to eliminate a false match based on corroborating 
evidence, the logic is flawed and the acceptance of the veracity of that evidence is 
biased. Perhaps an automatic weapon was used for those two shots, or one man was firing 
two weapons, or one shot came from the TSBD and the other came from the grassy knoll. The 
case that I believe most likely is that another man fired the second shot from a few 
windows down. There is some evidence and eyewitness testimony that there was a second man 
on the same floor of the TSBD and a different weapon from Oswald's Mamlicher-Carcano. Ramsey's value of 7 is based on the assumption that only 2 shots were fired in Dealey 
Plaza, accounting for 9 wounds, 3 points of damage to the limo, and 4 scars in the street. That's how he came up with l-(7f9)3. If he had stuck to the old Warren Commission 3 shots, 
then 1-(6T9)3a».7037037. The trajectories of the wounds compared to the timing suggested by 
the tape make 4 shots the minimum, even without a miss, so l-(5f9)3=.8285323. I have found 
corroboration in all the other evidence for 5 shots, which includes BB&N false alarm 140.32, 
so the equation should be I- (5*10)3=.875. Notice that for these calculations, Ramsey 
doesn't complain that the mikes were too close as he did for the chi-square. He wants 
to have it both ways. If he did, he'd have to deduct 5 of the matches as duplicates, then 
5 more false alarms, leaving only 5 matches for 5 possible shots, so the equation would 
be l-CO^)1- 1.0. 7

--- PAGE BREAK ---The critical issue is BB&N's computation of the probability that W&A could obtain 
such a good match between the DPD tape pattern and the echo pattern they calculated for 
their estimated cycle-shooter locations.

BB&N calculated that the probablity that such 
a match could occur at random was about 0.053, giving them a 95+% confidence that the 
pattern on the tape was a grassy knoll shot.

Some of Ramsey's criticisms of BB&N's 
computation are correct and quite important, but his only purpose seemed to be to increase 
Che p above 0.05, not to seek the true conditions, nor try for maximum accuracy.

As W&A 
pointed out quite clearly, there is always a chance that the pattern is not a shot, but 
a random pattern due solely to chance.The thing which gives inversely proportional confid- 
ence is the chance that it could occur at random.

If Ramsey thinks the randomness of the DPD impulse pattern is an important criterion, 
then the first thing that should have been done that none of the scientists did, would have 
been to test the pattern for randomness.

Using W&A's Table 4, I counted the runs of signals 
and the runs of non-signals, using 2 ms.

time windows starting at .1 ms.

With the values: 
n1*22, n2=163, N*185, and r=40, I used Wald and Wolfowitz's formula with Yates' correction 
as shown on Langley p.326.

The resulting z=-.0200981 doesn't even approach the 10% value of 
1.64.

Thus this test does not show that the pattern is not random.

I then deducted the 
190 ms.

of silence between the two groups of impulses and tested the randomness with the 
values: ni»22, n2=68, N=90, r=40.

The resulting z=.6626179 was slightly more significant, 
but was still much greater than 10%.

Thus even with the deduction for the silence 
duration, non-randomness could not be shown.

Because this test is a modification designed 
to make calculations easier , I decided to look for a more complex formula.

In Freund's 
Modern Elementary Statistics, p.Because this test is a modification designed 
to make calculations easier , I decided to look for a more complex formula.

In Freund's 
Modern Elementary Statistics, p.

326 the test of runs is based on the formula z= -r--— 
Calculation with the original values yields z=.2858912.

Again deducting the 95 time 
windows of silence this time yielded z=-3.0090982, which is significant almost to the 
.2% level.

This shows a definite non-randomness.

Ramsey tries to criticize the 0.053 figure with a ridiculous analogy to a bridge 
hand having 3 Aces.

That is like comparing apples and oranges.

As Russell Langley points 
out in Practical Statistics, pp.

374-375, a person might throw a handful of coins into the 
air and notice the pattern they land in.

The probability of their landing in those 
positions may be a billion to one, but that doesn't imply that it is due to anything other 
than chance.

The probability would be significant only if the pattern had been predicted 
before the experiment.

Then we could say that it's extremely unlikely that the pattern is 
due to chance.

The specific bridge hand was not predicted before the deal.

W&A did predict 
an echo pattern that matched with the DPD impulse pattern very closely, as noted elsewhere.

Also, why would anyone suspect the dealer of dishonesty?

I dealt that hand a few 
weeks ago and everyone had to pass.

Why not suspect the opponents who shuffled and cut the 
cards?

If a player were dishonest, he'd want to arrange the cards for maximum profit with 
the least suspicion.

An excellent card manipulator can stack the deck or misdeal after the 
opponents have shuffled and cut to give himself a 7NT hand.

But no one would double that 
37 point hand and everyone would suspect him of card sharking.

Most cheating at bridge 
consists of secret conventions, hand signals, or other relayingt echn i quesjrofessionals 
make use of ceiling peepholes and leg transmitters.--- PAGE BREAK ---

But no one would double that 
37 point hand and everyone would suspect him of card sharking. Most cheating at bridge 
consists of secret conventions, hand signals, or other relayingt echn i quesjrofessionals 
make use of ceiling peepholes and leg transmitters. Most average players* suspicions are 
not aroused by a few lucky finesses and psych bids, but are when the opponents get a 7 NT 
hand every time. If a card manipulator were really skillful, he might give himself a 10 
card spade suit and two voids, his partner the 3 missing spades and a void in the fourth 
suit, plus giving the dealer those famous 3 aces and his side most of the remaining high 
cards, thus fooling him into taking some kind of action over his spade bid, so that when 
he jumps to 7 Spades, he makes the dealer guess whether to double or bid 7 NT. Either 
way would be diastrous , giving the manipulator maximum profit. But Ramsey also makes simple errors in his analogy. He states that p=.044( actually 
.043841538), but that is cumulative including getting 4 aces. For only 3 aces the p« 
.0412004786. He then goes on to compare the 0.053 which he considers a Poisson probability 
with 0.044 which should be considered only a hypergeometric probability. To make a valid 
comparison, he'd have to take the hypergeometric^and then calculate the chance of getting 
only 1 in 180 trials as BB&N did. The expected number in 180 would be 7.41608615. Using 
A=7, x-1, the Poisson Test shows that p= 0.006832038. So if you never get a hand which 
contains 3 aces out of 180 deals, you might get some sympathy. Ramsey correctly pointed out BB&N errors of logic and simple oversight. As Ramsey 
8

--- PAGE BREAK ---'XfflWFrHDSWt 
‘ pointed out, BB&N did make a simple oversight in stating that N-45 windows as used in the 
hypergeometric calculation.

Each of the two groups containing impulses was 90, for a total 
duration of 180 ms., thus 90 windows not 45.

However, Ramsey doesn't tell you what the 
hvoereeometric distribution would then be,given N=90.

In fact, h(9; 12,14,90)= 5.13843913 
x jO”7, which is much less than h(9; 12,14,45), which is 3.12899277 x 10 Note here 
that Ramsey fails to point out that BB&N had already made 2 conservative adjustments to 
the data.

First, they deducted the 320 ms.(should have been 190 ms.) of silence between 
the two groups of impulses.

If that duration had been included, then they would have 
started with a much smaller value for the hypergeometric.

Second, they deducted 1 match, 
because any match could be made simply by moving the time scale of either.

Ramsey ignore 
this adjustment, but I feel that it must be questioned.

Moving either time scale would 
inrease the sampling space.

But given the fact that N is now so large, the difference may 
be minor.

On the other hand,Ramsey makes the very important observation that 2 pairs of 
impulses, 19+20, 23+24 coincide in the same 2 ms.

window and one pair of the predicted 
echoes coincide in the same window.

That all depends on where you draw the boundary between 
time windows.

In this case, it is natural to start at 0.0 and make each 2 ms.

Thus 312.4 
and 313.1 fall in the same window.

Further, #19 and #20 are both 283.7; they obviously faLl 
in the same window no matter what boundary is set.

So Ramsey deducts those coincident 
impulses to reduce the data to x=8, n= 11, M=12, N=90.

That's o.k., but then he goes on to 
reduce those by 7 to account for the so-called "free" parameters.

Later he does note that 
the data tend to suggest non-randomness, except for his admittedly conservative adjust 
ment.That's o.k., but then he goes on to 
reduce those by 7 to account for the so-called "free" parameters.

Later he does note that 
the data tend to suggest non-randomness, except for his admittedly conservative adjust 
ment.

However, he states plainly in the text that such an adjustment of deducting one match 
for each "free" parameter is a traditional method.

To me it seems outrageous, and nowhere 
does he cite any reference or test which advocates that approach.

There may be similar 
methods applied to other tests, but it is a complete misuse to apply them to the 
hypergeometric arbitrarily, with no experimental results or logical proof.

Yet even given his adjustments, Ramsey fails to perform the same calculations that 
BB&N did with that data.

Specifically, the hypergeometric h(I ;4,5,83)-.206996006, not 
.223.

Then the next problem arises when trying to compute the probability of getting such 
a match only once in the many trials possible just by moving the cyclist's position.

Ramsey 
should have noticed W&A's error in estimating the width of the corridor travelled by the 
cycle.

They derived the 18 feet length correctly by noting that the test pattern from only 
mike 3(4) matched, not the one before or after, so the cycle was probably in the range of 
mike 3(4).

But when estimating the width, they erroneously concluded that, because the mike 
was supposed to be in the middle of the street with no mike on either side, the cycle 
could have been anywhere along the width of the street.

In making that estimate, they 
presupposed certain real-life conditions.

They assumed that the cycle remained in the 
street, otherwise the width could have been 100 feet or more.

That is not necessarily a 
safe assumption, given testimony of witnesses that saw a cyclist try to jump the curb an 
drive up the grassy knoll.

In this case they should have examined the evidence more 
carefully.

The estimate of 180 Bernoulli trials is very important.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In this case they should have examined the evidence more 
carefully. The estimate of 180 Bernoulli trials is very important. W&A never actually 
performed 180 trials, but BB&N estimated that tjjey could have and used that figure in the 
binomial calculation. There are several clues which they overlooked. First, the cycle has been identified as McLain's which was on the left side or the 
motorcade at the side of the press cars. Also, the previous matches were with mikes on the 
left side of the motorcade route. For the cyclist to have been on the right side of the 
motorcade at the time of the grassy knoll shot, he would have had to cross the center lane 
through the press cars. There is absolutely no testimony that McLain did that. Further, 
there is photographic evidence that only one cycle, Courson, crossed through the press 
cars from the left to the right side of the street. These films, including Dorman and 
Couch, show that McLain stayed on the left. Also, the Altgens 5 photograph, taken at 
about the same time as Zapruder frame 255, just a few seconds before the grassy knoll shot 
shows several cars rounding the corner in the middle of the street. Calculating a smooth 
trajectory from his known positions in these films, the farthest to the right McLain 
could have been would be about 5 feet into the middle lane, and that is even doubtful, 
given the closeness of the press cars. We must assume that W&A would remember that no two 
objects can occupy the same space at the same time. If that space was occupied by a car, 
it is unavailable to the cycle as a possible trial. So these limits produce a corridor o 
18 by 18 feet square, equal to 81 trials. 9

--- PAGE BREAK ---Ramsey’s deduction of 7 parameters must be studied more in depth.

For example, he 
states that there are 2 parameters associated with the location of the shooter.

If one is 
for the test shooter and the other for the second assassin, then a more careful examina- 
tion of the evidence would allow one to determine their positions within a very small 
margin of error.

If both are for just one, representing the x and y axes, then why not a 
third for the z axis?

Even then, the variation in recoil would leave an uncertainty of 
about 1 inch.

Would Ramsey still cite that as a ’’free” parameter when it has an impact of 
less than .00IZ on the calculations?

If the 2 parameters are for one shooter, then maybe 
there should be 6 total, 3 for each shooter.

Or what about the cycle position?

Ramsey 
seems to imply that the cycle can be anywhere, whereas I have shown that the travel 
corridor was actually much narrower.

Even such minor factors as the wind velocity, 
building shading, bullet airodynamics, etc.

could be considered "free parameters Jhe main 
problem is that Ramsey never cites any criteria for deciding what a parameter is and how 
’’free" it is, nor any standard method of accounting for them.

Some of the parameters he 
lists are dependent or off-setting.

Others fall far below the built-in uncertainty.

In 
addition, there are other factors which Ramsey did not consider.

The maps used were only 
accurate to ±3 feet, so that's almost a 1% difference for most echoes right there.

Or 
perhaps one temperature was measured with a dry bulb and the other with a wet bulb.

What 
difference would that make?

Perhaps the shockwave of one bullet or the explosion of the 
explosive bullet temporarily rarified the air through which the sound of the next echo 
travelled.

What difference would that make?

No logic seems clear.What difference would that make?

No logic seems clear.

Any fool could make up a 
list of all the variable conditions that could have existed and then deduct one match for 
each• 
Perhaps the worst mistake Ramsey makes is found in the next to last sentence of his 
criticism of BB&N's computation.

I tend to give him the benefit of doubt and assume it was 
a simple oversight or writing fatigue.

If not, it is one of the most blatant misrepresenta- 
tions of fact ever.

Ramsey states that the level of p=0.223 is not impressive In contrast 
to the claim of p=0.053.

Again Ramsey is comparing apples and oranges by contrasting the p 
of his incorrect hypergeometric with BB&N's binomial.

In his attempt to raise the p level, 
he incorrectly plants the impression that the p level of the hypergeometric is what 
determines the significance.

Here Ramsey went overboard the other way.

If the h(x) is 
.206996006, then the expected occurances by chance in 180 trials would be 37.2592811.

Contrary to Ramsey's summary of BB&N's analysis, one does not obtain the binomial 
probability simply by multiplying the h(x) by the number of trials.

That may be an 
approximation if the E(x)<x.

But by using a standard binomial test for that data, the 
actual probability of only one match is 3.47957775x 10~17.

Ramsey suggests using the 
Poisson Test, but that may be less accurate than a simple binomial test when the p is 
so large.

For the other calculations where the p is small and n is large, the Poisson may 
be a good approximation.

It is often used as an approximation, because calculations are 
done more easily than by the binomial.

As an analogy, suppose you have 180 coins whose 
bias is known that approximately 37 heads will come up when they are all tossed.

Then 
suppose that on the next trial only 1 head comes up.

Given the expected value, X**37, 
the probability of getting only 1 head is 3.13730616 x 10~15.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then 
suppose that on the next trial only 1 head comes up. Given the expected value, X**37, 
the probability of getting only 1 head is 3.13730616 x 10~15. As it turns out, calculation 
is relatively easy using the binomial, because x= 1 in all these cases so that nCr=n. This 
means that the calculation of the combinations does not involve any factorials or logs of 
them. Usually, the variance should equal the mean to use the Poisson. I believe that the actual situation is h(8;11,12,90)= 9.0512911 x 10~7. Then the ; • 
chance of 1 success in 81 trials® 7.3310083 x I0~5. That value of p makes me 99.992 
confident that the DPD pattern matches the predicted grassy knoll shot pattern, and 
given the fact that other shots were identified by the same method before and after this 
impulse convinces me that the DPD pattern is a shot from the grassy knoll. As Ramsey pointed out, there are some places in BB&N's report where the wording is 
misleading. He missed some however and should have been more specific. For example, on 
p. 75, the following corrections should have been made: in the first paragraph, the first 
sentence should read, " 12 of the 22 predicted echoes would be..in the next sentence, 
"...that were judged loud enough..."; in the last paragraph, starting at the second 
sentence, "We observed that they obtained 10 matches, within ±lms., out of 12 predicted 
echoes, with 14 DPD tape impulses in a 370 ms. time span. We note, however, that the 12 
predicted echoes were contained in two time intervals of approximately 9£ms. each, for a 
total duration of 180 ms.These two time intervals were separated by a span of about 190

--- PAGE BREAK ---ms.

in which no echoes louder than background noise appeared.

Because an echo was counted 
if it occurred within a 2 ms.

time window, there were 90 possible windows in which echoes 
might have occurred, ignoring the 95 windows between thl two time intervals "• and on n 76 
more out of 12.

of pointing .ut P' " 
copied it.

The calculation of the hypergeometric is a simple one, not cumulative.

Only 10 
previously^6 made’ n0t “ '2* A"d th* nUmber °f trialS Sh°uld be 81 as 1 ported out 
v ftllE!H^th°U8h-WiA|S matCh betWCen 8 DPD impulse pattern and ^eir predicted grassy 
knoll shot was significant, Ramsey still criticized the conclusion that there was evidence 
that it was actually a shot.

He claims that W&A and BB&N failed to consider alternative 
sources, but gave no examples.

I have always thought that one of the basic tenets of 
explanation ?LrwoSldnbC f5empt 5° diaprove a contention without offering an alternative 
explanation.

That would be like saying that you think Einstein's Special Theory of 
it JccurlLlJ nPedictedCabSp C°Uld aCC°Unt f°r the observed Phenomena which 
^ pred*ct?d\bu* offer no alternative theory or examples.

That’s not a 
scientific argument; it is demagoguery.

In the case of possible shots on ch.

I there are 
ITlTf t£eV1°US altern^iv® SOurces- Ramsey dare not specify or consideP PL,’b^aPse 
RpLeP inTat" b® ®8SXly disproves I offer some now merely as strawmen to show why 
othe/oortioL orPh/r^1"?’ If 8tatlc.was the source, matches should be found at 
notion nf ?6 r the tape, yet none were found elsewhere and 15 were found within a 9 sec.

P ?

°f the tape.P ?

°f the tape.

No attempt was made by Ramsey to show that any portion of the tape 
contained static that was not random and then no explanation for thenon-randomness such 
as sunspots, RF interference from the Dallas Electric radios, natural eLcScardlPchaPge 
like lightning or static electricity, periodic discharge such as the motorcycle’s ignition 
llidl* yrtaV W1‘h0UC 8UPP«ssion spark plug wires, is offered, because there is no 
evidence that such sources occurred and were recorded on the tape, especially during the 
criticai 9secs However, there are examples of mechanical sources, such as the fact^hat 
the mike had stuck open before the well-known 5k min.

portion and occassionally after but 
STLiSiSr*7 ;r,ed to pi°ve th“the °f 
the headlight or turn signal or emargency lights, or the siren could mimic a gun shot 
PhC iana-Th?

mlkC turnlng on or off while other radios were trying to use thf same channel 
dl8P 8y.

8 heteyodyno< interference tone ) of a specific pitch and the actual noise 
hPi-prnH tCh keylng 58keS leSS th8n *1 sec-’ whereas the detected shots had no 
half second Wtw did°R Whlle thC Blke W8S conCinuously open, and lasted for almost a 
"h:r
f '*Nor dxd gam®ey attempt to compare the decibel levels of the keying in to the 
h s.

Another mechanical event which Ramsey overlooked was the jarring of the mike, 
which should not be considered unusual, given the fact that the mike was on a moving 
’ 8 fSa- that C8n bC confirmed by the Presence of exhaust noise and squealling 
rhh I- rOU”d^8 c°rners* These may M what Bowles calls the "bonk-bonk” sounds heard 
near the time of the shots.

For years I had thought these might be the shots, but at the 
«cofid !

t0 BB-P detecCed shoCs’ there are only two of these bonks, spaced about a 
«nnldd ?3r£’ uh8t lf thCSe WCre tyPical shot, sounds, and may be loud enough, there 
does not t ???

a?sassina^on, separated by about 1 second.

This definitely 
, , .--- PAGE BREAK ---

a?sassina^on, separated by about 1 second. This definitely 
, , . ,e.kn^Wn balll®tlcs» medical, photographic, or earwitness testimony. JFK is 
clearly wounded by Zapruder frame 225 and struck in the head at frame 3)3, a difference of 
Wine which** ^ \CeC^Vh0CS mUSC h8Ve 8t l68St that seParatron. Some examples of 
hnmn fJi should haYe bested a^: hitting the mike, running the bike over a 
_ Pjj Th 3 CUrb’ ebc,f a”d klcklng the side while shifting gears or putting up the kick 
"IS * are mechanical sources that also should be detected as impulsivf sources, 
within 5^—lmC * Sh<>tI And h°W llkely would i£ be that 5 such events occurred only 
within the 9section and nowhere else. Ramsey dare not even consider alternative acoustical sources, lest he fall into the 
rL r?ttha^the !BI did- °nCe y°U St8rt With the prenlise tha^ the sounds are in ulshe, 
the locationaofeth ^ ^ i?itiator* the matching test will still identify 
the location of the source and the open mike. Then you can just argue what type of 
source could have made such a loud sound with echoes coming in after .5 sec. ?at 100 
decibels. The FBI tried to suggest a stick hitting concrete, but when have you ever heard 
^lck hltting concrete inside a building as loud as 130 decibels? And if you try to use 
Drof^in™? VC S°Yrce f?r a11 5 shots, you are left with the improbable conclusion that 
professional assassins tried to kill the President of the United States by slapping sticks 
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---against concrete walls.

The only sources capable of producing the high volume levels are 
explosive, so it really doesn’t matter what you call the source, but that it’s very loud 
and it’s location is identifiable.

It could be any type of firearm, even firing blanks, 
or even a loud firecracker.

But again, the BB&N method would work and you’d identify the 
source as a loud explosive impulse.

In the case of the TSBD, there is no physical evidence 
of anything other than a gun, and loads of physical and eyewitness evidence of the gun.

On the grassy knoll, there is no evidence of anything other than a gun, and some 
circumstantial evidence that if there was a loud explosive sound from there, that it was 
due to a gun.

There is no photographic evidence of any other source such as a firecracker 
or car exhaust backfire, but there is photographic evidence of a gun at that location.

There is also the speculative identification of a shockwave which would have to preceed 
the blast of a loud explosive sound.

As far as I know, there are no supersonic blanks, and 
there is no evidence that a high explosive like TNT or RDX was set off above the fence.

Other loud impulses such as jet plane sonic booms or thunderclap are absurd explanations.

These few examples show why Ramsey dare not offer alternative explanations.

Ramsey’s improper methods not only impede a proper investigation of the assassination, 
but they also pose a danger to traditional science.

Take, for example, his assertion 
that just because BB&N were able to reject the null hypothesis, that doesn’t mean that 
their alternative hypothesis was correct.

Ramsey introduces unnamed alternatives as 
equally likely causes.

By that same reasoning, all statistical tests and analyses of 
experiments are invalid, because the results may be due to some “magical" alternative 
sources.Ramsey introduces unnamed alternatives as 
equally likely causes.

By that same reasoning, all statistical tests and analyses of 
experiments are invalid, because the results may be due to some “magical" alternative 
sources.

Thus no medical firm or researcher could claim success with a new drug or 
treatment simply because the null hypothesis was rejected at a highly significant level.

The basic definition of success of an experiment would be invalid.

Progress would come to 
a complete standstill.

I can understand why experts on statistics and acoustics are not 
interested in the assassination of a political figure, but they should rise up in anger 
when their science is degraded by misuse.

Addendum, Sept.1983: The national security establishment 
should also be alarmed that the work of this country’s top acoustical 
experts was dismissed so cavalierly.

In addition to having analyzed 
the Watergate tapes and proven who -fired which shots in the Kent 
State Massacre, Bolt,Beranek and Newman is an important defense 
contractor, especially to the Navy.

If their basic understanding of 
science is as flawed as Ramsey suggests, the implications are 
frightening.

In that case, they couldn’t tell a Russian sub from a 
whale by sonar.

No intercepted code could be decrypted, because the 
noise reducing or filtering algorithms would be suspect.

As for the 
validity of Ramsey’s work, it would be a travesty if someone were 
convicted on the basis of the same type of voiceprint analysis he 
did.

If that work is accepted as a precedent for the growing field of 
speech recognition,there will be a lot of dangerous and costly 
misidentifications leading to cold leads and needless brinksmanship.

Addendum, Dec.1983:Another piece of unanalyzed evidence which 
I have recently come across is the live broadcast by KBOX at the 
Dallas Trade Mart.

As reporter Ron Jenkins breaks in, he states quite 
clearly that he had just heard the broadcast about Industrial 
Boulevard over the radio.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Addendum, Dec.1983:Another piece of unanalyzed evidence which 
I have recently come across is the live broadcast by KBOX at the 
Dallas Trade Mart. As reporter Ron Jenkins breaks in, he states quite 
clearly that he had just heard the broadcast about Industrial 
Boulevard over the radio. Then the motorcade goes pasts then he and 
the DPD motorcycles stationed at the Trade Mart join the race to 
Parkland Hospital. It is obvious from listening to the KBOX tape that 
none of the DPD cyclists at the Trade Mart had turned on their sirens 
until several seconds after the motorcade passed them. Thus it is 
impossible that the open microphone was at the Trade Mart, as 
suggested by some critics of the HSCA acoustical studies. Sirens are 
clearly heard on Ch.i at 12:32:36.1< 262.6 seconds after the mike 
stuck open ) and on on Ch.2 at 12:32:37.3( 132.7 seconds after 
Curry’s "triple underpass" message ), but the first mention of 
Industrial Boulevard on Ch.2 was almost two minutes later, from 
Unit#15-car 2, Capt. J.N.<Red) Souter’s order to the dispatcher to 
have Unit#283 cut the traffic at Hines and Industrial, followed 
immediately by the dispatcher’s order to 283 to cut traffic, Hines 
and Industrial. Furthermore, the patterns, types, and sheer numbers 
of sirens you can hear at the Trade Mart joining the motorcade sound 
much different from the patterns, types, and much fewer numbers on 
Ch.l. This is proof that the sirens heard on Ch.l were not at the 
Trade Mart. Therefore, they were part of the motorcade.

--- PAGE BREAK ---rent from the patterns, types, and much fewer numbers on 
Ch.l. This is proof that the sirens heard on Ch.l were not at the 
Trade Mart. Therefore, they were part of the motorcade.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Corrections to "Rebuttal to Ramsey 
Page 8: All calculations of the Runs Test were incorrect. In each 
case, the value for r was keyed into the calculator instead of the 
value for N. I have since expanded ray computer's statistics program to 
include the Runs Test. Using the same data and tests, the results 
calculated by the computer are as follows: 
For n1®22,n2-163,N*185,r=40,z®.25964663 
using Langley's version of the Wald-wolfowitz Test with Yates 
correction, whereas z«.0823970838 using the simpler version found in 
Freund. 
For n1»22ln2»68,N«90,r~40,z=l.8024943 
using Langley's version of the Wald-Volfowitz Test with Yates 
correction, whereas z=l.65842282 using the simpler version found in 
Freund • 
In order to reject the null hypothesis, that the pattern is 
random, at the 52 level, the z score must be=> 1.96. In none of these 
calculations did the z ever exceed 1.96, therefore there is no 
statistical evidence that the DPD impulse pattern is anything but 
random• 
Although this result is merely peripheral to the issue of the 
match between the W&A predicted pattern and the DPD pattern, it does 
confirm my suspicion that prediction is much more important than 
randomness. 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---ripheral to the issue of the 
match between the W&A predicted pattern and the DPD pattern, it does 
confirm my suspicion that prediction is much more important than 
randomness. 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Bibliography 
U.S. House of Representatives, Hearings before the Select Committee 
on Assassinations (Investigation of the Assassination of President John 
F. Kennedy), 95th Congress, 2nd session, U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, D.C., 1979, Stock No. 052-070-04979-1 
Ramsey, Prof. Norman et al., Report of the Committee on Ballistic 
Acoustics, National Research Council, Commission on Physical Sciences, 
Mathematics and Resources, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1982 
Adler, Henry L. and Roessler, Edward B., Introduction to Probability 
and Statistics, 5th edition, W.H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 1972 
Freund, John E., Modern Elementary Statistics, 3rd edition, 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1971 
Hodges, J.L., Jr., and Lehman, E.L., Basic Concepts of Probability and 
Statistics, 2nd edition, Holden-Day, Inc., San Francisco, 1970 
Hoel, Paul G., Introduction to Mathematical Statistics, 4th edition, 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1971 
Koosis,Donald J., Statistics, A Self-Teaching Guide, 2nd edition, 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1977 
Langley, Russell, Practical Statistics for Non-Mathematical People, 
Drake Publishers, Inc., New York 1971 
Lindgren, B.W. and McElrath, G.W., Introduction to Probability and 
Statistics, 3rd edition, The Macmillan Company, London, 1969 
Naiman, Arnold et al., Understanding Statistics, 2nd edition, 
McGraw-Hill, New York 
Maier, B.R. et al.,"Phonograph Playback", Popular Electronics, 
November 1980, pp.48-52 
Schadewald, Robert, "The Speech Gap", ^Technology Illustrated, 
June 1983, pp. 55-59

--- PAGE BREAK ---York 
Maier, B.R. et al.,"Phonograph Playback", Popular Electronics, 
November 1980, pp.48-52 
Schadewald, Robert, "The Speech Gap", ^Technology Illustrated, 
June 1983, pp. 55-59

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r 
Coordinates of reflective points in 
Dealey Plaza to be considered in an 
echo study of the DPD Ch.l recording 
of Nov. 22, 1963 (for bullets fired 
from the Northeast corner of Dealey 
Plaza and a motorcycle travelling 
.North on Houston Street). 
Point of origin (0,0) is the 
intersection of the middle of Houston 
3t. and the middle of Main St. 
Object 
Traffic light #1 
Traffic Box 
Poo1,tip 
?ool, NE corner 
Tree A 
Column B, North tip 
DCRB, NW corner 
Column A, East tip 
DAL-TEX, SW corner 
Tree N 
Jail A,NE corner 
Tree D 
| Tree B 
DCRB, SW corner 
Neon 1ight #1 
OCCB, NW corner 
Tree C 
Column D, NE corner 
lonument, NE corner 
'I. She 1 ter , SE corner 
Column C, NE corner 
□CCB, SW corner 
>.Shelter,SE corner 
detaining wall, tip 
City bus 
Cld Courthouse 
■*. O. , NE corner 
X coord. 
Y coord. 
276.000 
72.5 
202.5 
32.5 
211.000 
56.25 
199.5 
44.75 
272.5 
97.000 
201.5 
79.25 
239.833 
-40.333 
265.75 
113.1666 
319.5 
-39.000 
174.000 
82.000 
248.5 
142.000 
296.5 
149.000 
179.000 
120.25 
158.5 
-40.333 
132.5 
31.000 
129.8333 
-39.000 
227.5 
182.000 
100.5 
96.000 
71.000 
65.5 
262.000 
235.000 
39.25 
76.5 
38.5 
-39:000 
205.000 
291.000 
161.000 
287.000 
-11.000 
80.000 
-40.000 
-40.000 
-315.000 
50.000 
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---27.5 
182.000 
100.5 
96.000 
71.000 
65.5 
262.000 
235.000 
39.25 
76.5 
38.5 
-39:000 
205.000 
291.000 
161.000 
287.000 
-11.000 
80.000 
-40.000 
-40.000 
-315.000 
50.000 
/

--- PAGE BREAK ---

If ^wa5*“^*^aaa5J5»5»aa«»J#fcii 
I I I I 
1 I 
! : i 
! I 
ii 
ssssgpsgaassas 
3161 
T*e *$ 
ll'S If 
8-*SJ 
#OC 
•ss.fi 
si- 
S.|l.s| 
a, g,!’^s'!••§'! ||:ls 
•glG.SlJUals.a^l 
S|j§1? $ ®° 
|°^8|3fasje.5.s 
.5 o E s 9 03 x 
1 H3 O 
6S-g 
V 
S*~ Sf£ is g g 
g<* S|o 8 g 
Six So'di 
r§!=ek- 
i~lE^ 
«J= Egis £=<=•£ a 
i'S^^gg’go'g 
- at „ E S e g g 
rn flj r! *—
1 fl) <i) T~1 P* 5 
S^c o js^ 
-3 .--8 3 H >.-jgs B"1 
ijipur 
t*la* 
£ . S .E "S m to .5 g’«3 
11*2 S^llJS §?| S’SJ o|jg^ 
ES,s 2'g£’t> e*4 e 5 
=» ® ® <u g _ £.£ * •£■*■' • 
S-5 oJ S'S.S’H I «£' 
a^-5 ®'g- gT3 
IU w O ? 2 « 
if HSJE1I llili? HI Mil«1!|M i 
slseilfc

--- PAGE BREAK ---.5 g’«3 
11*2 S^llJS §?| S’SJ o|jg^ 
ES,s 2'g£’t> e*4 e 5 
=» ® ® <u g _ £.£ * •£■*■' • 
S-5 oJ S'S.S’H I «£' 
a^-5 ®'g- gT3 
IU w O ? 2 « 
if HSJE1I llili? HI Mil«1!|M i 
slseilfc

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BB&N Echo Study 
Microphone # 4 in array 2. 
Rifle in Window #1 on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository 
Rifle Coordinates: 322.416667 x 46.3333334 
Microphone Coordinates at Blast: 194 x 14 
Speed of sound: 1139.5 fps. 
Millisec. 
Corrected 
Elapsed sec Elapsed ft 
Calc, feet Deviation 
Matches 
25.000 
0.0250000 
0.1264751 
144.1184 
144.1184 
11.6135 
★★BLAST** 
30.000 
0.0300000 
0.1314751 
149.8159 
152.1016 
2.2857 
TrafficBox 
31.875 
0.0318750 
0.1333501 
151.9524 
152.1016 
0.1492 
TrafficBox 
41.875 
0.0418750 
0.1433501 
163.3474 
164.1760 
0.8285 
Trf. light 
54.375 
0.0543750 
0.1558501 
177.5912 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
60.000 
0.0600000 
0.1614751 
184.0009 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
68.750 
0.0687500 
0.1702251 
193.9715 
193.8938 
0.0777 
Tree A 
74.375 
0.0743750 
0.1758501 
200.3812 
199.2825 
1.0987 
Column B 
83.750 
0.0837500 
0.1852251 
211.0640 
207.0804 
3.9836 
DCRB face 
103.750 
0.1037500 
0.2052251 
233.8540 
236.9121 
3.0581 
North post 
113.125 
0.1131250 
0.2146001 
244.5368 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
131.250 
0.1312500 
0.2327251 
265.1902 
266.1612 
0.9710 
Wall A,NE 
150.000 
0.1500000 
0.2514751 
286.5559 
291.3903 
4.8344 
St.light 2 
178.125 
0.1781250 
0.2796001 
318.6043 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
258.750 
0.2587500 
0.3602251 
410.4765 
408.6928 
1.7837 
Tree F 
448.750 
0.4487500 
0.5502251 
626.9815 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
907.813 
0.9078125 
1.0092876 
1150.0832 
1149.1067 
0.9765 
P.O., NE

--- PAGE BREAK ---2251 
410.4765 
408.6928 
1.7837 
Tree F 
448.750 
0.4487500 
0.5502251 
626.9815 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
907.813 
0.9078125 
1.0092876 
1150.0832 
1149.1067 
0.9765 
P.O., NE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BB&N Echo Study 
Microphone # 5 in array 2. 
Rifle in Ulndov #1 on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository 
Rifle Coordinates: 322,416667 x 46.3333334 
Microphone Coordinates at Blast: 212 x 12.5 
Speed of sound: 1140 fps. 
Millisec. 
Corrected 
Elapsed sec Elapsed ft 
Calc, feet Deviation 
Matches 
11.375 
0.0113750 
0.1126859 
128.4620 
128.4620 
8.1191 
★★BLAST** 
14.375 
0.0143750 
0.1156859 
131.8820 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
22.500 
0.0225000 
0.1238109 
141.1445 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
30.000 
0.0300000 
0.1313109 
149.6945 
151.8224 
2.1280 
Trf. light 
30.000 
0.0300000 
0.1313109 
149.6945 
151.8224 
2.1280 
Trf. light 
42.500 
0.0425000 
0.1438109 
163.9445 
165.4783 
1.5339 
Pool tip 
64.375 
0.0643750 
0.1656859 
188.8820 
188.0445 
0.8374 
DCRB, NW 
78.125 
0.0781250 
0.1794359 
204.5570 
203.9031 
0.6538 
DCRB face 
91.250 
0.0912500 
0.1925609 
219.5195 
216.4673 
3.0522 
South post 
106.875 
0.1068750 
0.2081859 
237.3320 
238.5821 
1.2502 
Tree N 
131.250 
0.1312500 
0.2325609 
265.1195 
266.6133 
1.4939 
DCRB, SW 
156.250 
0.1562500 
0.2575609 
293.6195 
290.1082 
3.5112 
Tree 0 
173.250 
0.1732500 
0.2745609 
312.9995 
312.7180 
0.2815 
DCCB, NW 
203.750 
0.2037500 
0.3050609 
347.7695 
348.6498 
0.8804 
Tree P 
265.750 
0.2657500 
0.3670609 
418.4495 
415.6577 
2.7917 
Fence face 
461.250 
0.4612500 
0.5625609 
641.3195 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
925.000 
0.9250000 
1.0263109 
1169.9945 
1167.1168 
2.8776 
P.O., NE 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---18.4495 
415.6577 
2.7917 
Fence face 
461.250 
0.4612500 
0.5625609 
641.3195 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
925.000 
0.9250000 
1.0263109 
1169.9945 
1167.1168 
2.8776 
P.O., NE 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BB&N Echo Study 
Microphone If 4 in array 2. 
Rifle in Window If 1 on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository 
Rifle Coordinates: 322.416667 x 46.3333334 
Microphone Coordinates at Blast: 194 x 14 
Speed of sound: 1139.5 fps. 
Millisec. 
Corrected 
Elapsed sec Elapsed ft 
Calc, feet Deviation 
Matches 
25.000 
0.0250000 
0.1264751 
144.1184 
144.1184 
13.7097 
**BLAST** 
30.000 
0.0300000 
0.1314751 
149.8159 
152.1016 
2.2857 
TrafficBox 
31.875 
0.0318750 
0.1333501 
151.9524 
152.1016 
0.1492 
TrafficBox 
41.875 
0.0418750 
0.1433501 
163.3474 
164.1760 
0.8285 
Trf• light 
54.375 
0.0543750 
0.1558501 
177.5912 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
60.000 
0.0600000 
0.1614751 
184.0009 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
68.750 
0.0687500 
0.1702251 
193.9715 
193.8938 
0.0777 
Tree A 
74.375 
0.0743750 
0.1758501 
200.3812 
199.2825 
1.0987 
Column B 
83.750 
0.0837500 
0.1852251 
211.0640 
0.0000 
OVER. 5.0 
No Natch VC 
103.750 
0.1037500 
0.2052251 
233.8540 
230.6427 
3.2113 
Tree K 
117 19* 
n 117 19 *n 
n O 1 /. tnn 1 
O/./i 
n nnnn 
nir rr> * n 
11-5. 1ZJ 
131.250 
U.1iJl/jU 
0.1312500 
U • L14DUU1 
0.2327251 
ZHH•J J Du 
265.1902 
U.UUvU 
266.1612 
UV Caw J • U 
0.9710 
150.000 
0.1500000 
0.2514751 
286.5559 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
178.125 
0.1781250 
0.2796001 
318.6043 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
258.750 
0.2587500 
0.3602251 
410.4765 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Hatch 
443.750 
0.4437500 
0.5502251 
626.9815 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Hatch 
907.813 
0.9078125 
1.0092376 
1150.0832 
1149.1067 
0.9765 
P.O., NE

--- PAGE BREAK ---51 
410.4765 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Hatch 
443.750 
0.4437500 
0.5502251 
626.9815 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Hatch 
907.813 
0.9078125 
1.0092376 
1150.0832 
1149.1067 
0.9765 
P.O., NE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

r f . * 
3B&N Echo Study 
' Microphone ^ 5 in array 2. 
Rifle in Window //I on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository 
Rifle Coordinates: 322.416667 x 46.3333334 
Microphone Coordinates at Blast: 212 x 12.5 
Speed of 6ound: 1140 fps. 
Millisec. 
Corrected 
Elapsed sec Elapsed ft 
Calc, feet Deviation 
Matches 
11.375 
0.0113750 
0.1126859 
128.4620 
128.4620 
13.2776 
★★BLAST** 
14.375 
0.0143750 
0.1156859 
131.8820 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
22.500 
0.0225000 
0.1238109 
141.1445 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
30.000 
0.0300000 
0.1313109 
149.6945 
151.8224 
2.1280 
Trf. light 
30.000 
0.0300000 
0.1313109 
149.6945 
151.8224 
2.1280 
Trf. light 
42.500 
0.0425000 
0.1438109 
163.9445 
165.4783 
1.5339 
Pool tip 
64.375 
0.0643750 
0.1656859 
188.8820 
188.0445 
0.8374 
DCRB. NW _ 
78.125 
0.0781250 
0.1794359 
204.5570 
200.9269 
3.6300 
Column B 
91.250 
0.0912500 
0.1925609 
219.5195 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
106.875 
0.1068750 
0.2081859 
237.3320 
238.5821 
1.2502 
Tree N 
131.250 
0.1312500 
0.2325609 
265.1195 
266.6133 
1.4939 
DCRB, SW 
156.250 
0.1562500 
0.2575609 
293.6195 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Hatch 
173.250 
0.1732500 
0.2745609 
312.9995 
312.7180 
0.2815 
DCCB, NW 
203.750 
0.2037500 
0.3050609 
347.7695 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
265.750 
0.2657500 
0.3670609 
416.4495 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
461.250 
0.4612500 
0.5625609 
641.3195 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
925.000 
0.9250000 
1.0263109 
1169.9945 
1167.1168 
2.8776 
P.O., NE 
'V

--- PAGE BREAK ---416.4495 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
461.250 
0.4612500 
0.5625609 
641.3195 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
925.000 
0.9250000 
1.0263109 
1169.9945 
1167.1168 
2.8776 
P.O., NE 
'V

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BB&N Echo Study 
Microphone # 6 in array 2. 
Rifle in Window #1 on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository 
Rifle Coordinates: 322.416667 x 46.3333334 
Microphone Coordinates at Blast: 230 x 12 
Speed of sound: 1140.7 fps. 
Millisec. 
Corrected 
Elapsed sec Elapsed ft 
Calc, feet Deviation 
Matches 
9.000 
0.0090000 
0.0994263 
113.4156 
113.4156 
18.4438 
**BLAST** 
16.875 
0.0168750 
0.1073013 
122.3986 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
38.750 
0.0387500 
0.1291763 
147.3514 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No i'atch 
64.375 
0.0643750 
0.1548013 
176.5818 
176.8048 
0.2230 
Pool. NE 
91.875 
0.0918750 
0,1823013 
207.9511 
206.1283 
1.8227 
Column B 
111.875 
0.1118750 
0.2023013 
230.7651 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
143.125 
0.1431250 
0.2335513 
266.4119 
264.1918 
2.2202 
Tree D 
156.875 
0.1568750 
0.2473013 
282.0966 
279.7008 
2.3957 
DCRE, SW 
178.750 
0.1787500 
0.2691763 
307.0494 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
215.625 
0.2156250 
0.3060513 
349.1127 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
227.500 
0.2275000 
0.3179263 
362.6585 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
235.000 
0.2350000 
0.3254263 
371.2138 
0.0000 
OVER. 5.0 
No Match 
318.750 
0.3187500 
0.4091763 
466.7474 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Natch 
350.000 
0.3500000 
0.4404263 
502.3943 
497.8054 
4.5883 
DCCR, SW 
440.000 
0.4400000 
0.5304263 
605.0573 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
Mo Match 
551.875 
0.551S750 
0.6423013 
732.6731 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
951.250 
0.9512500 
1.0416763 
1188.2401 
1185.0774 
3.1627 
P.O., NE

--- PAGE BREAK ---63 
605.0573 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
Mo Match 
551.875 
0.551S750 
0.6423013 
732.6731 
0.0000 
OVER 5.0 
No Match 
951.250 
0.9512500 
1.0416763 
1188.2401 
1185.0774 
3.1627 
P.O., NE

--- PAGE BREAK ---

BB&N Echo Study 
Microphone # 6 in array 2. 
Rifle in Window #1 on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository 
Rifle Coordinates: 322.416667 x 46.3333334 
Microphone Coordinates at Blast: 230 x 12 
Speed of sound: 1140.7 fps. 
Millisec. Corrected 
9.000 0.0090000 
16.875 0.0168750 
38.750 0.0387500 
64.375 0.0643750 
91.875 0.0918750 
111.875 0.1118750 
143.125 0.1431250 
156.875 0.1568750 
178.750 0.1787500 
215.625 0.2156250 
227.500 0.2275000 
235.000 0.2350000 
318.750 0.3187500 
350.000 0.3500000 
440.000 0.4400000 
551.875 0.5518750 
951.250 0.9512500 
Elapsed sec Elapsed ft 
0.0994263 113.4156 
0.1073013 122.3986 
0.1291763 147.3514 
0.1548013 176.5818 
0.1823013 207.9511 
0.2023013 230.7651 
0.2335513 266.4119 
0.2473013 282.0966 
0.2691763 307.0494 
0.3060513 349.1127 
0.3179263 362.6585 
0.3254263 371.2138 
0.4091763 466.7474 
0.4404263 502.3943 
0.5304263 605.0573 
0.6423013 732.6731 
1.0416763 1188.2401 
Calc, feet Deviation 
113.4156 16.5766 
0.0000 OVER 5.0 
0.0000 OVER 5.0 
176.8048 0.2230 
207.5139 0.4371 
234.7100 3.9449 
0.0000 OVER 5.0 
279.7008 2.3957 
303.5534 3.4960 
0.0000 OVER 5.0 
363.9548 1.2963 
0.0000 OVER 5.0 
0.0000 OVER 5.0 
497.9471 4.4472 
0.0000 OVER 5.0 
0.0000 OVER 5.0 
1185.0774 3.1627 
Matches 
♦♦BLAST** 
Mo Match 
No Match 
Pool. NE 
DCRB face 
North post 
No Match 
DCRB, SW 
Tree 0 
No Match 
Tree P 
No Match 
No Match 
Column E 
No Match 
No Match 
P.O., NE 
r

--- PAGE BREAK ---

f 
DPD Echo Study ( in PROMAL ). 
Shot#?  ,

R i-f 1 e located the 6th floor of the Texas School Book 
Rifle coordinates: ( 321.250, 46.100). 
Cyc 1 e coord i nates at blast: ( 208.300^ 128eJ5®0)_£  
Cycle’s initial speed 8.5000 MPH 
: Cycle’s path: 35.0000 degrees south of due west. 
Tape correction factor: 1.0430_tes: ( 321.250, 46.100). 
Cyc 1 e coord i nates at blast: ( 208.300^ 128eJ5®0)_£  
Cycle’s initial speed 8.5000 MPH 
: Cycle’s path: 35.0000 degrees south of due west. 
Tape correction factor: 1.0430_

Speed of sound: 1123.00 fps. 
Depository, window 1. 
Mi 11 1 secs. Corrected ms Elapsed sgj^Elaps,ed_it._C_gmput_ed -ft DeviAllo.ri_Mat.che.5  
 48.7300 .030846250 .137979203 154.950645 154.950645 Sum: 21.6 Blast 
62.5000 .065187500 .152320453 171.055869 0.000000 Over 5.0 No Match 
67.5000 .070402500 . 157535453 176.912314 0.000000__OygrNo_Mat«;.h  
74.3750 .077573125 .164706078 184.964926 186.497559 1.532633 Column B 
79.3750 .082788125 .169921078 190.821371 195.052959 4.231589 Pool tip 
87.5000 .091262500  .178395453 200.338094 0.000000 Over—5.0 Np_.Match_— 
110.0000 .114730000 .201862953 226.692097 226.208371 .483726 Tra-Ff icBox 
158.7500 .165576250 .252709203 283.792435 0.000000 Over 5.0 No Match 
186.8750 . 194910625 .282043578 316.734938 0.000000 Qyer_5.0.—Np_Match  
220.0000 .229460000 .316592953 355.533387 0.000000 Over 5.0 No Match 
234.3750 .244453125 .331586078 372.371166 0.000000 Over 5.0 No. Match 
246.8750 . 257490625 344623578387.012278 0.000000 0ver_5.^._ No_Match  
“ 254.3750 .265313125 .352446078 395.796946 400.537372 4.740426 DCCB, NW 
286.2500 .298558750 .385691703 433.131783 0.000000 Over 5.0 No Match 
- 322.5000 .336367500 .423300453 475.591009 0. 000000 Over_5_. 0 No Match  
336.2500 .350708750 .437841703 491.696233 0.000000 Over 5.0 No Match 
368.1250 .383954375 .471087328 .529.031070 0.000000 Over 5.0 No Match 
403.1250 .420459375 .507592328 570.026185 0.000000 Over 5.0 Na_Matc_h  
428.7500 .447186250 .534319203 600.040465 0.000000 Over 5.0 No Match 
462.5000 .482387500 .569520453 639.571469 0.000000 Over 5.0 No Match 
473 1250 .493469375 .580602328 652.016415 0.000000_0ver_5 —No [!Latch  
 493.7500 .514981250 T602114203 676.174250 672.759282 3.414969 Old Court.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

jwgjnn