Ms.Madelym Johnson(Attm。Ms.Kornblut)
9/4/81
Civil Division
Departnent of Justice
Hashington,D.C.20530
Dear Mo.Johnson,
Your lottexofAugust 29rofors to your inability to locato snyrocordsertain=
ing to aJFK assagnination tank force aal tho fact that no zecorda roferring to it
roagonablopresugtionsJaddrogsbalow
Itla not now poscible for me to make the soarmh necossary to locate whatIhavo
aleeady sont to the Dopertuent。I hava medical and rosulting physical problens.But
uithin the Dapartment the appeals office and probably Ms.Phyllis Hubbell thero can
provide you with copiosandwith ancocountofthosearchlng they didaftorecelpt
ofmy appcal.If they carnot plaase lot mo lmov aid I will nakn th:soarch ani send
youacopy or copdase
H.Shea failed in his soarch for tho raason lndicated in your lettor,he wogerded
the"taak fozcetheDepartment's vords,ag a fouvel.struoturo。It was not。It was,
rather,informalsnd ontixely uopublicized.I knou about lt contenporaneously but 
then hadnoproodthatitwasrogardedaga taskforca or called that.
Tovazdtheendo21968andin oesly 1969,whenJinGariri.sonwaaDtatrictAttorney
in Neu Orleans,he filed suit in Washington.D.C。,tor certain rocords and other
thinga for uso in hia caco,jouiaiana y.Clay Shau.Prior to tho hearing beforo tho!
Judge Charies Halleck,there wag a certain amount ot'disenchantuent within the Civll
DiviaioneAs best  now renember what then cane to ny attontgon fron the Civil Division
side,this centerod around the existing xecords on the autopsy and the raport ota panel
of experts who had boen corroked in socret and hadprapereda roportchnt aad been kept
secretby tho Department,which convoked the panel。Please believe me when Isay that
no conpetentlawyer whoig inpartialcanread and analyze thatpanelroportwithout the
docpost concern and apprahensions.would prefer not to be mor specirio in identify
ingmy source,butbelieve meitwasaninside"sourco,inayositcn1tokrow。One
think thatItemember is aDepartuent expedition to the offico of tho Miarylend State
Medical Exandiner,Dr.Fisher, who had beon panel chairman.AsI recali,this Rs cn
aweckend。He more or legsvhiped the doubterg into ranks againe
Carl Eardley handledthat matter,assistod byIrving Jaffe and othors whose names
I do not now recall。(They shared offices.）Maybe David Andesson was involved。I thinlc
he should be acked。I think a secretary wag named Hics。Cavacini。
Defense of the Garrison suitwas only one function oi’the task iorce,but thos9shared offices.）Maybe David Andesson was involved。I thinlc
he should be acked。I think a secretary wag named Hics。Cavacini。
Defense of the Garrison suitwas only one function oi’the task iorce,but thos9

--- PAGE BREAK ---e David Andesson was involved。I thinlc
he should be acked。I think a secretary wag named Hics。Cavacini。
Defense of the Garrison suitwas only one function oi’the task iorce,but thos9

--- PAGE BREAK ---

notincdnsddorableefrorts wore,clearly，Civil Divisionfumctions.Therocordgof
thecltodlitigationahouldprovidemoroleads。
1thinkanotiorLawyor involveddwasJosepaHannon
Mir.Shea wasLookingfor a formal struotur andaformalroport,although I
toldhinIdidnotexpect therewaseither.Ifhelookedforwhatdidnotaxist，
naturnily.hewouldnotfindit。
This was an informal. unit,or menb.rs fron differont congonenta,whose uction
was todefend the oificial conclusionsaboutthe assasainetlone
In inis wrdting after he loi't the Wnita Houso,Jom P.Rochewho had beon LBJ'g
intollectualin residenco,took creditfor sone ifuotallof those finctions being
assignedtotheDepartnent
youtiatthoreneverwesanyconsidoretionofsnythirgaaced,statedorsuggostedby
any coucozned citizon or kanbar ot' the Congroas.Trore wa boilerplagod non-roaponse,
withresponsibilitytornakingitatvarioustimedividedbotweon2ndshiftedbetwoen
variouscongonento
Ono of the yroblona tocay is this hiatory,of infaaribirity cod total.wefusal
to coneider anythingothor than the orficaalline
These exe recorda ofconaidorable hstbrical. intoregt aod inportance nov.Perhaps
thergianownoembarrasstentover themannerInwhich thefunctionwashaniled.Tho
unction,itisclear,masdfondingthdgoificiaolino
Ydo not noan that no such attitude oxiststoday,for it does,but notwiti tie
idonticalintormgtions
Allofthorocords generatedaro notinthe recordshave been.provided.It
appaargtotopaoboble.Ithdnk,thatvheze they wox:filedthoyiwerefaled.undes
moroorlessasticklers,inanticipationoffuture neoda.Evonaitertheretiienn
o²Mr.Bardley and othary the necdscontinued,for the official accountofthe criro
officialvilllngneagtocousidoranyofthesubstantialinforuation thatwasaiways
availanletoofficialdome
Idapireciateitifyou could make an additionalBearoh after makinginquiries
ofthose vhomishthavesomeknoulodgeandmlghtnotbeunwiliingfoftherocordsto
bedtcclosed
Sincoraly,
Harold Weisberg