5/768
Dear Faul, your May 7 analysis of the FBI's reporting of Oswald's activities
is brllliant, perticularly becuse it depenas Bo much on reosoning and you are
co remote from the sources of hiaden information.

My I ,in this context, review
what I sskcd you to tell me about ond thet you referred to Eal, from wnom I am
triy out there,
the shrad, how picayune the trifle in this dsrecti
There ere a few.

minox sugestions noke for your tmindng.

knowledge of Oswald or a false one, end that the informant could have been fenale,
girl, for example.

There was a young female informetant.I cannot say she wos
NO T 6.

And,1s my recollection wrong.in tolling me thot one, pazhaps this one,
pussed in public transportation Unrortunetely, Ive not had time to read O IN No
since publicaticn,and when I
glance.et perts
cind.rether heavy andunwise
Should you ever redc this meuo,I suggest strengthening the second pera -
graph, for the reality is more lmporbable: that every left-winger asrestec by the
police csk to be intorvlewed by the FEI.

more important.Recall my henaling of Kasck in O IN NOAnd deBrueys with Pena
Iheve since learned more aboutdeBrueys.There wes an'inner office at the Cc'or
tha Rzonte, hich Pens uses indietinguishably,or the more general tera,
deBrueya,Ferrie, Arcacha, Bertes end meny others.I heve cne long interview with
bin tronscribed and now correcta.

I expect to hand it to Jin this weekend or to
take it with me.

Ask Tom to send you a copy enc tell him it is with my permission
Ill be there to confirm it.Iet he tell you, in confidence, thet Tom is a bitter
Gisappointment to me because hs iz so incredibly lazy.

Fe gets in 1);30-ll, leaves
not later than 5, and seems to do nothing sf ter hours.It is simply because there
1s no one doing this work thet I must go there, snd someone living there 7ould
have an enormous advantege.Ask Tom to send you a copy enc tell him it is with my permission
Ill be there to confirm it.Iet he tell you, in confidence, thet Tom is a bitter
Gisappointment to me because hs iz so incredibly lazy. Fe gets in 1);30-ll, leaves
not later than 5, and seems to do nothing sf ter hours.It is simply because there
1s no one doing this work thet I must go there, snd someone living there 7ould
have an enormous advantege. If I ask hin to send it to you, eh do whet he alvays
has, tell me to Xeiox it myself,end I just cannot co down there, put in the hours
I do,and then spend the tiua at a Xerox mscbine. If there is s daglothine that
he bas or has come sccrose thnt wuld help in the ork that I em ing Zor thet
office,he has not cnce vilunteqred it-ever. However, there had to be reason for
anumber of the strange thinge that happened,cside from this,involving deBrueys. Why did he so lose his ccol end threeten Pena,especially because Tona wes his
informant'of course,to say that Tenc told him of pro-Cestros is to say nothing
beceuss tHere were none eni there never wes and is not now an xind cf pro-
Castro organization or ectivity.I connot evan find m eetive pro-Oostro person to
help ne, though I did locate a o--yean old Spcnish ver veteran,who confirms the
above-and has done cothirg ond come up vith ncbody. Pena also compiained tka7 to
the BI snd hired e lawyar to do it, so gross wes the sbuse, Possibly this compla nt
Wa enoggh to trigger deB., nothing else needed. Howevar, I regard it as rather
is likely whet Pena said or whet he knows,in my cpinion.He ig now uncertain of
the time.I believe he originally toid me it was after his testimony. I think I
thia term it will be in the sense scme ofmy witnessss use it, all federals or
federalswhose origin is not certein。 There is something nov I heve learnea,and
as many as three agencies, sometimes simultaneously.I cannot reveal more about this。

--- PAGE BREAK ---the detail of what I've learned.In sumnery, it is this: all those bsstards down
their lied or were.carefully led awe from reality and essence by Liebeler, who
kmew precisely wnat he was foing.From whet is public 2et me isaustrate this,
evasion for the first person with him) thet the CRC was getting CIA money and the
is notthe proper subjeet of the cuppressed Ferrie reports,in part, and there is
nothing in any of the evidonce ebout it.Eut be di& koow it,and in more detail.I
have him saying it, on tape Osweld, or mOsmaia", was at Pena's at least three
regularly at another plece in that block early in the morning, in.the company
"ith a Mexican not of Dean Andrewsdescription: Eis conversation(s) with Bringuier
bell"mitness,and on tepe。 Two efforts were mede to shoot or intimidete Evsristo
Rodriguez, an other successful intimidations were employed.However,I founa him
suffering from the'mumps,befriended him, earned his confidence,and turmd him on。
He still held out end I didn't take him as far as + ultirately expect to.I stayed
away from things I knew he'd likely get his back up about.

Ive also interviewed
bermaias with knowledge （butnot of Englishs) and from a combination of people a
learnel some of what the now-dead Armanda knew, which was so much more than Iive
learned.

Bringuier leed rather celeberly to the Commission snd Liebeler, who
lied about:-het he said, or both.If you compare Fhilip Geracis testimony with
Bringuier'e, here alone, on the number and times of visits, you can see it.

How-
ever,they had a longer end closer relationship,ss,mong other things,reports
I now hev= prove.

Including Secret Service, and there is g receipt Fhilip signed
in June,not August 2.This is quite significance, believa me,and a ything you
hove,suopect or deduce along this line ould be interesting to me.Philip is
very.important.--- PAGE BREAK ---

How-
ever,they had a longer end closer relationship,ss,mong other things,reports
I now hev= prove. Including Secret Service, and there is g receipt Fhilip signed
in June,not August 2.This is quite significance, believa me,and a ything you
hove,suopect or deduce along this line ould be interesting to me.Philip is
very.important. Fascinating story-reelly incredible.He had a number of associetes,
many now known to me, and had a strenge history,no lees so since.He was suddenly
drafted,after I got on the track of something, althouch he was and should heve been
I wamder so, for the pressure of time is that great on thie. In your third paragreph,why not edd the Kaack and deBrueys omissions and
ask yourself if this culd not be because a Feebee had it under ohservetion,that
Kaack kmew why it should not be reported and deBrueys did not emke a simple
or that Kaack did without.drawing attention to the oversight,or that a CIA msn
knowm.tohim didor a CTA contaot ageny（their distinction is betweenemnloyed
by and working fdr.Ferrie was in the latter category, on 6e-day contracts,thus
kmew it. Skip in your thinking to the correct anomolies you so perceptively spot
in Quiroga.and Bringuier,to which I shall return,Does this also not make sense
of the omissionscited in your next paragraph
There was a tight ringof friendships and hoosexuality in the old Trade lart。I
have no doubt whetsoever ofShaw'sCIA connectionsaThat os others in his circle
isnot unlikely, directly or through him. belief,andI canget lots ofhints butno proof。
Quoroge and Bringuier are among the most professional liars you vill

--- PAGE BREAK ---t os others in his circle
isnot unlikely, directly or through him. belief,andI canget lots ofhints butno proof。
Quoroge and Bringuier are among the most professional liars you vill

--- PAGE BREAK ---

interestOnly because it nid not heve to. By then they knew the nsture of the
operation, the one thing thet mekes sense of the demend for en FBI agent.Who was
he going to ask for-the CIA"
Does it not make sense thet Quiroge was out lo king
for what he found the first time And does it meke sense that Bringuier would not
further investigations of a defector to the UssR engaged in such activity es this
oneseemstohavebeen
emember,Oswald told them he wanted to return,in the
βfricial acoo unting,b/causehe was disenchanted.Remember what the Mertello report
says he said'Fain's.In N.0."Cuben activities" and relate to the only kind
there were, enti-Castro.Benister is an unlikely candidate,unless he were part
of the establishment of the cover.There is every reason to presumehe did know
Oswald orOswaidHere note thatthereisa difference between not knowing and
not knowing of.It is unlikely that any oen kmowing anything at all about Cuban
activities or any kind by that date did tot know of Osweld.
Bartes wes CIA, may still be, right now considers himself under their
proection and is explicitabout it.I believe it.e told me.He cests himeelf and
clothes hismelf like a Jame Bond type, even to the trench coat when it is not
raining. He flew planes in the Congo in 1965. Need any more He is e Cat holic-
Royalist-fascist type, serious in these beliefs. I sugzest that these less-than-
minimal Bartes and similar reports were designed so that there ould always be
an affirmative answer to the question,had he（they)been interviewed aadthe
either a nasty whimsy or e deliberate desigm,to attract opronents to the less
then tender nercies of those anti-Castros....Whoever wrote the (you should
remember, edited report)that is CD984h,kmew better on all counts
In your last paragraph,you understanding will be increased if you sub-
stotute Liebeler for omnission, for that is the reality, and if you credit my
assurance, that he damned well kmew what he wes doing. Another change that will
helf is the substitution or"federel" for FBI.The CIA operation there is enormous,
was oberlapping with at least Treasury, wto I am certain of is customs and nar-
cotics.Immigration,without doubt。
Paul,you are going the right wey.Nov ycu know why I esked
a1,8ssoon8s
I returned from New Orleans the first time,to have you people.concentrete on the
Cuban end.Tnenit was hunch.Now it is certainty.I regret that I cannot tell
you more,butI have given my word and I cannot and will not inany way jeopardize
my sourcss,which are mine alone and seperatad to the degree I can from cthers-all.
However, I am going to ask a grset favor of you. I heve been so involved
with so meny and some other things thst I had completely forgotten the printed
sources you cite. Also,Id like a copy of the TINEs cliping on the CRC for my xrset favor of you. I heve been so involved
with so meny and some other things thst I had completely forgotten the printed
sources you cite. Also,Id like a copy of the TINEs cliping on the CRC for my x

more than I canx and I haven't the time now.Further,please cut them apert by
sheet and staple tham together,each as en individuel document.If this does not
overburden you,please do tho same thing ith the Bringuier testimony ana ashibit3
and thetof Ceraci end Blalock.I willwont them to show witnesses.I heven't the
time now and should not take it there.I expect to spend less tine in the ofrice,
because I waste too much time there. In adaition to the new and vital field, I have
8very considerable backlog on other aspocts when I an there,and.I want to doall
Ic&n。

--- PAGE BREAK ---he ofrice,
because I waste too much time there. In adaition to the new and vital field, I have
8very considerable backlog on other aspocts when I an there,and.I want to doall
Ic&n。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4stayTheoff
stay.The office is so broke they hevent paid the motel about 1,Ooo,so they
will tske time, snd part of the time I will require public accomodations because
ofwhetI will be doing.I em having to pey my ow fare,too,and Iive just not
got tho money.I do not even have enough to.pay upcoming obligations.But thia I
must do,es you wil ultimately learn.Worst of al], the leck of security in the
office is so great I can tell but little there,and none of c nsequence to Jim
or the lawyers.Only the outline.One of the great worries is that the suecessful
whores on our side will stesl this, too, and wita the by now toc obvious unscrup-
this:I ar anged for two ofJim'amen to meet me at the motel so I coula intro-
duce a witnese to them. This was on Good Fridsy, when everything there is closed.
The official shadowing report located,it says,two other Garrison men there at tx
the some time,unknown tome or the two whojoined me!
This financial situation mskes me bitter about things that need not heve
hoppened and shcula not, for example, the feilure of the Forum to psy my guaranteed
196o axpenses.Hall has been silent since my rather pointed comment on this. He is
the only one with whom I wont you to sahre hat I have said here, and I want neiher
of you to let it gc fsrthur. Pisase needle him sbout this for me. There is no
pos.ible excuse or justirication for this continued imposition on me or on their
impositi on on Hal's word and integrity.
My oresent schedule it Minneapolis 5/14 am until 16 p.m, with Gary Schoener,
Kansas City 16 p.m.until 17 a.m., withJohn Nichols (grand guy,magnificent work),
thence New Orleans.Ill be there throuch the dey of 28,msy stay.longer while I
am down thereifI haye the money and cen use the time on.s holiday weekend.I
mustbebsckbefore 6/4andintime togetallthebacklog cleaned upbycthen.
about Klein's on page l4,study the footnote carefully (what he means but doesn't
say is Doc S7 -there is no indox) and then tell we wbere this has ever apreared
save in Chapter 6 of WII,Ee steals even when it isn't necessary, However, you
cen send αything to m c'o Louis Ivon, marked to hold for arrival.He will and it
will be more secure there. I do hope you can Xerox these things for me. If you
can think of m ything else you'd like an inside source to go over, please include
it with any note for me ycu think appropriate.
One thing befors I apologize for nownot having the time to read this for
typos(by now Hgll shoula be able to6nticipete them, with the great knowleage he
has.ofmy originsl spelling end.swful typing),from tine to time I have been saying
that Liebeler is the nost important thing of all.More then ever,I so assure you.
Ploase, svery srap on hinm, every suspicaon, every evidence. And there is nothing
tco minor sbout New Orleans,
Cubans, the CIa, etc. Sincerely.