THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE REPORT 
ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN 
UNITED STATES RECORDING COMPANY 
AND THE 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 
AND 
CERTAIN OTHER MATTERS 
PERTAINING TO THE F.B.I. 
JANUARY, 1978

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE REPORT 
ON THE RELATIONSHIP 
BETWEEN 
UNITED STATES RECORDING COMPANY 
AND THE 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, 
AND 
CERTAIN OTHER MATTERS 
PERTAINING TO THE F.B.I.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
 1 
PART I. 
A. The Relationship Between the United 
States Recording Company and the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation   2 
B. Tax Investigation 10 
C. Conversion of Electronic Equipment   10 
D. Goods and Services 12 
1. Director J. Edgar Hoover . .   13 
2. John P. Mohr 14 
3. Nicholas P. Callahan 16 
4. John P. Dunphy 18 
5. Clarence M. Kelley 18 
6. Miscellaneous 19 
E. Imprest Fund 20 
F. Confidential Fund 21 
G. FBI Recreation Association   24 
H. Special Agents Mutual Benefit 
Association (SAMBA)   26

--- PAGE BREAK ---

I. FBI Relations with Firearms Suppliers   28 
J. Miscellaneous Allegations   29 
1. Financial Dealings Between Joseph C. 
Palumbo and John P. Mohr 29 
2. Official and Confidential Files   30 
PART II. 
A. Summary and Actions Taken 
Against Principal Subjects   31 
1. John P. Mohr 31 
2. Nicholas P. Callahan 32 
3. Ivan W. Conrad 33 
4. Clarence M. Kelley 33 
5. G. Speights McMichael 34 
6. Joseph X. Tait  35 
B. Possible Civil Actions   36 
1. U.S. Recording Company 36 
2. Conversion of Government Property 
By Bureau Officials   36 
3. Imprest Fund 37 
4. Confidential Fund 37 
5. FBI Recreation Association   37 
C. Action Taken to Prevent Recurrence   38 
ii

--- PAGE BREAK ---on of Government Property 
By Bureau Officials   36 
3. Imprest Fund 37 
4. Confidential Fund 37 
5. FBI Recreation Association   37 
C. Action Taken to Prevent Recurrence   38 
ii

--- PAGE BREAK ---

INTRODUCTION 
This is a report on a Department of Justice investi- 
gation of alleged misconduct by certain past and present 
officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
In the Fall of 1975, the House Select Committee on 
Intelligence provided the Department with information that 
certain officials of the F.B.I. were allegedly profiting 
from the Bureau's business transactions with its exclusive 
electronics equipment supplier, the United States Recording 
Company of Washington, D.C. On November 3, 1975, Attorney 
General Edward H. Levi requested F.B.I. Director Clarence 
M. Kelley to investigate these allegations. Director Kelley 
appointed an Ad Hoc Coromitfee to oversee an inquiry by the 
F.B.I.'s Inspection Division, the Bureau unit ordinarily 
responsible for internal investigations. Attorney General 
Levi found the report of the Inspection Division and the 
Ad Hoc Committee to be incomplete and unsatisfactory. On 
January 2, 1976, he directed the Office of Professional 
Responsibility and the Criminal Division to review the 
Inspection Division Report and conduct an independent investi- 
gation. The Deputy Attorney General requested two Criminal 
Division attorneys to work with the Office of Professional 
Responsibility in supervising a special team of F.B.I. investi- 
gators, who were carefully selected from Bureau field offices 
for their ability and experience. I.R.S. agents were also 
selected to investigate the tax implications of the allegations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---, who were carefully selected from Bureau field offices 
for their ability and experience. I.R.S. agents were also 
selected to investigate the tax implications of the allegations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 
Hundreds of past and present F.B.I. officials were 
interviewed. Agent-accountants examined vast quantities of 
documents and records to determine the nature of the 
U.S.R.C. relationship and the FBI's procedures for purchasing 
electronic equipment. As the investigation proceeded and 
possible criminal violations emerged^ a Federal Grand Jury 
in the District of Columbia, aided by the Criminal Division 
attorneys, began to review the findings of the Department's 
investigators. 
The investigation was completed on November 11, 1976. 
The findings went beyond the original allegations into other 
areas of misconduct uncovered by the investigation. The 
Criminal Division investigative report examined the use of 
Government material and personnel services by F.B.I. officials 
for their personal benefit; the administrative mishandling and 
misapplication of appropriated funds; the misuse of funds of 
the FBI Recreation Association — a private association of 
FBI employees; and improprieties in the FBI's dealings with 
contractors other than USRC. 
PART I 
A. The Relationship Between the United States 
Recording Company and the 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation  
Joseph Tait has been owner and manager of the United 
States Recording Company (USRC) since 1938. Incorporated in 
1969 in the District of Columbia, USRC sells and distributes 
electronic equipment, principally to the Federal Government.

--- PAGE BREAK ---tes Recording Company (USRC) since 1938. Incorporated in 
1969 in the District of Columbia, USRC sells and distributes 
electronic equipment, principally to the Federal Government.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mr. Tait. started doing business with the Government in 1943, 
when Army Intelligence asked the Bureau’s Laboratory Division, 
then interested in purchasing two Army microphones, to use 
USRC as a middleman. In the late 1940*s, USRC contracted 
with the Bureau to service amplifiers, recorders and other 
technical equipment used by the Laboratory Division. From 
1963 to 1975, USRC was virtually the sole supplier of electronic 
equipment to the FBI, and Bureau purchase orders were frequently 
directed to USRC without open bidding as required by Government 
1/ 
procurement statutes and regulations. 
FBI officials justified the exclusive relationship under 
a specific exemption for purchases that require confidentiality 
y 
for security reasons. The following facts do not support 
this explanation, however. For instance, from 1971 to 1975, 
the Bureau made $500,000 worth of exclusive purchases from USRC 
which were not marked as confidential. Much of the equipment, 
including transmitters, receivers, and microphones, clearly 
fell into the "sensitive” category, but it was not clear why 
other "non-sensitive” equipment was purchased exclusively from 
USRC. Also, the Bureau took few precautions to insure the 
security and confidentiality of the FBI-USRC relationship. 
1/ 41 U.S.C. 252(c) and regulations promulgated thereunder.

--- PAGE BREAK ---USRC. Also, the Bureau took few precautions to insure the 
security and confidentiality of the FBI-USRC relationship. 
1/ 41 U.S.C. 252(c) and regulations promulgated thereunder.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

4 
A number of electronic equipment manufacturers and suppliers 
were aware that the FBI used USRC as a middleman. The Bureau 
often purchased equipment directly from the manufacturer/ but 
always paid its bills through USRC. USRC employees did not 
receive security clearances. The firm was broken into on 
at least two occasions. USRC made equipment deliveries ’to 
the FBI during working hours in a panel truck plainly marked 
” U. S. Recording Company. '* 
Moreover/ the FBI failed to follow proper procedures 
for such "confidential" purchases. Section 252(c)(12) of 
Title 41 of the United States Code requires an agency head to 
make a determination that the purchase of certain equipment 
should not be publicly disclosed before public advertising 
cuid open bidding regulations can be suspended. No evidence 
was found that either the Attorney General or the FBI Director 
ever made such a formal determination. The procurement 
regulations were also evaded, and the scrutiny of the 
Department of Justice avoided/ by the "splitting" of orders 
to USRC so that no single order exceeded $2/500/ the limit 
aiDOve which all purchase orders had to be advertised for 
3/ 
open bid. 
From 1961 to 1973, the Bureau purchased large quantities 
of tape recorders/ playback units, closed circuit television

--- PAGE BREAK ---all purchase orders had to be advertised for 
3/ 
open bid. 
From 1961 to 1973, the Bureau purchased large quantities 
of tape recorders/ playback units, closed circuit television

--- PAGE BREAK ---

systems, video tape machines, laboratory test equipment and 
FM radio equipment under confidential contract with USRC to 
the virtual exclusion of all other contractors. The costs 
to the Government of this special relationship were considerable 
From Fiscal Year 1971 through 1975, 60 percent of USRC's total 
sales were made to the Bureau. Department investigators 
examined 1,339 USRC sales invoices, compared the cost of each 
item, where available, to USRC to the price USRC charged the 
Bureau, and found an average mark-up of 23.8 percent from 
Fiscal Year 1969 through 1975. Individual mark-ups varied 
widely and were as high as 40 to 70 percent. In addition to 
high mark-ups, by using USRC as a middleman, the Bureau was 
not able to purchase equipment at discount prices offered by 
manufacturers for direct sales on large orders. For example, 
in 1971 the Bureau paid USRC $147,261.50 for burglar alarm 
equipment which could have been purchased from a New York 
supplier for $81,357.00. 
USRC asserted that its overhead costs amounted to 15 to 
16 percent over the price it paid to the manufacturer. 
Department investigators found no objective evidence -supporting 
a figure this high. 
These findings essentially confirmed allegations made 
by a Special Agent of the FBI's Radio Engineering Section in 
1973. He reported that the FBI paid too much for USRC equipment 
that USRC mark-ups were too high, that FBI employees were forced 
to buy inexpensive items'from USRC when they were available 
elsewhere, and that the FBI-USRC relationship was not

--- PAGE BREAK ---that USRC mark-ups were too high, that FBI employees were forced 
to buy inexpensive items'from USRC when they were available 
elsewhere, and that the FBI-USRC relationship was not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

confidential. An Inspection Division inquiry was made into 
those allegations, but this investigation found that during 
that inquiry key witnesses were not interviewed. One Bureau 
official, now retired, provided Inspection Division investi- 
gators with palpably inaccurate information. The committees 
which reviewed the inquiry recommended the continued use" of 
USP.C as a "cutout" (i.e. a middleman used to conceal the 
Bureau's identity from outsiders) for confidential procurement 
without any sound basis for the conclusion. The agent who 
made the complaint was denied promotion and then transferred 
to the Tampa Field Office, where the Special Agent-in-Charge 
was told the agent was not a good "team" player and did not 
get along with other employees. 
The officials chiefly responsible for the proper 
implementation of procurement requirements and procedures 
were John P. Mohr, Assistant to the Director for Administrative 
Affairs; Nicholas P. Callahan, Assistant Director, Administra- 
tive Division; and G. Speights McMichael, Chief Procurement 
Officer. The investigation clearly established that these 
officials knowingly failed to apply required procurement 
procedures to purchases from USRC. Two possible motives 
were found for their actions. 
No evidence of cash kickbacks or bribes was discovered. 
Rather, a pattern of social contacts and minor gratuities was 
revealed between Mr. Tait and various FBI officials, including 
Messrs. Mohr, Callahan and McMichael. In the 1960's, Mr. Tait

--- PAGE BREAK ---a pattern of social contacts and minor gratuities was 
revealed between Mr. Tait and various FBI officials, including 
Messrs. Mohr, Callahan and McMichael. In the 1960's, Mr. Tait

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7 
and a number of high Bureau officials would get together 
4/ 
at the Blue Ridge Rod and Gun Club (Blue Ridge Club)-^ to 
play poker. The poker parties would begin on Friday evening 
and continue until Saturday noon. (Each participant paid the 
host/ a Bureau official/ for.the cost of food and lodging.) 
Mr. Tait also entertained FBI officials on occasion 
at the Bethesda Country Club/ Billy Martin's Carriage House 
in Georgetown/ and the Rotunda Restaurant on Capitol Hill. 
There was no evidence of excessive drinking/ associating with 
the opposite sex, payoffS/ big winners or losers. Nor was 
there evidence that official FBI files were destroyed/ as 
alleged/ at the Blue Ridge Club. 
Mr. Tait often gave Laboratory Division employees small 
gifts at Christmas time/ such as tie clasps/ wallets/ manicure 
setS/ and desk calendars. In 1971/ Mr. Tait gave one FBI 
employee a stereo playback unit for his car after he retired 
from the Bureau. A former USRC employee stated that in 1969 
1/ 
The Blue Ridge Club burned down on November 23, 1975/ 
just before House Select Committee investigators were scheduled 
to interview Club employees. This investigation revealed that 
an eight-year-old child caused the fire while playing with 
matches. The child "confessed” to Department investigators. 
The testimony of other witnesses corroborates the confession.

--- PAGE BREAK ---eight-year-old child caused the fire while playing with 
matches. The child "confessed” to Department investigators. 
The testimony of other witnesses corroborates the confession.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8 
Mr. Tait purchased and paid for the installation of an 
eight track tape player with two speakers in John P. Mohr's 
Cadillac at a total cost of $172.12. There was no other 
evidence of any personal benefit to any other FBI official. 
The investigation also disclosed another possible 
reason for the Bureau's special relationship with Mr. Tait 
and USRC. Over the years. Bureau officials came to trust 
Mr. Tait's willingness to keep the FBI-USRC relationship 
confidential, and especially, to keep Congress in the dark 
about FBI eavesdropping practices. In a March 14, 1963, 
memorandum to Laboratory Assistant Director, Ivan W. Conrad, 
Mr. Mohr ordered that: 
...no recorders are to be purchased 
by the Bureau outside of USRC. The reason 
for this is because Mr. Tait of the USRC 
will protect the Bureau in the event 
questions are asked by a Congressional 
committee concerning the purchase of 
recorders by the FBI. Other companies 
will not do this for the Bureau. 
On May 22, 1964, after learning that Mr. Tait had been 
invited to testify before the Senate Subcommittee on 
Administrative Practice and Procedure, Mr. Mohr wrote in a 
memorandum: 
Mr. Tait told me he does not know at this 
point just what he is going to do with the 
letter but he does not intend to furnish the 
Subcommittee with any specific information. 
It should be noted that the Bureau purchases 
virtually all of its electronic eavesdropping 
devices from the U.S. Recording Company. 
Over the years Mr. Tait has been an excellent 
friend of the Bureau and would go to any 
lengths to protect our interests from any 
sources. He is a personal friend of mine

--- PAGE BREAK ---mpany. 
Over the years Mr. Tait has been an excellent 
friend of the Bureau and would go to any 
lengths to protect our interests from any 
sources. He is a personal friend of mine

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9 
and he told me that he would most certainly 
furnish us with any response that he makes 
to the Subcommittee's letter before submit- 
ting it to the Subcommittee.^/ 
According to past and present employees of the Radio Engineer- 
ing Section, Mr. Mohr's March 1963 order initiated the Bureau's 
exclusive relationship with USRC. 
The Department concluded that FBI officials showed an 
improper favoritism to Mr. Tait and USRC in violation of 
specific conflict of interest regulations of the Department 
of Justice.®./ However, no evidence was found indicating a 
fraudulent intent sufficient to make out a crime vinder 
Federal bribery or fraud statutes. 
V A search of the transcripts of committee hearings revealed 
no evidence that Mr. Tait actually testified before the 
referenced subcommittee or any other subcommittee. 
28 C.F.R. §45.735-2(b) and (c) prohibit the giving of 
favored treatment or advantage to any member of the public 
and any action which might result in, or create the appearance 
of; preferential treatment, the use of public office for 
private gain, or an adverse effect on public confidence in the 
integrity of the Government. 
28 C.F.R. §45.735-14(a)(1) prohibits the acceptance by 
public officials of gifts or gratuities from those doing 
business with the Department of Justice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---grity of the Government. 
28 C.F.R. §45.735-14(a)(1) prohibits the acceptance by 
public officials of gifts or gratuities from those doing 
business with the Department of Justice.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10 
B. Tax Investigation 
Mr. Tait was tried and, on June 20, 1977, acquitted 
of all tax evasion charges under Title 26, United States 
Code, Section 7201, for the years 1971, 1972 and 1973. 
The Department found no evidence that Mr. Mohr 
violated any federal tax laws. 
C. Conversion of Electronic Equipment 
Ivan W. Conrad, former Assistant Director of the FBI 
Laboratory Division, was found to have taken a large quantity 
of FBI electronic equipment to his home, principally, between 
1964 and 1966. Conrad liked to tinker with electronic equip- 
ment and was a "ham" radio operator. The equipment included 
voltmeters, wattmeters, battery testers, stereo amplifiers, 
consoles, speakers, microphones, cables, sidewinders, mixers, 
tape recorders, transformers, and other sorts of electronic 
gadgetry. This equipment was evidently delivered directly 
from USRC to Mr. Conrad's office at FBI headquarters and he 
took the equipment home. No record was made on FBI 
inventory files that Mr. Conrad had possession of the equip- 
ment. 
In late December 1975, after being questioned by inves- 
tigators from the 1975 Inspection Division inquiry about 
unaccounted for equipment and after denying knowledge of it, 
Mr. Conrad, with Mr. Tait's assistance, shipped twenty-nine

--- PAGE BREAK ---tigators from the 1975 Inspection Division inquiry about 
unaccounted for equipment and after denying knowledge of it, 
Mr. Conrad, with Mr. Tait's assistance, shipped twenty-nine

--- PAGE BREAK ---

packages of electronic recording "hcun'' radio equipment and a 
large recording console from his home to the USRC warehouse 
in Southeast Washington. This included the equipment about 
which he had been questioned. A USRC employee made the 
delivery in a USRC truck. As much as eighty percent of the 
equipment had never been used and was in excellent condition. 
This equipment was subsequently recovered for the Bureau by 
this investigation. Purchasing documents revealed an 
acquisition cost of over $20,000. 
Mr. Conrad, who retired in July 1973, was interviewed 
four times during this investigation. He admitted that the 
equipment once belonged to the FBI. While head of the 
Laboratory Division, he ordered the equipment from USRC and 
then used it on "special projects" for Director Hoover, he 
said. He serviced the Director's television, hi-fi sets, 
short-wave radio, and designed a portable recording system 
for him. The console recorder was delivered directly to his 
home by Mr. Tait, and he took the other equipment home after 
USRC delivered it to the Bureau. He said that most of the 
equipment was obtained between 1964 and 1966. 
Mr. Conrad asserted that he never intended to convert 
this equipment to his own use. After Director Hoover died in 
1972, he wanted either to buy the equipment from USRC or return 
it to the company. He said he was "tardy" in not returning it

--- PAGE BREAK ---ipment to his own use. After Director Hoover died in 
1972, he wanted either to buy the equipment from USRC or return 
it to the company. He said he was "tardy" in not returning it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 
to Mr. Tait until late December 1975. In August 1976, in 
response to inquiries from this investigation, he delivered 
another shipment of electronic equipment to the FBI. He 
had signed this out of FBI Laboratory stocks in the early 
1960's. Auto radios, control cables, heads, speakers, 
antennas, assorted accessory equipment, a stereo receiver, 
tape recorders, microphones, and a sound recording set were 
included in this shipment. It is believed that all FBI 
equipment that was in Mr. Conrad's possession has now been 
recovered. 
D. Goods and Services of the FBI's Exhibits Section 
The Department also investigated the allegation that 
FBI employees were required to provide goods and services to 
their superiors. The Exhibits Section of the FBI is staffed 
with accomplished craftsmen and artisans. Their official task 
is to design and construct exhibits for use in Department 
litigation and displays, furniture, and other exhibits for 
internal FBI use. The Radio Engineering Section is responsible 
for maintaining and servicing FBI electronic equipment. Inter- 
views with past and present employees of those sections and 
an examination of photographs and personal logs maintained 
by some of them revealed that services were provided to FBI 
officials during official duty hours and that goods were

--- PAGE BREAK ---d 
an examination of photographs and personal logs maintained 
by some of them revealed that services were provided to FBI 
officials during official duty hours and that goods were

--- PAGE BREAK ---

produced for FBI officials with Government property and 
equipment.—'^ This constituted a misuse of Government time 
and materials, contrary to federal law and regulations. 
18 U.S.C. 641; 28 C.F.R.§45.735-16. Prosecutions, where 
otherwise possible, are barred*by the statute of limitations 
as virtually all of the following misconduct occurred more 
than five years ago. 18 U.S.C. 3282. 
1. Director J. Edgar Hoover 
Exhibits Section employees painted Director Hoover * s 
house each year when he visited California during the summer. 
They built a front portico onto his house and dug a fish pond, 
equipping it with water pump and outdoor lights. They 
constructed shelves, telephone stands, and an oriental fruit- 
bowl. Home appliances, air conditioners, stereo equipment, 
tape recorders, and television sets, and electric wiring were 
serviced and repaired by Radio Engineering Section employees. 
Exhibits Section employees serviced his lawn mower and snowblower, 
maintained his yard, replaced sod twice a year, installed 
artificial turf, and planted and moved shrubbery. The 
Exhibits Section built a deck in the rear of his house, a 
7/ 
No official documents, memoranda, or work orders were found 
which account for the work performed, the materials used, or 
the goods produced by Exhibits Section employees for the 
personal benefit of Bureau officials.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ork orders were found 
which account for the work performed, the materials used, or 
the goods produced by Exhibits Section employees for the 
personal benefit of Bureau officials.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14 
redwood garden fence, a flagstone court and sidewalks. A 
power window with sliding glass doors was also designed 
and constructed. Clocks were reset, metal polished, wall- 
paper retouched, firewood provided, and furniture rearranged. 
Employees were on call night’ and day for this work. 
Mr. Hoover employed one grade 15 Bureau accountant 
to give him tax advice, maintain his tax records, and prepare 
his annual Federal tax return. 
His secretary or two associates would generally make 
the work requests. Exhibits Section employees were called 
upon to build gifts for Director Hoover every year for 
Christmas, his service anniversary and other special occasions. 
These gifts included furniture such as tables, display cases, 
cabinets, a bar and valets. Assistant Directors chipped in 
to pay for cost of materials. Employee labor, however, was 
not compensated. 
FBI employees called upon to perform these services 
did not think them proper, but felt compelled to follow orders 
for fear of losing their jobs, or of arbitrary transfers or 
promotion delays. 
2. John P. Mohr 
Mr. Mohr had car radios repaired, the body of his son's 
MG repaired and repainted, and an elaborate dental exhibit 
constructed for his son, a dentist. At his home. Exhibits 
Section employees shaved doors to accommodate new carpeting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---MG repaired and repainted, and an elaborate dental exhibit 
constructed for his son, a dentist. At his home. Exhibits 
Section employees shaved doors to accommodate new carpeting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

and Radio Engineering Section employees repaired his tele- 
vision numerous times, and installed phones, stereo hi-fi 
speakers (Mr. Mohr's property) and a burglar alarm system 
which required frequent servicing after installation (FBI 
property). They repaired his stereo and purchased and 
installed a new FM radio tuner in an existing cabinet which 
was modified by Exhibits Section employees. Mr. Mohr also 
received certain gifts made by the Exhibits Section, including 
a coat of arms, a dresser top valet, and an oak portable 
liquor cabinet in the shape of a wine case. 
Exhibits Section employees painted a desk and made a 
drawing board for Mr. Mohr. They made, at his direction, a 
walnut cigar box, a walnut tape-cartridge rack, a walnut 
wine rack cabinet whose value has been estimated at $2,000, 
and two walnut gun cases with glass front doors. 
Mr. Mohr had employees mount snow tires, wash, and 
transport his personal automobile to commercial garages for 
repairs. A battery was installed in his car and a turn 
signal lamp was replaced by Exhibits Section employees. Mr. 
Mohr also received tapes of record albums which were copied 
and distributed by Radio Engineering Section employees at 
the direction of former Assistant to the Director Cartha D. 
DeLoach. 
Mr. Mohr received services even after he retired in 
June 1972. Radio Engineering Section employees were sent to

--- PAGE BREAK ---direction of former Assistant to the Director Cartha D. 
DeLoach. 
Mr. Mohr received services even after he retired in 
June 1972. Radio Engineering Section employees were sent to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16 
SfSj 
■.J.\i^AV/sV’'iV>: .' 
his home, at his request, to repair electrical switches, 
televisions, and the burglar alarm system which had been 
installed earlier. Mr. Mohr also asked a Radio Engineering 
Section employee to repair his electric blood pressure machine. 
At Mr. Mohr's request to foritier Exhibits Section Chief John P. 
Dunphy, the Exhibits Section built a birdhouse according to 
plans he provided. 
3. Nicholas P. Callahan 
For Mr. Callahan, Exhibits Section employees silk- 
screened a felt cloth used for table games, cut doors at his 
house to accommodate new carpeting, printed maps showing the 
location of his beach home and finished styrofoam nautical 
objects to decorate it. They made walnut fishing rod racks 
for his beach home, assembled a lathe fence to prevent sand 
erosion at his beach home, cuid built a picket fence for his 
p / 
residence.— He had walnut shelves cut by section employees 
during official hours (he supplied the material), had a piece 
of plywood covered with weatherproof material for a shed roof, 
had Exhibits Section employees make a sign for his daughter 
and son-in-law with their name, and had former Exhibits Section 
Chief Leo J. Gauthier make a fuse box cover for the basement 
recreation room in his home. At his request, the Exhibits 
8/ 
Contrary to the evidence obtained from Exhibits Section 
employees, Mr. Callahan stated that he paid for the material 
for the fences and installed them himself on personal time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Contrary to the evidence obtained from Exhibits Section 
employees, Mr. Callahan stated that he paid for the material 
for the fences and installed them himself on personal time.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17 
Section cast a desk memento in plastic for him to give to 
a friend and make him a set of stack tables which duplicated 
a set which had been made for Director Kelley (see below). 
Radio Engineering Section employees diagnosed troubles with 
his televisions and Exhibits Section employees framed his 
personal photographs. 
Mr. Callahan also received various gifts. He received 
a framed plaque which recited an Irish prayer, a plaque 
bearing his coat of arms, a dresser top valet, a portable 
oak liquor cabinet in the shape of a wine cask, a decorative 
Christmas tree ball, and a gold medallion and chain for Mrs. 
Callahan into which a gold-disc with the FBI seal was set 
by the Exhibits Section (Mr. Callahan bought the medallion 
and chain). The valet and liquor cabinet were duplicates of 
gifts given to Director Hoover, Mr. Mohr and Mr. Dunphy. 
Mr. Callahan also received considerable services to 
his automobile. Employees test drove his personal car, did 
diagnostic work on it, took it out for washes, fill-ups, 
snow tire mounting, and servicing at garages and muffler 
shops. Scratches on his car were touched up. (Some employees, 
however, recalled that the whole trunk lid on Mr. Callahan's 
car was painted.) 
Mr. Callahan states that Mr. McMichael provided him 
with a Polaroid camera which he used for personal photographs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d that the whole trunk lid on Mr. Callahan's 
car was painted.) 
Mr. Callahan states that Mr. McMichael provided him 
with a Polaroid camera which he used for personal photographs.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18 
9/ 
Film for the camera was also provided at FBI expense. — 
He has since returned the camera. 
4. John P. Dunphy 
On August 13, 1976, Mr. Dunphy pleaded guilty to a 
misdemeanor charge under Section 6.41, Title 18, United • 
States Code, as part of an agreement with the United States 
as a result of which he voluntarily tendered his resignation 
from his position as Chief of the Exhibits Section and cooperated 
with this investigation.—'^ 
5. Director Clarence M. Kelley 
On directions from Mr. Callahan shortly after Director 
Kelley and his wife moved tp Washington, two sets of valances 
were made and installed in Director Kelley's apartment by the 
Exhibits Section and two television sets were purchased and 
installed by the Radio Engineering Section. After this investi- 
gation began. Director Kelley paid for the estimated cost of 
the valances. Director Kelley admitted he knew, after the 
i/ Mr. Callahan testified that agents are allowed to take home 
cameras for personal use to maintain their proficiency with 
them. Agents assigned to this investigation verified that 
this is the case, but indicated that the practice is intended 
to maintain familiarity with cameras more complex than the 
Polaroid. 
10/ 
A further term of the agreement was that he make restitution 
for the goods he received in an eunount to be determined later 
between his attorney and attorneys for the United States. 
On September 28, 1976, Dunphy was fined $500 and placed on 
probation. He returned all government materials to the Bureau, 
in accordance with the plea agreement.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e United States. 
On September 28, 1976, Dunphy was fined $500 and placed on 
probation. He returned all government materials to the Bureau, 
in accordance with the plea agreement.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19 
_ i 
job was done, that the Exhibits Section installed the first 
set of valances. ;>Then they proved unsatisfactory, he requested 
a second set to be built and installed. This set was also 
built and installed by Exhibits Section employees. The tele- 
vision sets were ordered returned by Director Kelley after this 
investigation revealed their source. Although Mr. Callahan 
said he directed that the televisions be loaned to Director 
Kelley, the sets were not entered on FBI equipment inventory 
until after their return from Director Kelley's apartment on 
February 19, 1976. 
The Exhibits Section also built a walnut table, a set 
of stack tables, and a jewelry box which were given to Director 
Kelley as gifts from the Executive Conference. He was unaware 
that the Exhibits Section made the gifts, he said. The 
Conference, by donations from its members, paid for the materials 
used in these gifts. 
Director Kelley's personal automobile received occasional 
servicing by FBI employees and his FBI-provided chauffuer 
performed personal errands for him. Section employees repaired 
a broken cabinet for Director Kelley, and mounted the FBI seal 
on a gold disc as a charm for the Director's wife. 
6. Miscellaneous 
The practice of providing FBI goods and services to high 
Bureau officials was not limited to the above individuals. 
Clyde Tolson, long-time Associate Director under Hoover, 
had FBI employees develop several patented devices during

--- PAGE BREAK ---igh 
Bureau officials was not limited to the above individuals. 
Clyde Tolson, long-time Associate Director under Hoover, 
had FBI employees develop several patented devices during

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20 
official hours. These included a reuseable bottle cap and 
a power window opener. These patents were assigned to the 
FBI. There was no evidence that Mr. Tolson personally 
benefited from the development of these devices. One of the 
power windows was installed for President Johnson in the 
White House. A second unit, designed and intended for 
President Johnson's ranch, was never completed. 
E. Imprest Fund 
There was evidence that an FBI official received 
reimbursement from the FBI Imprest Fund (petty cash fund) for 
personal purchases. 
G. Speights McMichael, Chief Procurement Officer, denied 
that Imprest Funds were used for the personal purchases of 
Bureau officials. He stated that he did not check to see 
whether the purchases were proper. Under Federal law he was 
required, as the Bureau's chief procurement officer, to certify 
that each disbursement was proper and correct. Each voucher 
reads, in part: "I certify that the disbursements claimed 
herein are correct and proper..." Many of the personal 
purchases could have been used by the Exhibits Section and, 
therefore, could have escaped Mr. McMichael's attention. 
He admitted being derelict in his responsibilities as the 
Imprest Fund's cashier, disbursing and certifying officer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd, 
therefore, could have escaped Mr. McMichael's attention. 
He admitted being derelict in his responsibilities as the 
Imprest Fund's cashier, disbursing and certifying officer.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21 
F. Confidential Fund 
Part of the FBI's annual appropriation is specified 
"not to exceed $70,000 to meet unforeseen emergencies of a 
confidential character to be expended under the direction of 
the Attorney General and to be accounted for solely on his 
certificate." The most common use is for payments to informants. 
Contrary to the appropriation language and to Federal regula- 
tions, this money was drawn from the Treasury by travel vouchers 
that failed to reflect the actual expenditures. Top FBI 
administrative officers were, therefore, able to maintain in 
cash form these monies over which they exercised custody and 
control. Field Offices were given separate funds for payment 
of informants which were maintained in separate accounts in 
addition to the so-called "Confidential Fund" which was kept 
at headquarters. Also contrary to Federal regulations, the 
unspent portion of the yearly appropriation was accumulated. 
By 1974, the headquarters "Confidential Fund" totalled $34,000. 
Nicholas P. Callahan controlled the Fund from 1946, 
when he was Number One man to the Assistant Director of the 
Administrative Division, until July 1973, when he became 
Associate Director. John P. Mohr, Clyde Tolson, and Director 
Hoover could also authorize disbursements. A 1974 inspection 
of the Fund concluded that "no written guidelines exist 
pertaining to the utilization of this fund" and that separate 
records for this fund were kept by FBI administrative units

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the Fund concluded that "no written guidelines exist 
pertaining to the utilization of this fund" and that separate 
records for this fund were kept by FBI administrative units

--- PAGE BREAK ---

apart from the FBI's normal accounting system and were not 
subject to Treasury Department audit. This investigation 
revealed uses of the "Confidential Fund" maintained at 
headquarters by FBI administrative officers that were not 
• •• 12/ 
within the scope of the appropriation.— 
This investigation revealed that between August 1956 
and May 1973 the Bureau purchased over $75,000 worth of 
electronic equipment with money from the Confidential Fund. 
No memoranda, purchase orders, requisitions, vouchers or 
similar documentations were located indicating why the equip- 
ment was purchased or who requested it. 
Mr. Callahan acknowledged that Mr. Mohr and he decided 
to use Confidential Fund monies to purchase electronic equip- 
ment. This was not done to disguise the nature of the 
equipment, he said, but to expedite large purchases of equipment. 
The Confidential Fund was also used to pay for public 
relations expenses. Between 1961 and 1975, $23,399.15 of 
Confidential Funds were spent on room rentals, food, drink 
and gifts for the liaison officers of foreign and domestic law 
12/ 
Title 31 U.S.C. 628, a non-criminal statute, prohibits the 
use of appropriated funds for a purpose not specified in the 
appropriation. The Counsel on Professional Responsibility has 
requested the Department's Office of Management and Finance to 
review these facts, to take necessary administrative action to 
prevent the recurrence of this conduct, and if appropriate, to 
refer the matter to the Comptroller General for possible recovery 
actions against responsible disbursing officers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---prevent the recurrence of this conduct, and if appropriate, to 
refer the matter to the Comptroller General for possible recovery 
actions against responsible disbursing officers.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

enforcement and intelligence gathering organizations. 
Mr. Callahan approved disbursements for liaison functions. 
There was also evidence that Mr. Mohr, and, to a far lesser 
extent. Assistant Director Eugene W. Walsh, and Deputy Associate 
Director Thomas J. Jenkins also authorized such disbursements. 
Director Kelley recalled such an authorization by himself on 
one occasion. 
One of these officials stated that any expenditure 
which in any way aids "the detection and prosecution of crimes 
against the United States," including liaison functions, is 
justified under the FBI's total appropriation and that the 
Confidential Fund was used only to expedite reimbursement. 
He admitted, however, that the Confidential Fund had been 
obtained on the representation to Treasury that they would be 
used for "unforeseen emergencies of a confidential character." 
Congress had not been informed that the Bureau was incurring 
public relations and liaison expenses and paying them out of 
the Confidential Fund. The Bureau had never submitted a 
formal request to Congress or the Office of Management and 
Budget for the proper budget authority to make these Confidential 
Fund expenditures. Title 31, United States Code, Section 551, 
which prohibits the use of appropriated funds for lodging, 
feeding, or providing transportation to an assemblage, can be 
interpreted specifically to prohibit the use of the Confidential 
Fund for public relations and liaison purposes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---g, 
feeding, or providing transportation to an assemblage, can be 
interpreted specifically to prohibit the use of the Confidential 
Fund for public relations and liaison purposes.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24 
This investigation also revealed that FBI officials 
used the Confidential Fund to cash personal checks. This 
practice was stopped after Mr. Walsh was questioned about the 
practice on May 21, 1976. 
No evidence was found' indicating that any senior 
official applied these appropriated funds to his own use. 
G. The FBI Recreation Association 
The FBI Recreation Association (FBIRA) was founded in 
1931 for the purpose of promoting and encouraging athletic, 
social and welfare activities among its members. The FBIRA 
is an independent and tax-exempt organization whose membership 
is voluntary. ' The Association's funds were spent on athletic 
and social functions, group travel, clubs, hobbies, art shows, 
and publication of The Investigator, a monthly magazine 
reporting on FBIRA activities. Its constitution and bylaws 
provide for the election of officers and a five-member Board 
of Directors. 
This investigation revealed that between September 1951 
and June 1972, Nicholas P. Callahan obtained $39,590.98 from 
the FBIRA designated for the "Library Fund." The Association's 
records contain no explanation or authorization for these 
disbursements. No disbursement requests or vouchers were 
found. Mr. Callahan was the Library Fund's only recipient and 
maintained the only records of its expenditures. I4r. Mohr 
periodically reviewed the records. Shortly after Mr. Hoover

--- PAGE BREAK ---und. Mr. Callahan was the Library Fund's only recipient and 
maintained the only records of its expenditures. I4r. Mohr 
periodically reviewed the records. Shortly after Mr. Hoover

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25 
■■•■sifiiSiiist'y 
died, Mr. Callahan and Mr. Mohr discontinued the Fund and 
destroyed its records. Neither of the two FBIRA treasurers 
who served during this period knew why the fund was named 
the Library Fund in the FBIRA Disbursements Journal. The 
treasurers understood that these "Library Fund" disbursements 
were for Director Hoover's public relations expenses,, such as 
office flowers, condolence telegrams, and for unspecified 
office expenses, such as books and newspapers. 
Only Messrs. Hoover, Tolson, Callahan, Mohr, and the 
treasurers knew about the "Library Fund" and disbursements 
were made to the Fund without the authorization of FBIRA 
officers whose approval is required under the FBIRA charter. 
Mr. Callahan asserted that the disbursements were for official 
public relations and liaison functions for which appropriated 
funds are unavailable under law and that they were proper under 
a broad interpretation of the FBIRA constitution's "general 
welfare" clause because money spent promoting the FBI's general 
welfare is in the best interest of its employees. 
The Investigation also revealed that $55,849.77 of 
FBIRA funds were expended on receptions for National Academy 
students and guests between April 8, 1958, and June 20, 1972. 
The National Academy is an FBI operated training and education 
facility for local law enforcement personnel around the country. 
The receptions were not FBIRA activities and they were not 
open to FBIRA members. About half the cost of the receptions

--- PAGE BREAK ---ty for local law enforcement personnel around the country. 
The receptions were not FBIRA activities and they were not 
open to FBIRA members. About half the cost of the receptions

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26 
was borne by those attending the receptions so that net cost 
to the FBIRA after offset by these donations was $29,443.67. 
The FBIRA constitution and bylaws do not provide for expenditures 
for such functions as National Academy receptions. 
From July 1952 to December 1975, another $12,219.90 
of FBIRA funds were spent on miscellaneous or liaison expenses 
and on receptions, luncheons, retirement parties, and gifts 
for foreign law enforcement liaison officers, and senior FBI 
officials. The funds also covered the cost of FBI press 
receptions and other public relations expenses. Director 
Hoover, Mr. Callahan, Mr. Mohr, Mr. DeLoach, and Mr. Walsh, 
not the FBIRA Board of Directors, approved these disburse- 
ments, according to the records. 
The above facts established that, from 1951 to 1975, 
high officials of the FBI obtained funds from the FBIRA for 
public relations and other uses not authorized by its charter 
and without obtaining the approval of its Board of Directors. 
There is no evidence that these Bureau officials converted 
the money to their own use and, therefore, no evidence of 
criminal intent as required under Title 18, United States Code, 
Section 654. 
H. Special Agents Mutual Benefit Association (SAMBA) 
SAMBA is an unincorporated association designed to 
provide life and health insurance to FBI employee members. 
The Prudential Insurance Company has been SAMBA's underwriter

--- PAGE BREAK ---AMBA) 
SAMBA is an unincorporated association designed to 
provide life and health insurance to FBI employee members. 
The Prudential Insurance Company has been SAMBA's underwriter

--- PAGE BREAK ---

27 
since SAMBA was founded in 1948. SAMBA is independent of 
the FBI, with private offices at 1325 G Street, N.W., 
Washington, D.C. 
This investigation uncovered questionable expenses 
from SAMBA books and records. The amount of $635.21 was 
withdrawn from the SAf4BA account to pay for a retirement 
party and gift for Mr. Mohr. $310.22 of this withdrawal 
covered the price of a Sears Roebuck fishing boat, which was 
delivered to Mr. Mohr by FBI employees. One SAMBA officer 
admitted that SAMBA funds were used, in disregard of its 
charter, to pay for retirement parties, luncheons, and gifts 
for out-going SAMBA officials and Directors. Other question- 
able expenses included two professional football season tickets 
for the use of a SAI4BA official, Saturday work charges, wedding 
and anniversary gifts, and annual Christmas parties. 
Director Kelley and his wife, along with Mr. and Mrs. 
Mohr, Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Jenkins, and SAMBA President Thomas 
J. Feeney, Jr., and his wife, attended a weekend meeting in 
New York City with officials of Prudential Life Insurance 
Company, which underwrites the SAMBA policy. Director Kelley's 
travel from Kansas City, Missouri, to New York and return to 
Washington, D.C., was by Government Travel Request (GTR). 
Travel for Mrs. Kelley and the others was paid by SAMBA. 
Prudential paid all other expenses. Director Kelley subse- 
quently reimbursed Prudential for these expenses.

--- PAGE BREAK ---uest (GTR). 
Travel for Mrs. Kelley and the others was paid by SAMBA. 
Prudential paid all other expenses. Director Kelley subse- 
quently reimbursed Prudential for these expenses.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28 
I. FBI Officials* Relations with Firearms Suppliers 
The Remington Arms Company, which bids on arms and 
2onmunition contracts with the FBI, maintains a 300-acre 
working farm and game preserve in Chestertown, Maryland, 
called Remington Farms. On January 3 and 4, 1972, Remington 
hosted three FBI officials at Remington Farms and paid for 
their room, board, hunting licenses and stamps at a cost of 
$203.50. Twelve other FBI officials were hosted at the 
Remington Farm on three subsequent occasions, costing the 
arms dealer an additional $1,168 in room and board. 
Remington also paid for liquor, ammunition, guides 
and game shot on these four weekends.^ Although a breakdown 
by individual is not available for these costs. Remington 
spent a total of $2,013.96 for forty seven individuals for 
the four weekends. Fifteen of the forty seven guests were 
then active FBI officials. 
FBI records show that the Remington Firearms Company 
has not been awarded a firearms contract since 1971. The 
hunting weekends mentioned above all occurred after 1971. 
Six ammunition (not firearms) contracts have been awarded to 
Remington since fiscal year 1971, but each of these contracts 
was solicited and awarded after open bidding by the Justice 
Department. Although several of the FBI officials who 
attended the hunting weekends were in a position to influence 
the awarding of arms contracts, no arms contracts were awarded 
V.* A

--- PAGE BREAK ---ent. Although several of the FBI officials who 
attended the hunting weekends were in a position to influence 
the awarding of arms contracts, no arms contracts were awarded 
V.* A

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29 
to Remington during the 1970's. Nor were arms contracts 
awarded during this time to Winchester Firearms Company 
which hosted a hunting weekend for three Bureau officials 
in 1973. 
The Federal illegal gratuities statute. Title 18, 
United States Code, Sections 201(f) and (g) , requires that 
the gratuity shall be "for or because of" an official act. 
This investigation found no evidence that the recipients of 
the gratuities did anything for Remington or Winchester, and 
therefore, there was no evidence warranting prosecution under 
this statute. The evidence does indicate that the Departmental 
regulation prohibiting the accepting of gifts or entertainment 
from those having or seeking a contractual relationship with 
the United States was violated. 28 C.F.R. §45.735-14(a). 
Moreover, the evidence shows that these employees also violated 
the general Departmental prohibition against conduct creating 
the appearance of impropriety. 28 C.F.R. §45.735-2. The 
Attorney General has referred this matter to the FBI Director 
with instructions to take appropriate administrative action 
against these employees. 
J. Miscellaneous Allegations 
1. Financial Dealings Between Joseph C. Palumbo 
 and John P. Mohr  
This investigation received information from the House 
Select Committee on Intelligence that John P. Mohr and 
Joseph C. Palumbo of Charlottesville, Virginia had had improper

--- PAGE BREAK ---hr  
This investigation received information from the House 
Select Committee on Intelligence that John P. Mohr and 
Joseph C. Palumbo of Charlottesville, Virginia had had improper

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30 
financial dealings. Mr. Palumbo and Mr. Mohr entered a 
financial arrangement in late 1972, after Mr. Mohr had 
retired from the FBI. The transaction was entirely lawful 
and at arms length and no evidence was found that Mr. Palumbo 
ever discussed the FBI or its activities with Mr. Mohr. 
2. Official and Confidential Files 
During 1975, an investigation was conducted into the 
disposition of the "official and confidential files" of 
J. Edgar Hoover following his death in May 1972. The inquiry 
determined that the files were turned over to Assistant 
Director W. Mark Felt by Miss Helen W. Gandy, Executive 
Assistant to Mr. Hoover, on May 4, 1972, and now are located 
at FBI headquarters. No evidence was found that official 
FBI files of any kind were removed to Mr. Hoover's home 
following his death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Hoover, on May 4, 1972, and now are located 
at FBI headquarters. No evidence was found that official 
FBI files of any kind were removed to Mr. Hoover's home 
following his death.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

31 
PART II 
A. Summary and Actions Taken Against Principal Subjects 
1. John P. Mohr 
(a) Mr. Mohr was Assistant Director for the Administrative 
Division of the FBI and the Assistant to the Director. 
He was primarily responsible for using USRC as an exclusive 
supplier of electronics equipment to the FBI. His conduct 
towards USRC violated 28 C.F.R. 845.735-2(b) and (c)(2) 
(prohibiting employees from giving preferential treatment 
to any person outside the Department). He received a few 
gratuities (tape deck, Christmas gifts) from Mr. Tait. 
No evidence was found that he was bribed, but he violated 
§45.735-14(a)(1), which prohibits employees from accepting 
gifts from those doing business with the Department. 
(b) FBI employees provided goods and services to him as 
described above. This arguably violated 18 U.S.C. 641 
(conversion of government property to his own use), 
(prosecution barred by the statute of limitations), and 
28 C.F.R. §45.735-16 (misuse of federal property). 
(c) Mr. Mohr was also responsible, along with Mr. Callahan, 
for using FBI Recreation Association and Confidential 
Fund monies for unauthorized public relations purposes. 
This matter has been referred to the Department’s Office 
of Management and Finance for appropriate action (see 
footnote 12 above). In 1972, he attended an expense 
paid hunting weekend at Remington Farms, an FBI arms

--- PAGE BREAK ---epartment’s Office 
of Management and Finance for appropriate action (see 
footnote 12 above). In 1972, he attended an expense 
paid hunting weekend at Remington Farms, an FBI arms

--- PAGE BREAK ---

supplier. This is a violation of the Department 
prohibition against accepting gifts from those doing 
business with the Department, 28 C.F.R. §45.735-14(a)(1). 
(d) No action has been taken against Mr. Mohr. He retired 
on June 30, 1972. Criminal action under all of the'above 
federal provisions is barred by the five year statute of 
limitations. 
Nicholas P. Callahan 
Mr. Callahan was Assistant Director for the FBI's 
Administrative Division and later Associate Director. 
In 1976, pursuant to Attorney General Levi's order, he 
was asked to resign as a result of this investigation. 
He did resign. 
(a) Mr. Callahan was responsible for improperly diverting 
thousands of dollars of FBIRA and Confidential Fund monies 
to official FBI public relations activities. The funds 
were not authorized or appropriated for public relations 
activities. There was no evidence that he converted these 
funds to his personal use, and therefore, no evidence 
warranting prosecution. This matter has been referred to 
the Department's Office of Management and Finance for 
appropriate action. (See footnote 12 above.) 
(b) Mr. Callahan admitted receiving FBI goods and services. 
FBI employees decorated his beach house, built a fence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---and Finance for 
appropriate action. (See footnote 12 above.) 
(b) Mr. Callahan admitted receiving FBI goods and services. 
FBI employees decorated his beach house, built a fence.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

walnut shelves^ and other furniture for his residence. 
The statute of limitations bars prosecution of Mr. Callahan 
for receiving government property in violation of 18 
U.S.C. 641. 
(c) No evidence was found that Mr. Callahan was bribed 
or that he received illegal gratuities. 
(d) No further action has been taken against Mr. Callahan. 
3. Ivan W. Conrad 
Mr. Conrad was employed by the FBI Laboratory in many 
positions from 1934 to 1973. He retired on July 12, 1973, 
as Assistant Director of the Laboratory. 
(a) Mr. Conrad took many pieces of electronic recording 
and amplifying equipment home with him and used them for 
his own benefit. Mr. Conrad asserted he had the equipment 
for legitimate purposes. The Department recovered all 
equipment, and Mr. Conrad tendered a $1,500 cashier's 
check to pay for his use of the equipment. 
(b) No further action has been taken against Mr. Conrad. 
Prosecution was barred, in the judgement of the Criminal 
Division, by the statute of limitations and because of 
the lack of evidence showing criminal intent on the part 
of Mr. Conrad. 
4. Clarence M. Kelley 
Director Kelley received the limited amount of goods

--- PAGE BREAK ---of limitations and because of 
the lack of evidence showing criminal intent on the part 
of Mr. Conrad. 
4. Clarence M. Kelley 
Director Kelley received the limited amount of goods

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34 
V; • 
and services described above. He was not involved in 
any of the other matters which are the subject of this 
I 
report. Attorney General Levi and Deputy Attorney 
General Tyler determined that no disciplinary action was 
called for, but that Director ICelley should reimburse the 
Bureau for the goods and services he received. That has 
been done and no further action against him has been taken. 
Director Kelley should be given credit for putting an end 
to the improper practices described in the report. His 
cooperation greatly assisted Departmental investigators 
in uncovering the facts. His cooperation made this report 
possible. It should also be noted that Director Kelley 
was primarily responsible for bringing about the internal 
reforms set forth in the final section of this report. 
G. Speights McMichael 
Mr. McMichael is no longer in charge of, but continues 
to work in, the FBI's Property Procurement and Management 
Section. He is no longer cashier of the Imprest Fund, a petty 
cash reimbursement fund. 
(a) Mr. McMichael clearly neglected his responsibilities 
in managing the Imprest Fund. There is some evidence that 
he permitted violations of procurement procedures to 
favor USRC in the purchase of electronic equipment. 
41 O.S.C. 252(c)(12). There is no evidence of bribery.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ome evidence that 
he permitted violations of procurement procedures to 
favor USRC in the purchase of electronic equipment. 
41 O.S.C. 252(c)(12). There is no evidence of bribery.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

35 
(b) While serving as the FBI's chief procurement officer, 
he attended an expense paid hunting weekend at Remington 
Farms. This is a probable violation of the Department 
regulation prohibiting the receipt of gifts from those 
doing business with the Department. 28 C.F.R. §45.735- 
14(a) (1) . 
(c) The evidence that Mr., .McMichael knowingly approved 
Imprest Fund reimbursement for the personal purchases of 
an FBI employee is not substantial. There is no evidence 
that he converted government money to his own use. 
18 U.S.C. 641 and 643. 
(d) McMichael clearly failed to meet his responsibilities 
as the FBI's Chief Procurement Officer and probably 
violated 28 C.F.R. §45.735-13 (misuse of official position) 
and §45.735-16 (misuse of federal property). His attendance 
at Remington Farms probably violated §45.735-14 (gifts 
from Department contractors). He failed to assist 
Department investigators. The statute of limitations bars 
criminal action against Mr. McMichael. These matters have, 
however, been referred to the Director with instructions 
to institute appropriate administrative action against him. 
6. Joseph X. Tait 
(a) On June 20, 1977, a jury acquitted Mr. Tait of charges

--- PAGE BREAK ---ferred to the Director with instructions 
to institute appropriate administrative action against him. 
6. Joseph X. Tait 
(a) On June 20, 1977, a jury acquitted Mr. Tait of charges

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36 
(b) A jury acquitted Mr. Tait on all counts of charges 
that he violated 18 U.S.C. 287 (false claims on the 
United States), 371 (conspiracy to defraud), and 1341 
(mail fraud). 
(c) Further comment regarding Mr. Tait is considered 
inappropriate because, unlike the other subjects of 
this report, he is not a government official. 
B. Possible Civil Actions 
1. U.S. Recording Company 
The Department is considering taking civil action 
to invalidate USRC contracts and recover the excess 
profits obtained from the Bureau. The basis of such 
a suit would be the clear breach of applicable govern- 
ment procurement regulations. The Civil Division is 
now evaluating the relevant facts to determine whether 
the Department should institute a civil recovery action 
against the United States Recording Company or its 
president. 
2. Conversion of Government Property by Bureau Officials 
Civil actions may not be instituted because: the 
actual amoxants involved are small compared to the 
expense of litigation; there would be substantial

--- PAGE BREAK ---roperty by Bureau Officials 
Civil actions may not be instituted because: the 
actual amoxants involved are small compared to the 
expense of litigation; there would be substantial

--- PAGE BREAK ---

37 
•'t.— 
difficulty in fixing the government's loss with any 
appreciable accuracy; and, much of the government's 
property has already been returned. In addition, civil 
action may be barred by the statute of limitations. 
Imprest Fund 
Approximately, $l,700'was diverted from that fund for 
clearly improper purposes. The property obtained with 
Imprest Fund monies has been returned to the Bureau. 
This matter has been referred to the Department's Office 
of Management and Finance to review the facts, and to 
take necessary administrative action. 
Confidential Fund 
Approximately, $75,000 was spent to purchase electronic 
equipment and $23,000 was spent over a fifteen year period 
on public relations type matter. This matter has also 
been referred to the Department's Office of Management 
and Finance for appropriate administrative action. 
FBI Recreation Association 
Monies from the FBI Recreation Association were 
improperly diverted. According to the Civil Division, 
the Government lacks standing to initiate any civil action, 
except under a somewhat strained theory of parens pabriae. 
Accordingly, no civil action will be instituted regarding 
this matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt lacks standing to initiate any civil action, 
except under a somewhat strained theory of parens pabriae. 
Accordingly, no civil action will be instituted regarding 
this matter.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

- 38 - 
C. Action Taken to Prevent Recurrence 
Within the last fifteen months. Director Kelley has 
taken the following corrective measures to prevent the 
recurrence of the improper practices described in this 
report. He has: 
1. Reorganized the Inspection Division and ren2imed 
it the Planning and Inspection Division; created the 
Office of Professional Responsibility, an Office of 
Inspections, and am Office of Planning and Evaluation; 
established within the Office of Inspections a separate 
Audit Unit, responsible for auditing all FBI funds and 
financial transactions; and organized the Division so 
that it reports directly to him, as Director. 
2. Removed the Property Procurement and Management 
Section from the Division with budget responsibility, 
the Finance and Personnel Division, thereby making one 
Division head responsible for procurement and another 
responsible for the FBI budget and funds. Director Kelley 
has placed a Special Agent Accountant, a Certified 
Public Accountant, as Section Chief of the Property 
Procurement and Management Section. 
3. Discontinued the use of the U.S. Recording Company 
as a "cover" or "cut-out" for confidential purposes and 
established controls to ensure that all purchases are made 
in accordance with government regulations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---. Recording Company 
as a "cover" or "cut-out" for confidential purposes and 
established controls to ensure that all purchases are made 
in accordance with government regulations.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39 
4. Restructured the FBI inventory system, to provide 
built-in controls and audit trails, and initiated 
automation of the inventory system to provide better 
accountability. 
5. Discontinued the FBI Laboratory and Exhibits 
Sections' practice of providing personal services to 
FBI officials. Director Kelley also has discontinued 
the use of the unauthorized cash fund once maintained in 
the Exhibits Section. 
6. Reorganized the management and handling of the 
FBI Recreation Association (FBIRA) and its funds, so that 
FBIRA officers are aware of their responsibilities to 
prevent unauthorized expenditures. A new treasurer of 
the FBIRA has taken office and is not responsible for any 
other FBI fund. 
7. Replaced the FBI Confidential Fund with the Field 
Support Account, an imprest fund approved by the Treasury 
Department and administered in accordance with Treasury 
and Justice Department regulations. 
8. Developed and improved the FBI career development 
progreun for Special Agents to ensure that the best 
qualified individuals are selected for administrative 
advancement, substantially reducing the possibility that 
one person or group can control the selection of such 
candidates. 
P.vr

--- PAGE BREAK ---fied individuals are selected for administrative 
advancement, substantially reducing the possibility that 
one person or group can control the selection of such 
candidates. 
P.vr

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40 
In addition to these administrative measures, the FBI 
has increased legal instruction within its training 
curriculum; held training sessions on the FBI guidelines 
for career agents; and issued detailed instructions to the 
field on legal questions concerning the legality and 
propriety of investigative techniques. The FBI is also 
posing such questions to the Department's Office of Legal 
Counsel with increasing frequency. 
On January 3, 1978, the Attorney General referred the 
entire U.S. Recording Company matter to the FBI and instructed 
the Director to initiate administrative proceedings against 
G. Speights McMichael and other FBI employees whom the 
Director considers to be appropriate subjects for administra- 
tive action. The Attorney General requested the Director 
to keep him advised by informing the Department's Counsel 
on Professional Responsibility of all administrative action 
taken. 
Finally, the Attorney General has asked Director Kelley 
to bring to the Attorney General * s attention any improper 
attempts to have FBI agents conduct investigations or 
undertake activities which are not within the Bureau's 
authorized jurisdiction. The Attorney General has also 
directed all Bureau personnel to bring reports of misconduct 
to the attention of appropriate Bureau officials, and when 
necessary, the Office of Professional Responsibility at 
the Bureau and at the Department of Justice. 
ZX>J.197S4t