JVIM. "/‘Z


The Glassy
Knoll Ripeis

The inside story of how some Boston
activists prodded Congress to admit that

Oswald did not act alone

By David Williams and Harvey Z. Yazijian


^ ^ JFK AND KING VICTIMS OF CON-

MMsPIRACIES — HOUSE PAfJEL. JUS-
^ ^ TICE DEPARTMENT Td GET RE-
PORT.” These headlines on the front page
of the Boston Globe last December 31
may have startled most of the paper’s
readers that morning. It was not that the
Boston public had bought the govern-
ment's official version of the John F.
Kennedy and Martin Luther King assas-
sinations without question — they had not
They were, however, skeptical that the
government and the national news media
would after fifteen years abandon that
granddaddy of cover-ups: the lone-assas-
sin theory to explain the murders of Ken-
nedy and King.

What caused the abrupt about-face of
official policy? Though it is true that the
political climate has certainly changed in
the past few years. Congress did not un-
dertake the most recent assassination
probe of its own volition. Nor was this
probe simply more sophisticated or deter-
mined than those that preceded it.

No, the December 31. 1978. headlines
came about in large part because the
House Select Committee on Assassina-
tions (HSCA) was spurred to action by a
large and vocal segment of the American
public, and by a Boston-bred grassroots
organization that attempted to serve as
the public’s voice — the Assassination In-
formation Bureau.

T he AIB story actually begins on a
chilly winter night early in 1973.
when a surprisingly large crowd
— responding to a few leaflets and a small
listing in a local underground weekly —
filed into the Charles Street Meeting
House to attend an audiovisual presenta-
tion entitled “Who Killed JFK?” It was
delivered by a young Cambridge free-
lance journalist and assassination student
named Bob Katz. Using slides taken at
the scene of the Kennedy assassination,
photographs of key evidence, and a very
grainy copy of the now famous Zapruder
film. Katz made everyone present an eye-
witness to the monstrous crime. Katz then
laid out his case against the Warren Com-


.ayomnanc


mission’s lone-assassin conclusion, stress-
ing ignored eyewitness testimony, sup-
pressed evidence, and ominous organized
crime/anti-Castro Cuban connections
that tended to contradict the commis-
sion’s findings.

Coincidentally, the Katz lecture oc-
curred at a time when the arrest of sever-
al intelligence types and anti-Castro
Cubans in the Democratic National
Committee headquarters was beginning
to develop into a national scandal. Con-
spiracy theories were about to come out
of the closet in a big way.

B y the spring of 1973. Katz had ac-
quired a small following of con-
spiracy buff's, among them Carl
Oglesby, founder and past president of
Students for a Democratic Society (SDS)
and then a political columnist for the
Boston Phoenix. At the time Oglesby was
developing an analysis of recent Ameri-
can political history, in which he con-
tended that Watergate was merely anoth-
er major battle in a continuing struggle
between rival political elites, which
Oglesby labeled “Yankees” and “Cow-
boys.” Oglesby further argued that the as-
sassination of Yankee John F. Kennedy
by Cowboys unknown was one of the first
acts in this clandestine war. If nothing
else. Oglesby’s controversial thesis was
one of the first to place the political assas-
sinations of the sixties in a plausible his-
torical context.

We the authors— Williams a film stu-
dent. Yazijian an aspiring writer— joined
our friend Bob Katz in a small discussion
group at Oglesby’s Cambridge apart-
ment: we called the group the Grassy
Knoll Debating Society, and we explored
the many erratic though often brilliant
critiques of the Warren Commission Re-
port. Caught up by the spell of the assas-
sination inquiry, we arrived at the same
conclusions: Oswald had been framed:
the President’s killers had not been ap-
prehended: and the government was con-
cealing many pertinent facts. Moreover,
we came deeply to believe that the assas-
(Continued on page 111)

Boston 83


m m » » m m m if i


The Gras^ Knoll Papers

(Continued from pnge 13)

sination question was no mere Agatha
Christie whodunit or the endless scholar-
ship of eccentrics — it was a matter of cru-
cial historic importance that had to be
placed on the national agenda. To that
end. the informal Grassy Knoll Debating
Society evolved into the more organized
Assassination Information Bureau (AIB).


The budding awareness of those of us be-
hind the AIB coincided with that of an
enterprising young talent agent named
Kathy Kinsella. of Boston’s Lordly &
Dame booking agency. Kinsella discov-
ered the AIB at one of Katz’s series of as-
sassination lectures, and immediately rec-
ognized the strong public interest in the
subject and the consequent potential of a
lecture tour. by AIB memlwrs. She was
particularly impressed by the fact that the
AIB’s large audiences were the result of
minimal advertising.

Once we had put together our basic
lecture format, news of the AIB’s presen-
tation spread like wildfire. A typical AIB
audiovisual presentation consisted of
ninety-five slides related to the assassina-
tion and its aftermath, a boot-leg copy of
the Zapruder film, an accompanying nar-
rative. and a question-and-answer session
with the audience, which inevitably last-
ed until the janitors kicked everyone out
of the building.

By the fall of 1973. we had assembled
two teams of lecturers to meet the heavy
demand, and over the next three years
various AIB members spoke before a
total K>( six hundred audiences ip forty-
five states.

The experience was heady and reward-
ing. Standing-room-only crowds were
common (we often outdrew the school
basketball team), and return engage-
ments were frequent (Kansas State Uni-
versity. for example, had us a total of five
times). The lectures were a perfect ve-
hicle for delivering our message; Contact
was personal, and people were able to
view our "evidence" with their own eyes.

Furthermore. Watergate created an
ideal political climate for presenting a
critique of the Warren Report. It bared a
Byzantine world of dirty tricks and con-
spiracies in which the ends were always
thought to justify the means. The spec-
tacle of Watergate enhanced the AIB’s
credibility and that of its presentation.

The AIB’s early Cambridge office, in a
back room on the second floor of an
apartment building at 63 Inman Su*eei.
was a study in political funk. It sheltered
a curious collective of easygoing folk
whose conversation was rich and edectic.
tanging from Lois Tiant’s ER.A. to the
latest mysterious death of an assassina-
tion witness.

Colorful jargon was spoken there.
Terms such as ‘^agic bullet,” “grassy
knoll,” “umbrella man.” and “neuro-


muscular reaction” had meaning for only
a few in those halcyon days. In the spring,
a sweet aroma testifying to the AIB’s
“grassroots” waRed about the file cabi-
nets. and the bureau and its friends took
to the soRball fields. Fortunately, the AIB
fared better in politics than it did in soft-
ball — first in war, first in peace, and a dis-
mal last in Cambridge Class C.

There was not a tffi'ee-piece suit among
us — a distinction which set the AIB apart
from such slick professionals as Mark
Lane. nor. were we prone to the excessive
paranoia that characterized some of the
lone-wolf researchers. We were the new
blood, the second generation of critics
who gave new energy to an old cause.

Consequently, the AIB was able to at-
U~act a broad constituency which tran-
scended any traditional cultural, political,
and economic barriers. We appealed to
liberals and conservatives, blacks and
whites, the rich and the poor. We offered
no ideologies, no alternative lifestyles —
just a perspective that people were findr
ing increasingly credible.

Little did we realize when we set up
the office, however, that scattered
throughout the land were legions of buffs
and others who had been waiting for fif-
teen years to try out their homespun con-
spiracy theories on the experts. The AIB
became fair game for anyone with a dime
and a kitchen-sink notion of who slew
Jack Kennedy. Out of the woodwork they
came; amateur sleuths, housewife re-
searchers, wide-eyed students, and, it
must be said, nuts of every stripe and per-
suasion— so much so that the office often
doubled as a psychosocial clinic for ad-
vanced paranoiacs. The Betelgeuse con-
nection illustrates;

AIB: Hello.

Caller: I’m calling long distance from
a phone booth and I don’t have much
time. I think they’re out to get me.

AIB: Uh. just back up a little and —
like, say, who are you?

Caller: I can’t say, but I’m talking
about Jack Kennedy. I’m talking
about his killers. They’re aliens.

AIB: Well, we’ve already covered the
foreign aspects of the assassination
and . . .

Caller. I don’t mean from Russia or
Cuba. I mean from Betelgeuse.

AIB: Beetle Juice?

Caller. No, Betelgeuse. It’s a star sys-
tem light years from here. Traversake
via hyperspace. And these people have
the fourth-dimensional ram jets in ad-
dition to having infiltrated the CIA,
the FBI. and the KGB.

AIB: Say what?

Caller. I can’t talk much longer, but
ril tell you this: Look into that so-
called meteor shower of last June 10.
And check out this angle; How come
no one actually saw this so-called
comet of the century, Kohoutek?

AIB (pause 1: Uh, I dunno.

Caller. Look, Tve got to go now. I


may have said too much. They’ve al-
ready put my house under surveil-
lance. So long and remember — keep
watching the ^ies.

■

In the fall of 1974, the AIB set out in a
major new direction when it sponsored
the three-day Politics of Conspiracy con-
ference at Boston University.

Previously, the Warren Commission
critics had suffered from an inability to
organize into a unified front They jeal-
ously hoarded their research and were
wracked with internecine fighting. Conse-
quently, their arguments were not pre-
sented as forcefully or authoritatively as
they could have been. The AIB proposed
to change that by bringing together under
one roof at B.U. as many writers, re-
searchers, and activists as we could.

Among the activities offered were
workshops and lectures on the subjects of
Watergate, intelligence agencies, organ-
ized crime, and the major political mur-
ders of the 1960s. And on the final day of
the conference, we discussed future strat-
egies and ways to take the assassination
question into the streets. The conference
reflected a new political consciousness;
Our cause had finally come out of the file
cabinets and into full public view.

The conference was a success in many
ways. Major portions of the talks were
broadcast live over WBUR-FM, and the
event received coverage in the New York
Times and other national media. AIB af-
filiates were orgaruzed, and plans were
made to produce similar conferences
throughout the counter. Alliances were
forged within the critical community,
such as that with Jeff Cohen, a Los Ange-
les-based writer, who would become the
AIB’s West Coast representative. Follow-
ing the conference, the AIB began pub-
lishing a newsletter. Clandestine America.
to cross-pollinate assassination research
and keep its constituency abreast of the
latest developments.

■

The AIB’s first contact with official Wash-
ington came in 1975 when we filed for
nonprofit status with the Internal Reve-
nue Service. The AIB’s cash flow was
touch-and-go at the time. Lecture en-
gagements were not plentiful because vir-
tually everyone had seen someone's pres-
entation. Our only alternative was to hit
the fund-raising circuit. However, this
route usually required tax exemption (so
our supporters could deduct their contri-
butions on their tax returns), a formal
government designation which is general-
ly reserved for more upright and ortho-
dox groups. The IRS had never seen the
likes of the AIB.

Sure enough, our request triggered
alarms at the Boston IRS office, and was
quickly forwarded to headquarters in
Washington. We knew that the IRS
would treat gingerly any organization
with the word “assassination” in its name
(as who wouldn’t?), so we expected a


^ninch

jfroh. hoi. wfly
^ect for &nday
i of oyr tpcciaitics
)o. it makes brunch


j Repair

^TERN ^
IKS INC.

ng In
ier for
!>r8che
panship at
I Prices

(617) 944-2607
has. 01887


good grilling. And we got it For twenty
months, the AIB bared every comma and
decimal point of its operation, and felt
that our bona fides had clearly been es-
tablished. But apparently no one at the
IRS was willing to assume the responsi-
bility for further legitimating the assassi-
nation question, and our request contin-
ued to be scrutinized.

By the summer of 1975, the AIB was in
desperate financial straits, and we simply
could not wait any longer for an IRS de-
cision. The AIB’s attorney, R. Arlen
Johnson of Wellesley, requested and re-
ceived a meeting with IRS officials in
Washington; Johnson laid out the AIB’s
for tax exemption, and his effort was
instrumental in having the IRS finally
rule in our favor. The AIB thus became
the first and only nonprofit corporation in
America which specialized in investi-
gating contemporary political murder.

■

In April, 1975, a Boston Globe copy editor
called our office with an offer to set up a
meeting between AIB members and the
paper’s top editors. We accepted the offer,
and a luncheon was arranged, at which
three of our members delivered an abbre- |
viated version of our lecture presenution.
Most interested of the Globe people was
associate editor Robert Healy, who pro-
ceeded to write an intelligent op-ed col-
umn entitled “Why the Dallas Files
Should Be Re-opened.” Unfortunately,
the reporter whom the Globe assigned to
follow up Healy with articles on the as-
sassination beat was Jack Thomas (now
an “At Large” columnist). Thomas punt-
ed. Although we offered him our assis-
tance and full resources, Thomas’s re-
portage indicated that he had done very
little reading and even less investigating.
So much for the Globe’s contribution.

By the fall of 1975, the rising wave of
Warren Commission criticism was crest-
ing. and the call for a new investigation
was irresistible. In response to the AIB’s
efforts and to a demand by the House
Black Caucus for a new King assassina-
tion probe. Congress created the House
Select Committee on Assassinations. The
issue was now in the hands of W ashing-
ton’s top political honchos, and the job of
enlightening members of Congress re-
quired more patience and finesse than the
AIB had been accustomed to practicing.
Accordingly, the AIB took the logical
next step and relocated its office to Wash-
ington, moving into a building owned by
seer-realtor Jeane Dixon. The building
was a haven for several anti-establish-
ment political groups, so the AIB mem-
bers figured they saved the government
money by moving into a building that
was already bugged.

Washington is a formal and ordered
city, uptight like no other city in Ameriia.
It’s a place where subtlety is prized, dis-
cretion assured, and caution is instinctive.
There’s simply too much political power
lining its boulevards for other approaches


tosucceed.

For our part (he days of whistle-stop
tours and activist audiences were over.
College students gave way to congres-
sional aides. Research briefs became
more useful than bumper stickers. The
AIB grew and changed as the assassina-
tion issue took on increasingly greater
importance.

■

The AIB was determined to make the
HSCA the first government-sanctioned
assassination protx to be monitored and
assisted by the private community of as-
sassination scholars. However, we found
committee members to be in a confused
state when we arrived in Washington.
Representative Thomas Downing, a
courtly Virginia Republican, had decided
to retire from Congress in 1976, and was
replaced in January, 1977, by Henry
Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat and assassi-
nation gadfly known more for his en-
thusiasm than for his political acumen.

Consequendy, the probe was direction-
less and many staffers were woefully
uninformed. One critic recounts how a
House committee aide interrupted a dis-
cussion of Oswald and the Dallas Police
Department to ask, “Who was J. D. Tip-
pit?” “My God,” the critic thought, “they
don't even know who was shot that day!”

Fortunately, not all were so ignorant,
and soon we were working Capitol Hill,
introducing ourselves to staffers and pre-
paring background papers on prospective


witnesses for the committee. Leading the
AIB’s research effort was Jim Kostman. a
former MfT philosophy professor, who
oversaw the writing and distribution of
several key research briefs. One irtstru-
mental brief dealt with Loran Hall, an
anti-Castro soldier of fortune who turned
out to be the owner of a rifle discovered
in Dealey Plaza shordy after the Ken-
nedy assassination. This revelation
prompted the committee to schedule a
rare public session to interrogate Hall,
who thereupon took the Fifth Amend-
ment to ail questions put to him.

Another of Kostman’s highly praised
briefings examined organized-crime boss
Santos Trafficante. Kostman had noted
several connections between Trafficante
and nightclub owner Jack Ruby, research
that was instrumental in prompting the
HSCA to look for — ^and find — more such
ties. Soon Trafficante was being publicly
questioned by the HSCA (and he too
took the Fifth). f

The committee, however, continued to
have internal troubles. Chairman Gonza-
lez had lodced horns with chief counsel
Richard Sprague over the issue of which
one was to be the ultimate authority in
the probe. After a messy and highly pub-
licized struggle, both men resigned from
the committee. To the horror of the crit-
ics, HSCA had become the joke of the
town and editorial cartoonists had a field
day with its bumbling ways.

The committee’s fortunes were soon re-


versed, however, with the arrival of two
new — and different — leaders: Louis
Stokes, the black Cleveland Democrat
who finally gave the committee the firm
and quiet leadership that it desperately
needed; and G. Robert Blakey, a Cornell
University professor and former counsel
to the late Senator John McClellan’s
Judiciary Committee, who replaced
Sprague as chief counsel, and head of the
HSCA staff. Blakey was very familiar
with the ways of Capitol Hill, unlike his
predecessor.

Under the leadership of Stokes and
Blakey, the HSCA regained its compo-
sure and found new direction. They
charted a cautious path for the com-
mittee. one that would not offend or pro-
voke anyone; any more bad press, they
knew, could destroy the committee. Thus.
Blakey announced at his first press con-
ference that it would be his last press con-
ference until the end of the investigation,
and he subsequently ordered committee
members and their staff to proceed in
strict secrecy.

This policy frustrated the AIB and
others in the critical community. We had
seen investigation after investigation qui-
etly evolve, unchecked and unmonitored,
into whitewashes. Nonetheless, the
HSCA was the only show in town, and we
continued to provide the committee with
research and support, often with produc-
tive results.

For example, the AIB undertook the


awesome task of researching and analyz-
ing the 100,000 documents relating to the
Kennedy assassination that were declassi-
fied by the FBI in 1977 under the Free-
dom of Information Act Slowly, those
engaged in this Herculean effort were
able to piece together a revealing look at
the FBI’s inner workings; eventually, ABI
researcher Bob Ranftel turned up one
document that became particularly im-
portant — a memo from die FBI’s Dallas
field office dated November 25. 1963. The
memo, which alluded to the existence of
a previously unreported “home movie”
of the Kennedy assassination, was circu-
lated throughout the assassination-re-
search community, until it landed in the
hands of Earl Golz, crack investigative
reporter for the Dallas Morning News.
Golz tradted down a copy of the film
from the man who had taken it that day
in Dallas — Charles Bronson of Ada, Ok-
lahoma — and passed the film on to one of
the HSCA’s photographic experts.

The film, Uken minutes before the as-
sassination, dearly shows the window on
the sixth floor of the Texas School Book
Depository, from which Oswald allegedly
fired — but according to the HSCA expert,
the movement of two figures can’ be dis-
cerned in the film. The AIB helped get
this word out among committee metri-
bers, svho were finishing up their investi-
gation: the committee then reconvened
its panel of optics experts to view the
Um, and many of them, too, saw two fig-


ures in the alleged gun perch.

The HSCA was unaUe to follow up on
this remarkable new material because of
the lateness of the hour, but it did recom-
mend that the Justice Department further
examine the film: after all, if it can be
verified that there are two figurbs at the
window, the film will be the most dra-
matic evidence yet that there was a con-
spiracy to murder John F. Kennedy.

■

The HSCA’s final report will not reveal
who killed Kennedy, although the com-
mittee has offidally stated that the ques-
tion is unanswered and that it does not
believe that Oswald acted alone. How-
ever, the committee did provide valuable
insights into the posable forces behind
the assassination, and researchers are
chomping at the bit to examine the forty-
odd volumes of committee depositions,
hearings, and evidence that will eventu-
ally be published.

Meanwhile! the AIB is pushing the
White House to appoint a special prose-
cutor to pursue the assassination question
rather than have the Justice Department
take over the probe. Says AIB member
Carl Oglesby from Washington; ‘TTtere’s
got to a special prosecutor because the
Justice Department route would involve
the FBI, and that’s exactly what we don’t
want The FBI’s track record is just too
uniformly dismal — they’ve destroyed evi-
dence. misled the Warren Commission,
and dropped leads.”


Though the issue has advanced to a po-
litically sensitive stage, the AIB still sees
the need for public political action. As
Oglesby says. “We’re trying to keep in
touch with the events as they unfold in
order to keep our constituency apprised
of the situation. The real energy that h^
been responsible for developing the evi-
dence in this case has come from the criti-
cal community — as will the energy for
any future thorough and honest probe.

If anything, the AIB’s work is just be-
ginning. Not only could the government’s
JFK and MLK probes continue for sever-
al years, any conspiracy verdicts could
carry a strong implication that other
political events — such as the Robert Ken-
nedy assassination — should be re-exam-
ined. Questions must be addressed —
among them that of why a myriad of pre-
vious assassination probes by the govern-
ment have consistently failed. And that of
why the national news media were some-
how unable to evaluate the abundance of
assassination evidence.

Above all, the assassination investiga-
tion has underscored the need for citizen
watchdogs, and the AIB expects to ^
around for some time to come. It will
continue to monitor the current prolxs
and to lobby for new ones; it will contin-
ue its research and keep the public in-
formed of what it finds. The AIB is, after
all, a legacy from the days when we
thought political power really did beloM
to the people. ^
