4
THE BARNES REVIEW
•
MARCH/APRIL 2013
•
W W W.B A R NES R EV IEW.C OM
•
1-877-773-9077
AMERICA HAD A COUPLE OF TIGERS by the tail
when our people foolishly allowed themselves to be
stampeded into war against Germany and Japan in
what is now known as World War II. While neither
Axis country wanted war with the United States, they
were capable of putting up quite a fight. What few
have ever realized is that both nations had nuclear
weapons, and at least one of them—Germany—had
ICBMs. Did the Big Apple escape being nuked by the
skin of its teeth? Would Adolf Hitler—as so many hon-
est Hitlerian scholars insist—have actually agreed to
drop an atomic weapon on the United States and his
Anglo-Saxon brethren unless his own nation faced
utter annihilation? The possibility is discussed here.
BY PHILIP RIFE
O
n January 8, 1945 (four months before Ger-
many’s surrender in World War II), a Navy ad-
miral responsible for America’s East Coast
defenses held an extraordinary briefing for
members of the local press aboard a warship anchored
in New York Harbor. The purpose was to prepare the pub-
lic for what seemed a very real threat of an enemy attack:
Gentlemen, I have reason to assume that
the Nazis are getting ready to launch a strate-
gic attack on New York and Washington by
robot bombs. I am here to tell you these at-
tacks are not only possible, but probable as
well, and that the East Coast is likely to be
buzz bombed within the next 30 or 60 days.
The thing to do is not to get excited about
it. [They] might knock out a high building or
two, might create a fire hazard, and most cer-
tainly would cause casualties. But [they] can-
not seriously affect the progress of the war. It
may only be 10 or 12 buzz bombs, but they may
come before we can stop them.1
“Buzz bomb” is the name the Allies gave to Germany’s
jet-propelled V-1 guided missile. The V-1’s relatively lim-
ited range (approximately 160 miles) ruled out a land-
based attack on the U.S. mainland. However, Allied
intelligence may have learned the Germans had recently
devised a method for launching V-1s from submarines.
The Nazis’ Big Apple
Was Germany ready to drop a nuke on New York?
Did they have the technology needed to do it?
UNCENSORED WORLD WAR II HISTORYly
devised a method for launching V-1s from submarines.
The Nazis’ Big Apple
Was Germany ready to drop a nuke on New York?
Did they have the technology needed to do it?
UNCENSORED WORLD WAR II HISTORY

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE BARNES REVIEW
•
P.O.

BOX 15877 • WA S H INGTON, D .C .

20003
•
M A R C H /A PR IL 2013
•
5
Whether launched from a ramp on
land or catapulted from the deck of a
surfaced U-boat, V-1s in their horizontal
flight could be seen and heard and (as
the British had proved repeatedly) often
shot down by anti-aircraft guns or fighter
planes before they reached their in-
tended target.

That may explain why the admiral didn’t
seem overly concerned about V-1s possibly being aimed
at American cities.

The V-1 threat to America never materialized.

But
what the admiral had no way of knowing was that a much
greater threat may have been ready for use against them:
the revolutionary two-stage A-9 long-range rocket.

In a postwar book he wrote, the general in charge of
magazine contained a curious allusion to the mysterious
destruction of a Soviet munitions complex near the Ural
Mountains sometime in 1945 by a “terror attack” repre-
senting “fascist perfidy.” The writer likened it to American
B-52 bomber strikes during the Vietnam War.

However,
the only National Socialist weapon capable of penetrating
more than 2,000 miles of Soviet-controlled airspace at the
time was an ICBM.4
the National Socialists’ rocket program described what
made the A-9 such a fearsome weapon:
The missile was planned to reach a height of
about 20 kilometers [12 miles], a maximum speed
of 4,400 kilometers per hour [2,800 miles per hour]
and then go into a shallow curving glide with a
peak of nearly 30 kilometers [18 miles].

On arrival
over the target, at a height of 5 kilometers [3 miles],
it was planned to dive vertically.2
In today’s parlance, the A-9 was the world’s first inter-
continental ballistic missile (ICBM).

In the 1940s, there
was no effective defense against a weapon of this type.

The National Socialists’ nicknames for the A-9—
“America Rocket” and “New York Rocket”—left little
doubt as to one of its ultimate intended targets.--- PAGE BREAK ---

In the 1940s, there
was no effective defense against a weapon of this type. The National Socialists’ nicknames for the A-9—
“America Rocket” and “New York Rocket”—left little
doubt as to one of its ultimate intended targets. Just how
narrowly America dodged the A-9 “bullet” is one of the
most-overlooked stories of World War II. In the end, the
United States was spared as an A-9 target, thanks largely
to massive Allied bombing raids that forced the Germans
to relocate their rocket production to bomb-proof facili-
ties laboriously tunneled into solid rock in the sides of
mountains, thereby delaying the A-9’s deployment for sev-
eral crucial months.3
Even so, there are reports that successful test flights
of the A-9 were made in January and March of 1945—and
there’s a tantalizing clue suggesting the Germans may
have used at least one other A-9 in combat against a dif-
ferent foe. A Cold War-era article in a Russian science
“The V-1 threat to America never materialized. But
a much greater threat may have been ready: the
revolutionary two-stage A-9 long-range rocket.”
A-Bomb
Hermann Goering real-
ized that if Germany were
to be able to attack Amer-
ica, it would need a craft
capable of crossing the
Atlantic and returning. Sci-
entist Eugen Saenger
thus suggested the Silber-
vogel (“Silver Bird”) artist’s
conception shown left. A more likely carrier for
an atomic weapon would
have been a rocket with
submarine launch capabil-
ity or a two-stage, long-
range rocket like the A-9.

--- PAGE BREAK ---6
THE BARNES REVIEW
•
MARCH/APRIL 2013
•
W W W.B A R NES R EV IEW.C OM
•
1-877-773-9077
But even if the Germans succeeded in deploying rock-
ets capable of reaching the U.S.

mainland, it would have
required a large number of well-targeted strikes to signif-
icantly impair the nation’s war-making capacity.

This cal-
culus might well change, however, if the National
Socialists were able to fit their rocket warheads with
something more destructive than conventional explosives.

As it turns out, National Socialist scientists were hard
at work on the same weapon of mass destruction we
were: the atom bomb.

For decades following World War II, the conventional
wisdom was that the Germans lagged far behind the Allies
in the race to build an A-bomb.

However, some recent rev-
elations have called that long-held belief
seriously into question.

As reported by an American news-
wire service in 1998: “Once top-secret
files on Nazi Germany’s race to build an
atomic bomb are being opened to the
general public for the first time.

The doc-
uments suggest that German research
into the atomic bomb was ‘nearly parallel’ with efforts in
the United States.”5
Actually, even that surprising reassessment underesti-
mates German progress in the area of atomic weaponry.

One particularly well-placed American weighed in on
the threat of National Socialist atomic weapons develop-
ment at the time, albeit off the record.

A close friend and
confidante of President Franklin Roosevelt recorded the
following incident in her diary: “He had just gotten a se-
cret report from a German source that the Germans had
developed a bomb which will kill by concussion every-
thing within a mile.

They are planning to use it on New
York City.

The Germans are way ahead of us in that direc-
tion, though we are doing a lot of research to catch (up)
to them.”6 (The U.S.They are planning to use it on New
York City.

The Germans are way ahead of us in that direc-
tion, though we are doing a lot of research to catch (up)
to them.”6 (The U.S.

wasn’t developing a “concussion”
bomb, but we were trying to build an atom bomb.)
For his part, Adolf Hitler was apparently quite bullish
on Germany’s atomic progress.

A doctor who treated the
National Socialist leader in the final months of the war
later recalled a memorable statement his famous patient
made to him in February of 1945:
In no time at all, I’m going to start using my vic-
tory weapon, and then the war will come to a glo-
rious end.

Sometime ago, we solved the problem
of nuclear fission, and we have developed it so far
that we can exploit the energy for armament pur-
poses.

They won’t even know what hit them.

It’s
the weapon of the future.

With it, Germany’s future
is assured.7
In fact, there is some intriguing eyewitness testimony
suggesting Germany’s atomic weapons development pro-
gressed well beyond the theoretical stage.

In 2003, a leading German magazine recounted the
strange wartime experience of a onetime resident of a se-
cluded area of central Germany where a number of secret
governmental research facilities were located: “She had
seen a glowing light as bright as ‘hundreds of bolts of
“The documents suggest that Germany’s
research into the atomic bomb was ‘nearly
parallel’ with efforts in the United States.”
Teutonic Ingenuity in Action
To overcome the great distance that prevented Germany from attacking the
United States, an official of the German Labor Front, Director Otto Lafferenz, sug-
gested that a watertight container be constructed, in which a V-2 ballistic missile
could be brought within range of the American coast.

The idea was discussed at
the Penemunde research facility.

The plan was to send three 500-ton displace-
ment containers towed by a submarine.

Each container, adjusted to neutral buoy-
ancy, concealed a V-2.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The plan was to send three 500-ton displace-
ment containers towed by a submarine. Each container, adjusted to neutral buoy-
ancy, concealed a V-2. Upon reaching the launch location, the containers would
be trimmed to a vertical position and the rockets launched. The idea was filed
away until 1944, when it was given the code name Prufstand XII and work secretly
began. While the records indicate that one such submarine launch container was
completed, it was never tested with a live firing. The concept was proven sound
by the Soviets in the 1950s. Using captured plans and German engineering assis-
tance they produced the Golem submarine towed missile. At left are shown sev-
eral smaller ship-to-ship rockets being test-launched from a U-boat.

--- PAGE BREAK ---THE BARNES REVIEW
•
P.O.

BOX 15877 • WA S H INGTON, D .C .

20003
•
M A R C H /A PR IL 2013
•
7
lightning,’ red inside and yellow on the outside, at approx-
imately 9:30 p.m.

on March 4, 1945.

[The woman] went on
to describe how a powerful squall had moved across the
mountains.

The next day, she said, she and others in the
area had nosebleeds, headaches and sensations of pres-
sure in their ears.”8
In 2005, an Italian man revealed his still-vivid memory
of an incident that occurred when he represented Hitler’s
ally Benito Mussolini at the test of a “disintegration
bomb” conducted on a German island in the Baltic Sea in
October 1944:
They took me to a concrete bunker with an
aperture of exceptionally thick glass.

There was a
slight tremor in the bunker, a sudden blinding flash
and then a thick cloud of smoke.

It took the shape
of a column and then that of a big flower.

The officials there told me we had to remain in
the bunker for several hours because of the effects
of the bomb.

When we eventually left, they made
us put on a sort of coat and trousers which seemed
to be made of asbestos, and we went to the scene
of the explosion.

The effects were tragic.

The trees around had
been turned to carbon.

No leaves.

Nothing alive.

There were some animals—sheep—in the area, and
they too had been burnt to cinders.9
(This was more than nine months before the first ac-
knowledged test of an American A-bomb in the New Mex-
ico desert.)
A former German military pilot said he observed an-
other apparent atomic test in northern Germany from the
air earlier in October:
I [was] about 12 to 15 km (7.5-9.3 miles) from an
atomic bomb test station when I noticed a strong,
bright illumination of the whole atmosphere, lasting
about two seconds.

The clearly visible pressure
wave escaped the cloud formed by the explosion.

This wave had a diameter of about 1 km (0.6 mile),
and the color of the cloud changed frequently.The clearly visible pressure
wave escaped the cloud formed by the explosion.

This wave had a diameter of about 1 km (0.6 mile),
and the color of the cloud changed frequently.

It be-
came dotted after a short period of darkness with
all sorts of light spots, which were, in contrast to
normal explosions, of a pale blue color.

The witness landed at this point, but when he took off
again an hour later, the unusual residual effects of the
massive explosion were still very much in evidence: “A
cloud shaped like a mushroom with turbulent, billowing
sections stood over the spot where the explosion took
The A-9/A-10 Rocket
The A-9/A-10 rocket represented one of the earliest de-
tailed studies of a multistage rocket, capable of cross-
ing the Atlantic Ocean.

According to Werner von
Braun’s own writings, the rocket of this class was en-
visioned as early as 1936, when yet-to-be built propul-
sion testing was designed to accommodate engines
with thrust up to 200 tons.

It would have been roughly
enough for a trans-Atlantic rocket.

The A-9/A-10 con-
cept emerged far ahead of its time, but it was fueled by
a dream of some in the WWII German government to
bomb America, which also gave it a name—“Projektil
Amerika.” To reach New York, the A-10 upper stage
would have to follow a string of radio beacons de-
ployed on submarines spread across the Atlantic.

For
its final guidance, the rocket could use a transmitter in-
stalled by agents in a window of a high-rise hotel in
the heart of Manhattan.

Another concept called for a
manned version of the A-9 stage guided by a daring
pilot.

The manned version of the missile would be
equipped with a pressurized cockpit, featuring life-sup-
port systems, cartographic radar and, apparently, an
ejection seat, which would allow a pilot to bail out
shortly before impacting the target.

The original con-
cept of the A-10 rocket envisioned a test version with
a propulsion system made of six combustion cham-
bers.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The manned version of the missile would be
equipped with a pressurized cockpit, featuring life-sup-
port systems, cartographic radar and, apparently, an
ejection seat, which would allow a pilot to bail out
shortly before impacting the target. The original con-
cept of the A-10 rocket envisioned a test version with
a propulsion system made of six combustion cham-
bers. The complexity of the rocket forced the Nazi lead-
ership to abandon the
idea around 1943, so the
development center could concentrate on the all-but-
flight-ready A-4. However, author Philip Rife believes
the design was further along than the court historians
have admitted. Above, artist’s rendering. A-9/A-10
Two-Stage
Rocket
A-10
A-9

--- PAGE BREAK ---8
THE BARNES REVIEW
•
MARCH/APRIL 2013
•
W W W.B A R NES R EV IEW.C OM
•
1-877-773-9077
place.

Strong electrical disturbances and the impossibil-
ity to continue radio communication as by lightning
turned up.”10
Another eyewitness report suggests the Germans may
have deployed a small tactical atomic weapon in combat
against the Red Army on the eastern front.

The informa-
tion, recently declassified by the U.S.

National Security
Agency, apparently originated in an intercepted wartime
message sent from the Japanese embassy in Stockholm,
Sweden to Tokyo under the title “Reports on the Atom-
Splitting Bomb”:
In June of 1943 the German army tried out an ut-
terly new type of weapon against the Russians at a
location 150 kilometers [93 miles] southeast of
Kursk.

Although it was the entire 19th Infantry Reg-
iment of the Russians which was attacked, only a
few bombs sufficed to utterly wipe them out to the
last man.

Colonel Kenji saw the actual scene imme-
diately after.

All the men and horses [within the area
of] the explosion of the shells were charred black.11
It is at this point that our old friend the A-9 rocket/
ICBM once again enters the picture.

We learn the following from the memoirs of a
Spaniard who was a top member of the National Socialist
espionage service:
I had been receiving reports from our men in
the United States and South America of a new
American secret weapon.

The reports hinted at an
entirely new type of bomb of devastating destruc-
tive power.

At the same time, I understood that
Nazi scientists were working desperately to design
a workable nuclear warhead for our rockets.”12
In World War II as today, the miniaturization of nuclear
weapons presented added technical challenges.

It’s a lit-
tle-known fact that, by late in the war, the Germans had
several four- and six-engine planes (one of which report-
edly flew to within 12 miles of New York City on a test
flight in 1944) capable of carrying a full-size atom bomb
and reaching North America.--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the same time, I understood that
Nazi scientists were working desperately to design
a workable nuclear warhead for our rockets.”12
In World War II as today, the miniaturization of nuclear
weapons presented added technical challenges. It’s a lit-
tle-known fact that, by late in the war, the Germans had
several four- and six-engine planes (one of which report-
edly flew to within 12 miles of New York City on a test
flight in 1944) capable of carrying a full-size atom bomb
and reaching North America. But they evidently opted for
developing smaller tactical nukes delivered by ICBMs—
which couldn’t be shot down—rather than larger atom
bombs carried by aircraft, which could be shot down. (The U.S. had no such delivery system option for its
atomic weapons during World War II.)13
If what one group of eyewitnesses reported is true, the
Third Reich’s scientists did in fact succeed in miniaturiz-
ing an atomic weapon for a rocket warhead in order to
achieve Hitler’s goal of hitting the U.S. homeland. Before the German submarine U-234 surrendered to
the U.S. Navy in the North Atlantic on May 14, 1945,
the U.S. lacked sufficient enriched uranium for its
Hiroshima bomb and a fuse to properly detonate its
plutonium (Nagasaki) bomb. The U-234’s cargo—which
ironically had been en route to Germany’s ally Japan
when Germany surrendered—included both enriched
uranium and new infrared fuses unfamiliar to Ameri-
can scientists. The atom bomb dropped on Nagasaki
less than three months later was detonated by an in-
frared fuse. (Hydrick, Carter P., Critical Mass, White-
hurst & Co., 2004.) Top photo: A German heavy rocket
launcher Type 41. These could be mounted on wooden
frames on the upper deck of a vessel. Lower photo
shows the installation and testing of rocket equipment
on U-551. All the equipment is German army-issue, 30
cm Wurfkorper 42 Spreng rockets then under develop-
ment, firing from a Schweres Wurfgerat 41 launcher. German Rockets on U-Boatsrocket equipment
on U-551. All the equipment is German army-issue, 30
cm Wurfkorper 42 Spreng rockets then under develop-
ment, firing from a Schweres Wurfgerat 41 launcher. German Rockets on U-Boats

--- PAGE BREAK ---U-551. All the equipment is German army-issue, 30
cm Wurfkorper 42 Spreng rockets then under develop-
ment, firing from a Schweres Wurfgerat 41 launcher. German Rockets on U-Boats

--- PAGE BREAK ---

THE BARNES REVIEW
•
P.O. BOX 15877 • WA S H INGTON, D .C . 20003
•
M A R C H /A PR IL 2013
•
9
The account, which appeared in a French magazine in
1958, described how a V-2 rocket (a smaller single-stage
predecessor of the A-9) destroyed a collection of struc-
tures built to simulate a small town. The source of the ac-
count was apparently one or more French POWs em-
ployed as laborers by the National Socialists in northern
Germany.
According to the article:
The rocket landed almost in the center of the
buildings with a deafening detonation. There was a
huge flame, and everything was covered with a
dense, gray, heavy smoke, while a warm, breath-
cutting puff of air spread rapidly. It took more than
one hour for this dense curtain to clear. From the
buildings, only debris remained. Metallic construc-
tions stuck out of the ground, shapeless and
melted.
The tall trees were no more than burned trunks.
At the point of impact, the ground was . . . fur-
rowed with deep crevasses, actually burning in
some points and dug as if subjected to an enor-
mous pressure. The cars parked in the street were
reduced to debris or violently thrust by the explo-
sion against the houses on fire. The concrete train
station had partly collapsed. The locomotives had
resisted the blow, but the smashed and tipped-over
[railcars] showed their insides.14
National Socialist Rockets:The Legacy—V-2 rockets armed with conventional explosives were used with considerable
effect against London and other cities. Over 3,000 V-2s struck their targets without warning after being launched from
sites in German-occupied Western Europe beginning in September 1944. When the war in Europe ended, hundreds of
unassembled V-2s along with many of the scientists who designed them and other German rockets (including future
NASA pioneer Werner von Braun) fell into Allied hands. They formed the foundation of both the U.S. and Soviet ICBM
and space programs in the postwar years. The dependence of both sides on former National Socialist scientists was so
widely recognized that when the Soviets launched the world’s first manmade satellite in 1957, comedian Bob Hope of-
fered this explanation in one of his TV monologues: “Their Germans are better than our Germans.” (Bar-Zohar, Michel,
The Hunt for German Scientists, Avon Books, New York, 1970.) Above, V-2 rockets ready for launch in Poland, 1944.of his TV monologues: “Their Germans are better than our Germans.” (Bar-Zohar, Michel,
The Hunt for German Scientists, Avon Books, New York, 1970.) Above, V-2 rockets ready for launch in Poland, 1944.

--- PAGE BREAK ---10
THE BARNES REVIEW
•
MARCH/APRIL 2013
•
W W W.B A R NES R EV IEW.C OM
•
1-877-773-9077
Further confirmation of the Germans’ tactical nuke-
ICBM approach comes from a French civilian who
worked for the Germans during the war.

He said he saw
blueprints for a specially designed rocket-launching site
scheduled to be built near the western coast of occupied
France—a fine location from which to launch rockets
across the Atlantic toward North America.

(V-2s were
fired from mobile launchers when used in combat.)
In addition, he recalled German engineers assigned to
the project boasting that the National Socialists were de-
veloping a powerful new weapon capable of destroying
everything within a 1/2-mile radius of the target—a dam-
age pattern more indicative of a small tactical nuke than
either conventional explosives or a full-size atom bomb.15
Apart from any physical damage inflicted on war pro-
duction facilities, nuclear missiles raining down on U.S.

cities without warning could be expected to take a toll on
morale and support for the war.

A document captured by U.S.

forces in Germany
showed just how precisely the National Socialists
planned the delivery of their nuclear warhead-equipped
ICBMs.

It included a detailed map of New York City with
a bull’s-eye positioned near Delancey Street and the Bow-
ery in lower Manhattan.16
!

ENDNOTES:
1.

The New York Times, January 9, 1945.

2.

Dornberger, Walter, V-2: Der Schuss in Weltall, Bechtle Verlag, Esslingen,
Germany, 1952.

3.

“Nova,” PBS, 1/18/2012.

4.

Farrell, Joseph P., The SS Brotherhood of the Bell, Adventures Press,
Kempton, IL, 2006.

5.

Associated Press, December 17, 1998.

6.

Beschloss, Michael, The Conquerors, Simon & Schuster, New York, 2003.

7.

Irving, David, Hitler’s War, Avon Books, New York, 1990.

8.

Der Spiegel, August 18, 2003.

9.

The Guardian, October 1, 2005.

10.

Farrell, Joseph P., Reich of the Black Sun, Adventures Unlimited Press,
Kempton, IL, 2004.

11.

Ibid.

12.Ibid.

12.

Cooper, Harry, Escape From the Bunker, Sharkhunters International,
Hernando, FL, 2010.

13.

Stevens, Henry, Dark Star, Adventures Unlimited Press, Kempton.

IL,
2011.

14.

Stevens, Henry, Hitler’s Suppressed and Still-Secret Weapons, Science
and Technology, Adventures Unlimited Press, Kempton, IL, 2007.

15.

Henshall, Philip, Vengeance, Sutton Publishing, Phoenix Mill, UK, 1998.

16.

Stevens, op.

cit.

HITLER
Democrat
The Personal Memoirs of Gen.

Leon Degrelle
W
hen retired Belgian General Leon Degrelle—the last surviving major fig-
ure from World War II—died in Spain in 1994, he was in the early stages of a
proposed fourteen volume series of works to be collectively titled “The Hitler
Century.” At the time of his death, the colorful and outspoken—and exquisitely literary—
Belgian statesman had completed some three volumes, but outrageous and insidious in-
trigues by certain enemies of truth in history sabotaged most of his work.

However, thanks
to the energetic efforts of a group of honest historians—graciously supported by Madame Degrelle, the general’s widow—
a substantial portion of his work was rescued and published over a period of years in THE BARNES REVIEW, the bimonthly
journal of Revisionist thought.

Now, that material appears here in Hitler Democrat between two covers for the first time.

In the end, this volume is not only a monumental work of history, a genuine epic, but it is also in its own fashion a tribute
to the man behind it: front-lines fighting Waffen SS officer Leon Degrelle.

Now, for the other side of the story, as only Leon Degrelle could tell it, read Hitler Democrat (softcover, 546 pages, #622,
$35 plus $5 S&H inside the U.S.

Outside U.S.

email sales@barnesreview.org for S&H).

To order additional copies, call toll
free 1-877-773-9077 to charge or write TBR, P.O.

Box 15877, Washington, D.C.

20003.

See also www.barnesreview.org.--- PAGE BREAK ---

20003. See also www.barnesreview.org. PHILIP RIFE is the author of The Pariah Files: 25 Dark Secrets
You’re Not Supposed to Know—Surprising Facts About 22 Famous
Deaths, Premature Burials: Famous and Infamous People Who
Cheated Death and Hoodwinked History and more.