The Einstein Hoax


The Disastrous Intellectual War on Common Sense


By- H. E. Retic


Published by-


The H. E. Retic Co.
West Caldwell, NJ


Initial Copyright- July 1997
Revision Copyright- December 1997
All Rights Reserved


Limited License-


License is hereby granted for the downloading of this document from its Internet Website and the
reproduction of a single hardcopy, a single backup disk, and storage on the harddrive of a personal
computer for the sole use of the individual performing the download. Copies are not licensed for
distribution to other parties. The storage of "The Einstein Hoax" is authorized only at the author's


website. No intermediate storage locations for the files of "The Einstein Hoax" are to be maintained
except as required to facilitate its transmission to legitimate recipients. The rights of individuals to
download these files terminates when the copyright holder deletes them from the Website on the
Internet Service Provider (ISP) host computer. The ISP has no rights to the copyrighted material,
regardless of any conditions it may seek to impose, since it has neither offered or provided any
consideration for such rights.


Equation Considerations-


In order to reliably reproduce equations over the Internet, the author has elected to employ only
symbols that appear on a conventional typewriter keyboard. It should be noted that-


e The symbol "*" represents a multiplication.
e The symbol "^" represents the raising of a number to a power.


e The author relies upon the "No Break" command of HTML to prevent equations and
expressions from being split between lines by the browser's wordwrap function.


Diagram Presentation:-


The presentation of a text containing Tables and/or Figures is compromised by the capability of
browsers to allow the user to vary the size of the presentation from an agreed upon standard. As a
result, it is necessary to incorporate "page break" commands within the text so that embedded
tables and diagrams will not split between two separate printed pades. This will have no effect on
texts read directly from the screen but will cause some of the printed pages to contain a blank
space at their end to allow the tables and/or diagrams to start at the top of the nect page. Ir is
recommended that the printer margins be set at 0.75 inches at the top, right and bottom and at 1.0
inches at the left. Your browser's text size should be initially set at MEDIUM. To test for a suitable
printed page size access Print Size Test Page. If printing does not fill page properly, try adjusting
the top and bottom margins. To copy text and diagrams to a file "Save As" "Complete HTML Text
File".


Chapter Index


Chapter 1 - Introduction

Chapter 2 - Historical Background

Chapter 3 - The Nature of the Einstein Hoax

Chapter 4 - Does the Aether Exist?

Chapter 5 - The Resurrection of Absolute Velocity By Quantum Experiments
Chapter 6 - The Nature of Reality


Chapter 7 - Applying the Lorentz Transformations Properly


Chapter 8 - Generating the Gravity Transformations

Chapter 9 - Dr. Einstein's Error and the Introduction of Curved Space
Chapter 10 - Gravitational Contraction and Collapse

Chapter 11 - Gravitational Collapse and the Creation of a Universe
Chapter 12 - The Space Time Continuum

Chapter 13 - The Nature of Particles

Chapter 14 - Adding the Quantum Effects to Our Understanding
Chapter 15 - Changing the Paradigms

Chapter 16 - What Can We Conclude?


Chapter 1 - Introduction


1.1- As a young man, the author had sufficient arrogance to believe that, while a lack of time
prevented an individual from understanding all of Nature, there was no aspect of Nature that could
not be understood at the intuitive level by a reasonably intelligent and adequately motivated
individual. As a result the statements which appeared in the texts of the time that the effects defined
by the Special and General Theories of Relativity were beyond such an understanding and could
only be treated by mathematical manipulations were a challenge. Inherently, mathematics is a
science of how much and not of how come, and it was the how come that the author wished to
understand. To meet that challenge, the author proceeded to study the concepts involved with the
good faith belief that they had been well thought out and well verified by men far better trained and
wiser than himself. However, the deeper the author probed, the more disillusioned he became. It
became more and more apparent that the effects represented were quite easily understood at the
intuitive, or common sense, level and that the reason that they appeared mysterious was that those
who purported to be experts did not actually understand the subject matter and that their assertions
of its incomprehensibility were rationalizations to cover their own limitations. It turns out that the
subject matter is readily understood by anyone with a good ability to visualize physical reality and
who is familiar with Physics and Calculus at the college freshman level.


1.2- The author's initial confusion resulted from the fact that, while Special Relativity was presented
as the epitome of physical wisdom, initially it was impossible for him to find a meaningful
distinction between it and the Lorentz Transformation-Aether Theory which had preceded it by two
years. It finally dawned on the author that the Special Theory of Relativity was actually the Lorentz
Transformation-Aether Theory without the constraint imposed by the requirement of an absolute
velocity reference (the Aether). Then, contrary to the rules of evidence which would be employed in
a court of law, the academic community forced the acceptance of the idea that, since both theories
had demonstrated that our absolute velocity through space could not be observed, the Aether had
no significance and was not to be used as the basis for a physical theory. This position was taken
even though Dr. Einstein had maintained a belief in absolute time (equivalent to a belief in the
existence of the Aether) for about 25 years after Special Relativity had been published. He had also
warned that the non-existence of the Aether had not been proven, what had been proven was that
its use was not necessary in mathematical analyses of physical processes.


1.3- Both Special Relativity and the Lorentz Transformation-Aether Theory demonstrated that the
observed velocity of light was independent of the velocity of its source. Therein lies the rub. Such a


result is obvious if light is a wave propagating through a medium (the Aether). By abolishing the
Aether, Special Relativity lost the velocity reference the Aether represented and asserted instead
that light propagated as ballistic particles (photons) through empty space. Advocates of Special
Relativity provided no explanation as to how Nature performed such a remarkable feat of speed
control without using the Aether as a reference and instead, they strongly asserted that any doubts
a questioner had resulted from his limited intellectual capacity rather than from a legitimate
concern. That attitude has run into some trouble in recent years, observations of the radiation
background of space have shown that the Earth has a velocity of 300 kilometers per second with
respect to that background, and experiments by quantum physicists have demonstrated that our
absolute velocity through space can be measured in the laboratory. As we shall see, these
observations make an overwhelmingly strong argument for the validity of the Lorentz
Transformation-Aether Theory and the artificiality of the Special Theory of Relativity.


1.4- The author's disillusionment became deeper when he began to study General Relativity. That
theory supposedly explained gravity as a phenomena resulting from a curving of space caused by
the presence of matter. However, General Relativity blithely fails to discuss the most significant
characteristic of gravity, the force which presses you to your chair. Compared to the need to
explain that force and the energy it represents, the corrections General Relativity provides to the
Newtonian orbits of planets, the path of starlight, or the rate of passage of time are rather trivial.
Incredibly, not only does General Relativity fail to explain the source of that force (and the energy it
implies), many texts on the subject actually deny that the force exists. When the derivation of
General Relativity is examined carefully, it is found to contain a fundamental error of a type which
would not have been tolerated if it had been made by a college freshman who was studying
Calculus. Even with that error, the truth of the basic premises of General Relativity (the Principles of
Relativity and of Equivalence) insured the error would not be revealed by observations made in the
weak gravitational field of the Sun or by observations of a distant binary star system. In order to
partially compensate for the effects of his mathematical error, Dr. Einstein introduced the
artificiality of curved space. This concept has had the unfortunate effect of leading a large number
of highly trained astronomers and cosmologists down the garden path and led to the absurdities of
Black Holes, Wormholes, and Singularities. Dr. Einstein may have recognized the existence of a
defect(s) in General Relativity since he is reported to have been uneasy about its extension into
regions of intense gravitational fields.


1.5- The author's disillusionment with the job performance of those from whom he had hoped to
learn led him to study the subject matter by starting from basics using an approach which was
suitable for the analysis of relativistic phenomena (i.e.- velocity effects and gravity effects). This
capability is not possessed by the Tensor Calculus commonly used by physicists and which allows
them to by-pass the need to understand the phenomenon they were investigating. The author
recognized, as does a surveyor who routinely corrects his observations for the effects of ambient
temperature on the length of his measuring tape, that observations made between reference frames
differing in velocity and/or elevation require a correction for the effects of that difference on the size
of the units of measurement he employs. Only after appropriate corrections have been made can
valid conclusions be drawn as to what actually occurs between different velocity and/or elevation
reference frames. The required technique for studying relativistic effects is Dimensional Analysis
which was developed in the 19th century to facilitate experiments in hydraulic engineering. The
Lorentz Transformations of both the Lorentz Transformation-Aether Theory and Special Relativity
provide the information required to allow the use of Dimensional Analysis for a rigorous analysis of
the effects of velocity. To examine the gravitational field, it was necessary for the author to devise a
means of deriving gravitational equivalents of the Lorentz Transformations that did not include the
loop of circular reasoning that caused General Relativity to be defective.


1.6- The real test of an expert's knowledge is his ability to make his subject matter intuitively
understandable to an intelligent layman. If he cannot do so, there is only one possible reason.
Regardless of his credentials and his acceptance by his peers, the reason is that he doesn't actually
understand his subject matter. In the remainder of this text, the writer hopes to be able to pass that


test of understandability and provide the reader with a useful insight into the nature of space, time,
matter, gravitation, and cosmology in a manner which is consistent with the physical laws taught in
undergraduate level physics. The author's tools are his simple minded belief that there is only one
reality and everything we accept as true about that reality must be consistent with everything else
we accept as true and his simple minded belief that Nature is constructed in the most
straightforward manner possible. With that in mind, the author hopes that what follows will be both
instructive and interesting to the reader and capable of raising the blood pressure of the academic
community. Enjoy!


1.7- (Note: A rigorous derivation of the gravitational field and its effects on cosmology is provided
in the author's text "Gravity" copyrighted in 1988. This text was sent, at the time, to individuals
identified as having a reputation in the field. Since then, the author has read some of the
conclusions presented in "Gravity" in books subsequently written by a few of those individuals.
Due to the controversial nature of this text, unless required by the subject matter, the names of
individuals and publications have been omitted in order to prevent their possible embarrassment.)


Chapter 2 - Historical Background


2.1- By the last quarter of the 19th century, the Science of Physics was considered to be nearly
complete. The electromagnetic equations of James Clark Maxwell had explained electromagnetic
radiation and light was considered to be a vibrational wave propagating through a medium called
the Aether in a manner similar to the propagation of sound through air. Using Maxwell's
Electromagnetic Equations, J. J. Thomson derived the relationship between mass and energy,
E=-M*C2, in 1888 when the alleged source of that relationship (Dr. Einstein) was still in knee pants.
(The author has since received an E-mail which asserts that a Mr. Olinto D. Pretto of Italy published
this relationship in 1903. This really doesn't matter too much, what is clear is that Dr. Einstein was
not the original source of the relationship for which he was credited.) A difficulty which remained
was that light was known to be a shear vibration acting in a plane perpendicular to the direction of
propagation rather than a compressional vibration acting in the direction of propagation. Since
shear vibrations cannot propagate through a fluid, it was recognized that the Aether must be solid.
This conclusion raised the interesting question of how material particles could move through a
solid without resistance. Even so, the concept of the Aether was so persuasive that the next logical
step was an attempt to measure the effects of changes in the velocity of the Earth as it traveled
through the Aether in its orbit around the Sun.


2.2- The most significant of the experiments was conducted by the the team of Michelson and
Morley. They devised an experiment using optical interferometry which attempted to measure the
difference in the velocity of propagation of light between two mutually perpendicular directions. To
everyone's chagrin, the experiment produced a null result! No interference effects were observed as
the Earth changed its velocity through the hypothetical Aether by 36 miles per second over the
course of a year even though the precision, accuracy, and stability of the experimental setup was
more than adequate to reveal the anticipated effects.


2.3- Initial attempts at explaining the null result of the Michelson-Morley Experiment produced
unsuccessful concepts such as the Aether Drift Theory in which the Aether was presumed to be
carried along with the Earth, but by 1903 the Lorentz Contraction-Aether Relativity Theory was
published. The key to this theory was the Fitzgerald Contraction which asserted that the length of
material objects, in the direction of motion, was reduced as a function of the velocity of the object
through the Aether in proportion to (1-V2/C2)9-5 but were unaffected in directions perpendicular to
that velocity. It was immediately recognized by Larmor that the Fitzgerald Contraction required an
equivalent slowing in the rate of passage of time. Since, by that time Lorentz had used the known
equivalence between mass and energy to provide the effects of velocity on mass, 1/(1-V2/C2)9-5,


transformations involving the expression (1-V2/C2)9-5 became known as Lorentz Transformations.
Collectively, these transformations became known as the Lorentz Transformation-Aether Theory. A
more meaningful name would seem to be the Aether Relativity Theory, and it will be referred to by
this name where necessary to distinguish it from the Special Theory of Relativity. Under this theory,
velocity through the Aether caused measuring instruments to change their calibrations in
obedience to the Lorentz Transformations. Those changes in calibration were of exactly the correct
amount to insure that, in conjunction with the finite velocity of light, it was impossible to observe
effects produced by our velocity through space (the Aether).


e Redefinition:- Since the Lorentz Transformation, (1-V2/C2)9-5, appears many times in the
material which follows follows, the symbol 'B,' will be substituted. Thus: By=(1-V2/C2)®-5.


2.4- Since everything we experience, including the physiological sensations and behavior of our
bodies, is the result of a measurement of some type, our absolute velocity with respect to space
could never be observed. No matter what one's absolute velocity was, he could always assume
himself to be at rest with respect to space and that everything that was not at rest with respect to
him was moving through the Aether. With the effects on observations imposed by the Aether
Relativity Theory, measurement of an observer's velocity with respect to the Aether was prevented
by the fact that the finite velocity of light made it impossible to determine when two physically
separated events were simultaneous. When the inability of an observer to communicate faster than
the velocity of light is considered, it is simple but tedious to show, using elementary algebra, that
the Aether Relativity Theory insures a null result of any attempt to determine an absolute velocity
(velocity with respect to the Aether). An observer is therefore free to consider that any velocity
reference frame between the limits of +/-C is valid as a base reference frame for making physical
observations.


2.5- At the time, three difficulties seemed to remain with the Aether Relativity Theory. The first
objection was that it did not account for the effects of velocity on electromagnetic phenomena. This
objection was not a legitimate one. The three Lorentz Transformations allow the derivation of
equivalent Lorentz Transformations for all physical parameters, including those of
electromagnetics, by applying Dimensional Analysis to known physical equations. When these
derived transformations are applied to electromagnetic phenomena, the Aether Relativity Theory is
found to be valid for electromagnetic phenomena as well. The second objection was the question as
to why, if the classical Aether is the absolute zero velocity reference for space itself, should Nature
conspire to conceal our velocity with respect to it. That may have been a reasonable question at the
time, but in the interim, quantum physicists have concluded that the forces between particles, such
as between the atoms in a measuring stick, are electromagnetic in nature and are alleged to result
from the exchange of virtual photons. A corollary to that conclusion is that since electromagnetic
effects travel at the velocity of light, matter must adjust its parameters so that the velocity of light
appears unchanged to a local observer. (It is fortunate that these adjustments occur. If they did not,
travel at high velocity, such as the velocity of the Earth in its orbit or the velocity of the Sun in its
galactic orbit, could be extremely hazardous to one's health.) The final objection to the Aether
Relativity Theory is that if the Aether is a solid medium, as required for the propagation of the light
as a transverse wave, matter should not be able to travel through it without resistance. A means by
which Nature may have resolved that objection is provided later.


2.6- In 1905 Dr. Einstein, apparently sensing an opportunity in the alleged failure of the Aether
Relativity Theory to correctly predict the electromagnetic effects associated with velocity, published
the Special Theory of Relativity. This theory was based upon Poincare's Principle of Relativity and
asserted that any velocity between the limits of +/-C could be considered to be valid for use as a
zero velocity reference for the purpose of physical observations. The Special Theory of Relativity
provided the same transformations for mass, length, and time as did the Aether Relativity Theory
published two years earlier. Under both approaches, any inconsistencies resulting from the effects
of velocity on observations were concealed by the effects of the Lorentz Transformations and the
fact that the finite velocity of light made the absolute synchronization of physically separated


clocks impossible. As with the Special Theory of Relativity, the Aether Relativity Theory allowed
one, regardless of his velocity through space, to be free to consider himself at rest and apply the
Lorentz Transformations to observations made in systems which were moving with respect to
himself. It must be pointed out that Special Relativity did not have the difficulties with respect to
electromagnetic phenomena alleged to be a weakness of the Aether Relativity Theory for the simple
reason that, instead of resolving those difficulties, it arbitrarily defined them as non-existent.


2.7- When one compares the Aether Relativity Theory and Special Relativity objectively, one finds
that they are identical theories and differ only in philosophical interpretation. Under the Aether
Relativity Theory, space is filled with a medium called the Aether which acts as the framework for
the Universe and our velocity through that Aether is concealed by the effects described above.
Under Special Relativity, the absolute velocity reference represented by the Aether is omitted since
it does not appear in the mathematics. Both theories conclude that the effects of velocity on
measuring instruments (including the physiological sensors of our bodies) and the finite velocity of
light make it appear to any observer that he is at rest and that everything having a velocity relative
to him is in motion. It should be obvious to all that the Aether Relativity Theory is a special case
solution of the Special Theory of Relativity in which one of the infinite number of zero velocity
references frames considered to be valid under Special Relativity is the correct one even though
one cannot determine his velocity with respect to it. Special Relativity takes the position that, since
our velocity with respect to an absolute spatial reference cannot be determined by observation, it is
meaningless to consider the existence of an absolute velocity reference as part of physical theory.
As we shall see, not only can our absolute spatial velocity be measured, asserting that it can't
violates a basic rule. One should be extremely careful in declaring something to be impossible.
Invariably as soon as such a declaration is made, some damned fool will come along and do it.


2.8- Recognition that our absolute velocity through space cannot be measured is a far cry from a
proof that an absolute velocity does not exist. If it were proven that the absolute velocity reference
represented by the Aether was not valid, then it would be proven that one of the velocities that
Special Relativity allows to be considered as at rest can not be used as a basis for physical
experiments. Such a proof would also be a proof that Special Relativity was invalid. Apparently, Dr.
Einstein thought the interpretations associated with the Aether Relativity Theory to be correct since
it has been reported that he maintained a belief in absolute simultaneity between physically
separated events (a belief which requires the existence of the Aether) for 25 years after the
publication of Special Relativity. He also is reported to have warned that "we have not proven that
the Aether doesn't exist, we have only proven that we do not need it [for computations]".


2.9- Since the Aether Relativity Theory preceded the Special Theory of Relativity by two years and
was in actuality the same theory in a different form, it was necessary to make a determination
between them. That became a matter of belief rather than proof and, as the multitudinous deaths in
religious wars over the centuries have amply demonstrated, the more unprovable a belief is, the
more savagely men will fight to defend it. Such a savagery occurred in the discussions which
followed. The Aether Relativity Theory was advocated by a cadre of physical scientists whose
primary reliance was on their physical insights and who used their mathematical skills to quantify
the results of those insights. Special Relativity was advocated by a different cadre of physicists
who had mastered mathematics well but who had found that their use of physical insights, which,
like art, requires an innate aptitude in addition to training, were unreliable. Since talent is scarce in
any field, the advocates of Special Relativity won the battle. The proponents of the Aether Relativity
Theory were ridiculed by having the Aether compared to the Emperor's Clothes in the fable of the
same name. The general public was led to believe that the mystery resulting from the null results of
the Michelson-Morley Experiment was resolved by Dr. Einstein even though Fitzgerald, Larmor and
Lorentz had achieved that result two years earlier.


2.10- The author is seriously troubled by the historical accounts. The fact that the knowledge and
insight to resolve the dilemma represented by the Michelson-Morley Experiment had already been
provided by truly intelligent men (Thompson, Lorentz, Larmor, and especially Fitzgerald), degrades


Dr. Einstein's contribution in this area from a work of brilliance to the rather trivial exercise of
formulating the existing knowledge into mathematical terms for easier use in computational
activities. [Dr. Einstein's famous equation, (dS)2=(dX)2+(dY)2+(dZ)2-C*(dT)2, which is accepted as
the most succinct means of defining the effects of velocity, follows from the fact that the Lorentz
Transformations for length and time are identical to the Pythagorean Theorem.] However, the
politics of the scientific community was not served by crediting Fitzgerald with the conceptual
breakthrough since his approach did not suit its goals. As a result, Dr. Einstein was given that
honor and was eventually proclaimed a deity of the new religion while the true contributors were
relegated to footnotes in textbooks.


2.11- The strength of the feelings involved were brought home to the writer by personal experience.
In the late 1950's, assuming that Special Relativity had been proven to validly represent our reality,
the author began a good faith study of the subject for his own satisfaction. It was rather upsetting
to learn the information provided in the previous paragraphs. Digging deeper, the author borrowed
a technique from mathematics to show that the Aether Relativity interpretation must be correct
because assuming the non-existence of the Aether led to an absurdity. In due course, this material
was shown to a physicist whose specialty was Special Relativity. The man's reaction was
astonishing. He did not take the intellectually reasonable although undiplomatic step of telling the
author that he was an ignorant fool, instead he went into a rage and accused the author of being
“dangerous heretic who must be suppressed". (It is fortunate for the author that this isn't the 16th
century.) His violent emotional reaction was akin to that of the Muslim Ayatollah who allegedly
condemned the author of the "Satanic Verses" to death. The reaction could only have come from an
individual whose quasi-religious beliefs were threatened. They were not the reactions of a man who
accepted Dr. Einstein's dictum that the search for truth must take precedence over the teachings of
established authority regardless of the prestige of that authority.


2.12- In 1915, Dr. Einstein published his General Theory of Relativity. In deriving this theory he
combined a new and apparently original concept, the Principle of Equivalence, with the Principle of
Relativity upon which Special Relativity was based. Simply stated, the Principle of Equivalence
asserts that gravitational acceleration can be considered to be equivalent to inertial acceleration.
Unfortunately, Dr. Einstein failed to recognize that Tensor Calculus cannot be used to derive a
relativistic theory (as discussed later) and employed that mathematical technique in the theory's
derivation. Its use for such a purpose introduced a mathematical error of a type which, if
persistently made by a student of Elementary Calculus, would result in a failing grade for the
course. As a result of this error, the derivation of General Relativity was impossible in terms of our
observable three dimensional Euclidian Space.


2.13- Instead of recognizing and correcting the source of his difficulty, Dr. Einstein took the easy
way out and arbitrarily added an extra degree of freedom by asserting that space was curved by the
presence of mass and was properly described by the non-Euclidian geometry of Riemann.
Objectively, his approach might be compared to that of a mechanic who installs the wrong part in a
machine by hammering it into place instead of obtaining the correct part. Discussions of General
Relativity at the time justified its validity by two rather questionable and irresponsible arguments.
The first argument was that there was no reason not to accept the idea that space was curved
“since no one could prove that it wasn't" (a proof that space is flat will be described later). The
second argument was that, while General Relativity taught that the gravitational field created energy
from nothingness, the Law of Conservation of Energy was not violated since the energy which was
created could not escape from the field. It would seem, from this reasoning, that the Law of
Conservation of Energy obeyed the Eleventh Commandment, "Thou Shalt Not Get Caught".
(Newtonian Gravitational Theory also asserts that the gravitational field creates energy and allows
that energy to escape from the field. That theory must be forgiven for this deficiency because, in the
16th century, it had not been recognized that energy must be conserved.)


2.14- As a result of the defect in its method of derivation, the relativistic corrections to the classical
Newtonian Gravitational Theory provided by General Relativity were not rigorously correct but were


only approximations. At the field strength existing at the surface of the Sun, these corrections
revised the predictions of Newtonian Gravitational Theory by one part in a million. Due to the
weakness of the Sun's field, General Relativity was able to predict, to within the limits of
experimental accuracy, the anomalous precession of Mercury's orbit, the bending of the path of a
ray of light as it passed close to the Sun and the slowing of time at the surface of the Sun evidenced
by the red shift of its spectral lines. The effects caused by residual errors in General Relativity
resulting from its invalid method of derivation are about a million times too small to be observed
within the Solar System.


2.15- It has been asserted that observations made of the red shift of the spectral lines in the light
from extremely dense and/or extremely massive stars and the observed change in the orbital period
of massive binary stars due to gravitational radiation provide the necessary verification for General
Relativity in strong fields. However, in order for such observations to provide that verification, they
must be combined with orbital observations made by an on-site observer. Until mankind has the
equivalent of Star Trek's Warp Drive, observational validation of General Relativity in strong
gravitational fields would seem to be impossible. At present, all that the spectral shift of light from
massive stellar objects proves is that gravity is a relativistic phenomena. It does not prove that
General Relativity is the correct description of that phenomena. As pointed out earlier, Dr. Einstein
was apparently aware of limitations in his derivation of General Relativity since it has been reported
that he was uneasy about the extension of the theory to extremely strong fields.


Chapter 3 - The Nature of The Einstein Hoax


3.1- Since the Special Theory of Relativity and the Aether Relativity Theory which predated it are
actuality the same theory and may be derived one from the other, the question arises as to the
nature of Dr. Einstein's contribution to the solution of problems related to velocity. In a historical
text published in the 1920's it was stated that his principle contribution was the demonstration that
mathematics could be used to derive physical theory and, since mathematics could be taught to
anyone, Science did not need to await the contributions of the "few great minds that arise in each
century" (a category which most certainly includes Fitzgerald) to achieve progress.


3.2- The insidious end result of that philosophy was verified by a telephone call received by the
author from a physicist at a highly respected Ivy League University whose status was sufficient to
have had his work described in Time Magazine. The author was advised that the physicist's sole job
was to search for mathematical relationships which provided predictions and to devise and perform
experiments which determined whether those predictions agreed with observation. It was not
considered to be the physicist's job to provide an understanding of the mechanisms by which
Nature achieved its results. That task was the proper province of philosophers and meta-physicists
and was beneath the dignity of physicists. This viewpoint is reinforced by one of the most
respected theoretical relativistic physicists in the world in a statement in one of the most
prestigious scientific publications in the world. He stated that he was unconcerned as to whether a
theory correspond to reality because he didn't know what reality was, he only was concerned that a
theory correctly predict experimental results. To place that high sounding philosophy in
perspective, both a highly talented musician and a trained circus seal can play "Yankee Doodle" on
a set of tuned bicycle horns and receive the applause of an audience. While the musician would
probably want money and the seal would be content with a fish, the real difference is that the
musician would understand the meaning of the music while the trained seal would have learned to
play the tune through repetitive actions induced by a trainer. Unlike their counterparts of a century
ago, it would seem that today many mainstream physicists do not feel the need to understand the
phenomena upon which they are working but are content to do their work by manipulating
mathematics and experiment using procedures they have learned only by rote. It is left to the reader
to draw his own conclusions as to whether such an analogy is fair.


3.3- The publication of Special Relativity provided a golden opportunity for the majority of the
academic community. Under the interpretations of Nature provided by Special Relativity the door
was opened for the majority of its members who were without the talent required to understand its
workings. At the same time, those with the necessary talent needed to understand reality
instinctively recognized that contradictions were implicit in Special Relativity (described later) and
could not accept the subject as it was presented. (Teachers of Special Relativity report that a
significant percentage of intelligent and mathematically skilled students cannot master the subject.)
The inability to accept Special Relativity, as presented, effectively eliminates individuals with a
strong sense of reality (which by another name is called common sense) from the ranks of those
who acted as advisors to PhD candidates and from the roles of those who perform the peer reviews
which determine what is published in scientific journals. As a result, a selection process was
gradually put in place which insured that only material which did not threaten the validity of Special
and General Relativity was published. Material which appeared to be a threat, no matter how
powerfully presented and how intellectually and observationally valid, was effectively squelched.
On the other hand, material which supported Special and General Relativity, no matter how trivial or
absurd, was readily published. Once this point was reached, it was possible to make the claim that
the subject matter could not be understood in terms of common sense. It could only be understood
in terms of mathematics and there were a limited number of minds in the world who could truly
comprehend Dr. Einstein's work.


3.4- Early civilizations were based upon the invention of agriculture and the ability to determine the
proper time for planting and harvesting crops was very important. In those societies, a small group
of men studied the heavens and learned how to divine the seasons from the positions of the Sun,
Moon, Planets, and Stars. Instead of passing along their knowledge, they kept it to themselves and
became priests who provided life and death information for society as a whole. As a result of their
monopoly of vital knowledge, more and more power and wealth flowed to them and in time they
formed a religion. That religion eventually became the basis of all powerful states ruled by
god-kings. In such a society, heresy was the most heinous crime imaginable, with revelation of the
secrets of the religion to the masses a close second. From the vantage point of history, the
motivation of these priests was obvious. They worked to achieve enormous power and luxury for
themselves at the expense of the peasants. They did not work for the benefit of society as a whole.


3.5- The establishment of the relativistic effects as a mystery which could not be understood in
terms of common sense placed the community of physicists into a position similar to that of those
ancient priests. They possessed knowledge which could only be understood by those individuals
who possessed the appropriate 'yup' in the form of a PhD in Physics. Naturally, no one whose
innate sense of reality caused him to question the conclusions of Relativity ever received such a
degree. (When the writer was interviewed for his first job, he was asked what kind of 'yup’ he had.
Puzzled, he asked for an explanation and was told that, when you spent the money it costs to go to
college, you were not buying knowledge, you were buying a ‘yup’. That 'yup' is required so that
when you seek a job and the interviewer asks if you went to college, you can answer ‘yup’. Of
course, 'yup's from different schools are rated differently, but the prime purpose of schooling is to
achieve that all important 'yup’, it is not the acquisition of knowledge.)


3.6- The Einstein Hoax consists of maintaining the quasi-religious belief that the phenomena
associated with velocity and gravitation cannot be understood by ordinary men using their common
sense. It can only be understood in terms of mathematics performed by initiates who possessed the
prerequisite 'yup's. Whether it is recognized or not, all of the essentials of a religion are present.
There is a deity in the form of Dr. Einstein, who, like most of the men who have had that role thrust
on them over the centuries, probably did not seek or even relish it. It has an established but
unproven set of truths which were revealed by that deity. Finally, it is protected by selected
defenders of the faith who, in this case, act through the peer review process to insure that heresy in
any form is never published. The motive for the maintaining of the Einstein Hoax is rather obvious,
it's money. Society expends a large sums supporting this priesthood through tuitions paid by


parents and grants by governments and industry. The donors believe they are paying for the
teaching of the young, however, that teaching is mostly done by graduate students who are seeking
their own 'yup's. The established possessors of the necessary 'yup's spend most of their time in
research because, not only is that activity more interesting, it serves to advance their tenure
protected careers. Should Special and/or General Relativity be shown to be fundamentally flawed,
the careers of Relativists, most Cosmologists, and those working on Quantum Gravity and/or
Unified Field Theory will have been wasted.


3.7- In the material which follows, the author will attempt to provide and justify the heresy required

to remake Relativity Theory into a subject which both can be understood at the undergraduate level
in terms of common sense and which will eliminate glaring defects in our current understanding of
the fundamental principles of Nature and of Cosmology.


Chapter 4 - Does The Aether Exist?


4.1- Since the conclusion that the Aether does not exist is based upon unproven assertions on the
part of key members of the community of physical scientists rather than upon evidence which
would be admissible in a court of law, the subject must be examined with extreme care to guard
against the possibility that evidence which would support its existence has not been knowingly or
unknowingly suppressed. Remember, there are strong political reasons which act to bias the
judgment of the academic community against the concept of the Aether. Determining whether the
Aether exists requires asking questions which are readily answered by one interpretation, and
which seem unanswerable by the other. Such questions encounter strong resistance when asked.
In addition to those questions, experiments performed by quantum physicists have demonstrated
the feasibility both of measuring the absolute velocity of an experimental setup through space and
of communicating at velocities greater than the velocity of light. Achieving these results requires
only minor modifications to their experimental arrangements.


4.2- How Does Light "Know" How Fast to Travel?:- This question arises from the fact that the
velocity of light is independent of the velocity of its source. Under the interpretation of reality
provided by Special Relativity, light is considered to consist of particles called photons which travel
ballistically through empty space. Under the interpretation provided by the Aether Relativity Theory,
light consists of packets(photons) of electromagnetic vibration transmitted through a medium
called the Aether. Since one would expect the velocity of ballistic particles to be affected by the
velocity of their source, Special Relativity would seem to be incapable of dealing with this question.
The Aether Relativity Theory, on the other hand, has no difficulty. The velocity of propagation of a
vibration in a medium is determined by the properties of the medium and is independent of the
velocity of its source.


4.3- Consider a car traveling down a road towards a target (Figure 4.1). On board the car is a man
with a rifle. At the side of the road is another man with an identical rifle. At the instant that the man
in the car passes the man at the side of the road, they both fire at the target. As expected, the
velocity of the bullet fired from the car is increased by the car's velocity and it reaches the target
before the bullet fired from the side of the road. The sounds of the shots travel together at the
velocity of sound in air and reach the target at the same time. The bullets are material particles
projected to the target and travel at different velocities. The sounds of the shots are vibrations
traveling through a medium and travel at the same velocity. Consider next an analogous experiment
(physically realizable) in which a rocket is passing Mars on its way to Earth. At the instant that the
rocket passes Mars, a radio on the rocket and a radio on Mars send a signal to the Earth. Along the
whole path traveled by those signals, they remain side by side and they arrive at the Earth
simultaneously. They travel together despite the fact that they were transmitted from sources
having a velocity difference which could not be compensated at the transmitters since each


transmitter was ignorant of the velocity of the other. Just as the simultaneous arrival of the bullets
at the target in the preceding example would cause a reasonable man to suspect some form of
chicanery, would not the same suspicions be aroused by the assertion of Special Relativity that
photons travel ballistically through empty space at a velocity which is independent of the velocity of
their source. It is difficult to envision a means by which the independence of their velocities from
the velocities of their sources could occur unless photons were wavelike disturbances propagating
through a medium. To date no explanations, other than the reliance on some form of magic, have
been provided by the proponents of Special Relativity. Instead, they have shouted down the
question whenever it was raised.


Sound Stationary and Moving Guns Are Fired Simultaneously


Bullet A Bullets Leave Gun Barrels at Velocity Vg
Bullet From Car Travels At Velocity Vg +Ve
i Target Bullet From Stationary Gun Travels at Velocity Vg


Sond sounds of Both Guns Travel at Velocity of sound, C


Moving Car With Gun Bullet From Car Arrives at Target
a


SS


Stationary Gun


Before Bullet From Stationary Gun


sounds of Both Gunshots Arrive
at Target Simultaneously


Rocket Passes Mars at Velocity Vy on Way to
signal From Mars Earth. Signals Are Sent From Mars to Earth
and From Rocket to Earth at Instant That
Rocket Passes Mars. Signals Travel Together
signal From Rocket and Arrive at Earth at Same Time.


Conclusion:- Barring Magic, The Independence of Velocity of Light and Velocity of Its
Source Implies That Light Propagates as a Disturbance in a Medium (ie. the Aether).


Figure 4.1- The Propagation of Electromagnetic Radiation


4.4- Why Does Light Travel at the Velocity of C?:- Current orthodoxy asserts that the Aether is not
required to explain the propagation of light at its velocity of C. All that is required is the magnetic
permeability, u', and the dielectric constant, e', of space. The velocity of light is then determined by
the expression C=(u'*e')9-5. As an analogy, if one strikes the end of a steel rod with a hammer, the
sound of the blow propagates along the rod at a velocity, V, determined by the elasticity, e, and the
density, d, of the rod in accordance with the expression V=1/(e*d)°-5. If one accepts the above
explanation for the velocity of light, consistency would require that he be willing to accept the
conclusion that, since the propagation of sound at its velocity of V requires only the elasticity and
density of the rod, the rod itself may be removed and only its elasticity and density retained to
explain the propagation of the sound of the blow at the velocity V. While such a conclusion is
obviously silly with respect to the rod, somehow it does not seem silly to Relativists when it is
applied to Special Relativity's interpretation of the propagation of light.


4.5- How Does the Speed of a Clock After a Change in Velocity Compare with its Speed Before the
Velocity Change?:- Consider, if your will, the following physically realizable experiment performed
in compliance with the mathematical predictions of Special Relativity Theory and/or the Aether


Relativity Theory. There are two locations, perhaps the Earth (reference frame A) and Mars
(reference frame B) as shown in Figure 4.2 , which are traveling at a significant velocity, V, with
respect to each other. Observers at each location measure the velocity of the other location using
Doppler radar as +V and -V respectively. There are identical clocks at each location which have
been synchronized by radio signal. Because of the finite velocity of light, the relative velocity
between the observers causes each of them to observe that the clock at the other location is
running more slowly than his clock. A rocket ship is at rest on the Earth and contains an observer
and a third identical clock. Both the observer on the Earth and the observer in the rocket ship find
that their clocks are running at the same speed and that the clock on Mars is running more slowly.
The observer on Mars observes that both the clock on the Earth and the clock in the rocket are
running more slowly than his. The rocket then takes off and lands on Mars. The observers on the
Earth, on Mars, and on the rocket measure that the velocity of the rocket has changed by +V. The
observer on the Earth measures that the clock on the rocket has slowed and it now runs at the
same speed as the clock on Mars. The observer on Mars measures that the clock on the rocket has
sped up and now runs at the same speed as his clock. The observer on the rocket observes no
change of the speed of his clock, but, observing that his velocity has changed by V, concludes that
its speed actually did change as a result of his change in velocity and concludes that the change
was concealed from him by the effects of the Lorentz Transformation for Time.


Rocket at Rest in At Start of Experiment Observers on A, B,
Rocket > 4 Velocity Reference and Rocket Compare Speeds of Their Clocks
Frame A
At End of Experiment Observers on A, B,
Velocity Relative Velocity Velocity and Rocket compare speeds of Their Clocks


Refi A Between A andB Reference B
iiiki All Observers Agree That


Rocket changed Velocity


Conditions at Siart of Experiment
Observer on A Asserts That


Clock on Rocket Slowed
Rocket at Rest in


Velocity Reference Observer on B Asserts That
Frame B Clock on Rocket Sped Up


Velocity Relative Velocity Velocity Observer on Rocket Asserts That Clock on
Reference A Between A andB Reference B Rocket Changed Speed Due to Change in
Velocity But That The Change Cannot Be


Conditions at End of Experiment Detected Due to Relativistic Effects


All observations were made in unaccelerated reference frames
insuring that relativistic velocity transformation are applicable.


Figure 4.2 - Rocket-Clock Experiment


4.6- With respect to the speed of the clock, the observer on the Earth asserts that the speed of the
clock on the rocket slowed, the observer on Mars asserts that the speed of the clock on the rocket
increased, and the observer on the rocket agrees that the speed of his clock has changed but
recognizes that the change is concealed from him by relativistic effects. There is one test result
upon which all three observers agree and which therefore must be accepted as observationally
verified. The change in velocity of the rocket produced a change in the speed of its clock. Under the
interpretations of the Aether Relativity Theory there is no conceptual difficulty. The change in the
velocity of the rocket caused the speed of its clock to change uniquely, but the nature of that
change is concealed from observation. The concepts of Special Relativity, however, produce an


absurdity. One event, the change in the velocity of the rocket, has produced two different and
mutually exclusive results. The change in velocity of the rocket has caused its clock to both slow
down and to speed up, depending upon whether the Earth or Mars is considered to be stationary.
Since there was a single event, the change in the velocity of the rocket, only a single result can
have occurred. At this point, readers who have been trained in Special Relativity will object. They
will state that the change in velocity of the rocket involves acceleration and the Special Theory of
Relativity was not derived for accelerated systems. Such an objection is irrelevant. All observations
were made under conditions of zero acceleration and the Special Theory of Relativity is clearly
applicable. A famous author has been quoted to the effect that the true measure of intelligence is
the ability to hold two mutually exclusive ideas at the same time. False! The holding of two mutually
exclusive ideas at the same time is evidence of a mind that is too lazy and/or incapable of resolving
the inconsistency by correcting one or both of the ideas and who is too arrogant to admit the need
for the correction and/or his inability to make it.


4.7- Enter the Tachyon:- In the 1960's it was recognized that the Lorentz Transformations did not
prohibit velocities greater than the velocity of light. Instead they demonstrated that the velocity of
light represented a velocity which material particles or objects could approach but not achieve
because, at that velocity, the Lorentz Transformation became zero. At the velocity of light, kinetic
energy (or mass if you prefer) became infinite and the rate of passage of time became zero. At
velocities greater than the velocity of light, the infinities and zeros do not occur and it is
theoretically possible for matter to travel at those velocities. Hypothetical particles which traveled at
velocities greater than the velocity of light were postulated and given the name tachyons. For
velocities greater than the velocity of light, the quantity within the square root sign in the Lorentz
Transformation becomes negative and the Lorentz Transformation may be rewritten. It then
becomes /*(V2/C2-1)9-5 , where jis equal to (-1)0-5.


4.8- At this point, readers might question whether i has any physical meaning since (-1)9-5 can
exist only in one's imagination. Indeed, this was the viewpoint for several centuries until it was
realized that the presence of /in a physical equation could be considered to represent a rotation of
an effect into an axis which was perpendicular to the axis of the original coordinate system and was
therefore unobservable. This concept has been found to be quite useful in the physical sciences
and particularly in Electrical and Electronic Engineering since it allows phenomena which occur in
two perpendicular axes to be represented in terms of the algebra normally used for a single axis
problem. To observers confined to making their observations in the real axis, effects occurring in
the imaginary axes are not directly observable and can only be inferred. Since i represents a
rotation through 90 degrees from the real axis to the imaginary axis, as one might expect, equations
containing Ê represents a rotation of 180 degrees from the positive real axis to the negative real
axis and produce observable effects which are reversed in sign.


4.9- While most of the properties of the hypothetical tachyon occur along the unobservable
imaginary axis, it has at least one property whose Lorentz Transformation involves i and
therefore occurs in the real axis where observation is possible. That property is its velocity. (Since
velocity is length divided by time, both of which are subject to Lorentz Transformations, the Lorentz
Transformation for a tachyon's velocity contains /2.) It is not surprising that the tachyon has

never been observed as a particle, since in addition to the fact that many particles have been
predicted long before they were observed, it would not be recognized as a particle because some of
its key properties would be unobservable. It is possible, however, to draw a conclusion as to the at
rest velocity of a tachyon. The at rest velocity of a particle traveling below the velocity of light is the
velocity at which the magnitude of its Lorentz Transformation B, is a maximum (V equals zero).

By analogy, the at rest velocity of the tachyon would be the velocity at which the magnitude of its
Lorentz Transformation is also at its maximum. Since this occurs when V is infinite, the at rest
velocity of the tachyon should also be infinite. Experiments by quantum physicists have shown that
mysterious effects called quantum numbers propagate at a velocities which are significantly faster
than the velocity of light, possibly at an infinite velocity. Quantum numbers would seem to have


something in common with the hypothetical tachyon.


4.10- The very concept of the tachyon is devastating to the idea that Special Relativity is a valid
representation of reality and it was vital to those who had built their careers around the Special
Theory of Relativity that the idea of tachyons be discredited if the Aether Relativity Theory were to
continue to be suppressed. To see why this should be so, consider the logic contained in the
following statements:


e A:- If | had a microscope, | would observe the existence of germs.


e B:- The existence of germs does not depend upon the existence of the microscope.


The first statement asserts that, except for the case where microscopes cause germs, germs exist
regardless of whether they have been observed. The second statement removes the escape clause
from the first statement and it becomes equivalent to "germs exist". Now consider the following
analogous statements:


e C:- If | could communicate using tachyons, I would be able to establish absolute simultaneity
between physically separated locations, measure my velocity with respect to space itself, and
thereby verify the Aether Relativity Theory.


e D:- The validity of the Aether Relativity Theory does not depend upon my ability to
communicate using tachyons.


A little reflection should convince the reader that, if statement D is true, the mere fact that I can
conceive of communicating through the use of tachyons demonstrates that the limitation imposed
on the Special Theory of Relativity by Aether Relativity Theory represents reality. The classical
Aether must exist!


4.11- Since it was vital that the idea of tachyons be suppressed and the fact that they had not been
observed is not sufficient to accomplish that suppression, another approach was required. It was
asserted that communication by tachyons would violate causality. (Causality is a very reasonable
concept which asserts that a result cannot occur prior to its cause.) As an example, consider
sending a signal by tachyon from the Earth to the Moon. If the time of transmission of the signal
was 11:00:00 AM and the tachyon arrived at the Moon at 10:59:59 AM, it would seem to imply that
it arrived at the Moon one second before it was transmitted. Literally interpreted, such a result
would be a clear violation of causality. The argument falls apart when it is remembered that the
clock on the Moon was synchronized with the clock on the Earth by an electromagnetic signal. If the
Earth-Moon system were traveling through the Aether in a direction towards the Moon at a velocity
of 0.81 times the velocity of light, the clock on the Moon would have a synchronization error
causing it to be one second late with respect to the clock on the Earth. The apparent violation of
causality would then be explained as being caused by the Earth-Moon system's velocity through the
Aether. There are only two ways in which communication by tachyon can produce a violation of the
Principle of Causality. The first possibility occurs if the tachyon arrives early by an amount of time
greater than the observed time for light to make the trip. The second possibility is if tachyons were
sent on a round trip from the Earth to the Moon and back and arrived on Earth before they were
sent. While there is a school of thought which suggest that this can happen, it is based upon a
misapplication of the Special Theory of Relativity.


4.12- The "Fictitious" Forces of Acceleration:- Newton's Second Law of Motion states that for every
action there is an equal an opposite reaction. An exception to this rule seems to be the forces
associated with inertial and gravitational accelerations. A force must be applied to an object to
change its velocity, but there is no apparent opposing force to match the applied force. The same
situation occurs when one considers the force of gravity. As you sit in your chair you are conscious
of a force pressing you against it, but, as with inertial acceleration, there is no apparent opposing


force matching it. As a result, the opposing forces required by Newtons's Second Law of Motion for
both inertial and gravitational forces are referred to as fictitious. It is sometimes asserted that the
General Theory of Relativity has shown that what appears to be the force of gravity does not occur
but is a manifestation of the curvature of space associated with the source of the gravitational field.
As we shall see later, General Relativity does not eliminate gravity as a force, it replaces it with the
observable component of an enormous force acting along an unobservable fourth spatial axis. If
one accepts the existence of the classical Aether, the fictitious forces present no conceptual
difficulty since they are acting against the rigid medium of the Aether. Under Special Relativity, on
the other hand, there is no medium for these forces to react against, and one is forced to accept the
existence of exceptions to Newtons's Second Law of Motion.


4.13- Action at a Distance:- One of the reasons the concept of the Aether was accepted in the 19th
Century was the need to explain the ability of forces to act between particles or objects which were
separated in space. With the acceptance of Special Relativity, the Aether was banished from
physical theories and another means of explaining the ability of these forces to act was required.
The result was the introduction of the concept of virtual particles which bounced back and forth to
produce the observed forces in a manner analogous to the production of force between two
athletes throwing a medicine ball to each other. That concept has a difficulty. The mutual exchange
of a medicine ball can only produce a repulsive force between the athletes. In order to produce an
attractive force, the mass of the medicine ball would need to be negative. To date no theoretician
seems to have raised the possibility that such is the case for the postulated virtual particles and
one must conclude that, to supply an attractive force, the virtual particle must be under tension and
consequently the distance over which it can act is limited by its size. If the exchange of virtual
particles produces forces which act at a distance, they would themselves constitute a medium
equivalent to the Aether and the need for the Aether to explain action at a distance would not have
been resolved, it would merely been pushed down one level into the virtual particle. Since the
advocates of Special Relativity have not addressed questions such as these, Dr. Einstein's
statement that the need for the Aether had been eliminated is not true, it only appears to be true
because embarrassing questions have been swept under the rug.


4.14- The precept that electrostatic forces result from the exchange of virtual photons is readily
tested. Such an experiment is diagramed in Figure 4.3. In this experiment, two metal plates are
suspended parallel to each other in a large electromagnetically shielded and evacuated chamber.
The plates are located symmetrically about the center of the chamber. Midway between the plates is
a wire which is capacitively coupled to a suitable radio receiver. The plates are connected to high
voltage D-C sources of equal amplitude and opposite polarity. The high voltages on the plates
produces a strong electrostatic force of attraction between them which, since it acts over a
distance, must either result from an electric stress in the Aether or, in accordance with the currently
accepted concepts, from the exchange of virtual photons between the plates. (A magnetic
equivalent of this experiment could be conducted with electromagnets substituted for the
electrically charged plates.) The concept that the force results from an electric stress in the Aether
is straightforward and needs no further explanation. The concept that the force results from the
exchange of virtual photons is more complex and requires further examination.


4.15- If the force between the plates results from the exchange of virtual photons, then the relatively
large spacing between the plates insures that the virtual photons have a fairly long wavelength and
a frequency low enough to allow them to be sensed by a conventional television set. As a result of
that low frequency, a large flux of virtual photons is required to produce the force level that a high
voltage can produce between the plates. A large virtual photon flux will, in turn, induce a high level
of random noise in the wire located between the plates and will cause a high noise output in the
radio receiver. (The evacuation of the chamber insures that the noise was not generated by ionized
gas molecules.) While this experiment is readily executed, it is not necessary for it to be performed.
If electrostatic forces resulted from the exchange of virtual photons, the electric fields which
abound at various locations, such as between the surface of the Earth and clouds or the voltage on
the picture tube of a TV set, would generate sufficient noise as to render electromagnetic


communication impossible.


Evacuated Electromagnetically Shielded Chamber


Antenna Wire —


Positive Plate Negative Plate


Insulating


Feedthroughs Blocking
Capacitor


Positive Negative
Voltage Receiver Voltage
Supply Supply


Figure 4.3 - Testing for Virtual Photons


4.16- Since we regularly use electromagnetic waves as a means of communication and that
communication seems unaffected by the presence of static electrical fields, it is safe to conclude
that electrostatic forces do not result from the exchange of virtual photons. The only explanation
which seems to remain is that they result from a stress in the Aether. If both our experience already
denies, and a physically realizable experiment will also deny, that virtual photons act as carriers of
the electrostatic force, they are most certainly ruled out as carriers of the magnetic force. If we are
forced to abandon the idea that virtual photons carry the electromagnetic forces, consistency
requires that we abandon the idea that virtual particles named gluons carry forces within the nuclei
of atoms. It is time to go back to the subatomic drawing board. A possible nature of those forces
will be discussed later.


4.17- The Radiometric Measurement of Our Velocity Through Space:- In November 1977, a paper
read at an American Astronomical Society convention in Atlanta announced that measurements of


the intensity of the microwave background radiation of space in different directions showed that the
Earth was moving through space at a speed of about 700,000 miles per hour. The experiments
were conducted by radiometers installed ina U-2 aircraft flown at an altitude of 70,000 ft. witha
methodology which was apparently beyond challenge. The report of these experiments led to
consternation on the part of cosmologists because it did violence to their existing concepts
concerning the distribution of matter in space. An even more significant result of these experiments
was not recognized. The observance of this velocity drives experimental nails into the coffin of the
Special Theory of Relativity because the validity of that theory, in comparison to the more
restrictive Aether Relativity Theory, depends on the fact that it is impossible for an observer to
measure his absolute velocity though space. As often happens, as soon as one declares that
something is impossible, some damned fool comes along and does it. The experimenters just didn't
play fair. Inadvertently, by measuring the velocity of the Earth through space, they demolished the
underpinnings of the Special Theory of Relativity and established that the Aether Relativity Theory
was the correct interpretation of reality. (Up with Fitzgerald, down with Einstein.)


4.18- Dirac's "Sea" of Negative Energy:- In the 1930's Dr. P. Dirac considered the effect of the impact
of a high energy photon (e.g.- 106 electron volts) against a more massive particle. He concluded


theoretically that the impact would produce both an electron and a positron and had the satisfaction
of having that prediction verified by observation. His theoretical treatment had one difficulty. It also
concluded that all of the matter in the Universe would vanish in a small fraction of a microsecond.
Since the Universe continues to exist, it was necessary to revise the theory. The resulting revision
was to consider that all of space was solidly filled with negative energy (whatever that is). The
production of the electron-positron pair was considered to result when the impact of the photon
knocked an electron from that sea of negative energy and left a hole where the electron had been.
That hole represented a missing negative charge in the sea of negative energy and appeared to us
as a positive electron. One might reasonably wonder how Dirac's concept of a sea of negative
energy which pervades all of space differs significantly from the concept of the classical Aether.


4.19- The Characteristics of the Aether:- The discussions to this point, and more particularly those
which follow in successive chapters, imply that, in order for "reality" to have the properties which
we observe, the Aether must have, as a minimum, the following properties:-


e It must be a solid medium rather than a fluid. If it were not a solid medium, transverse
electromagnetic disturbances (light) would not propagate since transverse disturbances
cannot propagate through a fluid.


e It must have, as a minimum, a dielectric constant, a permeability, and occupy a volume since
these properties are readily observed.


e It apparently is absolutely continuous rather than composed of minute particles. This
continuity may well approach a zero size as a limit since it behaves as if it had a "Q" which
approach infinity.


o A tuning fork made of steel will ring for a prolonged period after being struck since steel
is a high "Q" material. One made of lead will merely "thunk" when struck since lead is a
low "Q" material. Disturbances in the Aether do not die out at a detectable rate while
propagating through free space suggesting that the Aether has a "Q" which is enormous
and may well be infinite.


e Material particles must be constructed in such a way that it is possible for them to propagate
through the solid Aether (Chapter 13).


4.20- Special Relativity and Occam's Razor:- It is sometimes asserted that Occam's Razor shows
that the Special Theory of Relativity is to be preferred over the Lorentz Contraction-Aether Theory.
Occam's Razor is a philosophical construct which asserts that, when there are two or more
explanations of a phenomena, the most simple explanation should be chosen. In the case of these
theories, Occam's Razor is ambiguous. Computations based upon Special Relativity are simpler
than those strictly based upon the Lorentz Transformation-Aether Theory for the reason that it
allows the observer's velocity reference frame to be used as the basis of computation rather than
requiring the use of an infinite number of velocity reference frames that would seem to be required
by the Lorentz Transformation-Aether Theory. The downside of the Special Theory of Relativity is
that it requires the acceptance of the idea that an infinite number of velocity reference frames
correctly represent reality.


4.21- The Lorentz Transformation-Aether Theory, on the other hand, asserts that there is only one
absolute velocity reference frame, and it would superficially seem to require the use of separate
calculations for each of the infinite number of possible velocities between the observers velocity
reference frame and the absolute velocity reference frame. However, such a complication does not
occur. As shown Figure 6.4 and the text which accompanies it, the absolute reference frame
cancels from all calculations and observations and the mathematics of Special Relativity are
completely applicable. (This happy effect results from the fact that the Lorentz Transformations are


multiplicatively commutative. - See Chapter 8.)


Capacitor | Plate
4-C Electrostatic Field


Current Meter


Capacitor | Plate


Figure 4.4 - A-C Current Flowing Through Field In Space


4.22- The Implications of Maxwell's Equations:- Based upon the discoveries of Faraday, Dr. Maxwell
derived the famed equations which define the electromagnetic field. According to early texts, he did
this by imagining "displacement currents occuring in space" even though he claimed not to have
and understanding of what those currents could be and when Faraday requested an explanation of
the theory in words, Maxwell is alleged to have been unable to provide it. If the author is to believe a
recent communication, the current teaching is that Maxwell's Equations do not have a physical
explanation, they just are!


4.23- Dr. Maxwell derived his equations based on the idea of "displacement currents" in space. To
understand the reason for considering these "currents", consider what happens when an A-C
voltage is applied across the plates of a capacitor consisting of two parallel plates in a vacuum as
shown in Figure 4.4. In this figure, the applied A-C voltage (which may be assumed to be identical at
the supply and the plates) causes an A-C current to flow in the wires to the plates which is phased
90 degrees in advance of the voltage. Since this is a series circuit, the current in all parts of the
circuit must be instantaneously the same. That means that the current must flow through the space
between the plates, but, since the conventional carrier of electric current (e.g.- electrons, ions, etc.)
cannot pass between the plates, the current must flow between the plates without the mediation of
charged particles. In addition, a magnetic field which surrounds the electric field is generated in
proportional to its rate of change. Similarly, an electric field is generated in proportion to the rate of
change of the magnetic field, again phase shifted 90 degrees in advanceof the mmagnetic field. In
combination, these two phase shifts are 180 degrees, and are capable of sustaining an oscillation
by feeding energy cyclically from one field to the other without the intervention of any other
mechanism. Maxwell's Equations concisely describe the interaction and show that such an
oscillation will propagate as a wave disturbance which is part of the electromagnetic spectrum.


4.24- The difficulty in describing Maxwell's Equations in words does not derive from the equations
themselves, the preceding paragraphs would seem to do that quite nicely. The difficulty arises
when one tries to reconcile them with the "empty" space implied by Special Relativity. After all, how
can electrical currents flow in empty space and how can magnetic forces exist in that space? On
the other hand, if one considers that the space is filled with the classical Aether, the problem
vanishes. One could consider that the Aether is stressed by the application of an electrical field.
This stress reveals itself as a negative electrostatic potential at one plate and a positive
electrostatic potential at the other plate and produces an attractive force between the surfaces
applying the field (space has a dielectric constant). (One could also argue that the Aether contains
two electrostatic components, positive and negative, in juxtaposition, and these components are
pulled apart by the electric field) The rate at which the electric stress is applied produces a hoop
stress in the Aether which stores energy and which we observe as the magnetic field (space has a
magnetic permeability). The rate of change of the magnetic field similarly produces an electric field
which acts on the electric components of the Aether. These two effects are not mirror images of


each other, we observe point electrostatic charges (electrons, positrons, etc.) but do not observe
point magnetic charges (monopoles). As we shall see later on, both the Velocity and Gravitational
Transformations for permeability and the dielectric constant differ significantly. (Viewing the Aether
in this manner provides an explanation for an observed phenomena. If the Aether is sufficiently
stressed by an electromagnetic field, the possibility suggests itself that the stress is relieved locally
by a rupture which generates electon-positron pairs.)


Chapter 5 - The Resurrection of Absolute Velocity By
Quantum Experiments


5.1- While the preceding chapter is probably adequate to convince individuals whose thought
processes include common sense that the Aether Relativity Theory and not Special Relativity
represents reality, it will not convince most members of the academic community. In order to
acquire their PhDs, they have, of necessity, allowed themselves to be brainwashed into submerging
common sense reasoning in favor of reasoning by formal procedures. In so doing, not only they
have they unknowingly suppressed the most powerful capability of the brain, its pattern recognition
capability, and concentrated on the development of one of the brain's lesser capabilities, its ability
to process logic, they have made it possible to ignore aspects of the problem which are not
included in the postulate structure of the mathematics. To convince those individuals, experimental
evidence is required. Fortunately, that evidence has been supplied by experiments in Quantum
Physics.


5.2- An article in one of the world's most prestigious scientific magazines in the late 1980's
described experiments which demonstrated that the polarization of paired photons (generated by a
common source) was coupled in such a way that changing the polarization of one photon changed
the polarization of the other. More significantly, they demonstrated that the velocity of the
polarization coupling between the paired photons was at least 4 times the velocity of light. These
results raise the question as to whether polarization, which quantum physicists designate as the
photon's quantum number, could be considered to be coupled by an observable property of the as
yet to be observed tachyon. If so, one would expect that the coupling of the polarization of paired
photons would propagate at an infinite velocity. Since the energy content of a photon does not
change as a result of its direction of polarization, the Special Theory of Relativity and/or the Aether
Relativity Theory do not impose a velocity limit on the transfer of information by the coupling of the
plane of polarization between paired photons. It should be noted that Special Relativity would seem
to require that such polarization coupling propagate at an infinite velocity. The reason that the
velocity of communication is limited to the velocity of light is that the communication is invariably
encoded in the form of energy and the Lorentz Transformation for energy is 1/(1-V2/C2)9-5 which
becomes infinite at the velocity of light and imaginary above that velocity. The situation changes
when we examine polarization angle. The angle of polarization of a photon is measured in radians,
which is a length along an arc divided by the radius of the arc. As such, polarization angle is a
length divided by a length and is therefore dimensionless. The Lorentz Transformation for angle is
unity for all velocities between +/- infinity. It is easily shown that this conclusion holds true even at
the velocity of light where the determination of the transformation involves multiplying zero times
infinity. If polarization coupling between "paired photons" does occur, Special Relativity would
assert that it must occur at an infinite velocity in accordance even as the more rational of the two
interpretations of Quantum Theory asserts that it does. Although the authors of the article made no
such claim, perhaps because they wished their work to be published, the experiments described in
the article demonstrated both that our absolute velocity through space could be measured
(validating the Aether Relativity Theory over the Special Theory of Relativity) and that
communication at velocities greater than the velocity of light was feasible with minor modifications
to the equipment.


switch Command


t


YP U w a U VP
Detector E l Switch Photon Switch i EE Detector
Source


Horizontal
aa Polarizer


Detector


Coincidence
Detector


U = Unpolarized HP = Horizontally Polarized VP = Vertically Plarized
L/2 is length of path. All paths so designated are equal.


Figure 5.1 - Block Diagram of Demonstration of Faster
Than Light Polarization Coupling of Paired Photons


5.3- In the article it was stated that attempts to use the apparatus to communicate at velocities
greater than the velocity of light resulted in the transmission of noise instead of information. Their
failure to achieve communication resulted from the fact that, while they were obviously good
quantum physicists, they were not good communication engineers. In analogous electronic terms,
they were attempting to communicate by phase modulating a randomly phased carrier. In such an
arrangement, the randomly phased carrier injects white noise that prevents the information, which
is actually present in the received signal, from being decoded. The experiment did demonstrate
that, if the carrier had been coherent, the desired propagation of information at translight velocity
would have been achieved.


5.4- The experimental setup is diagramed in Figure 5.1. A photon source is provided which contains
excited atoms of a type which emit a pair of photons of the same polarization in opposite directions
whenever one of them reverts to its unexcited state. Each of the photons of a pair (left and right) are
sent to an optical switch which sends its photons in one of two directions in response to a
command signal. Depending upon the setting of the switch, each photon passes through a
horizontally or vertically oriented polarizer and is received by one of two photon detectors. (Two
photon detectors are at each end of the apparatus.) The outputs of the four detectors were
compared in a coincidence detector. The purpose of the coincidence detector is twofold. It insures
that the only detections which are recorded are those which occur as simultaneous pairs at
opposite end of the apparatus and therefore result from photon pairs and not from spurious
photons. It also allows the matching detections to be sorted into four categories,
horizontal/horizontal, vertical/vertical, horizontal/vertical, and vertical/horizontal. The lengths of the
right and left halves of the experimental setup are carefully matched to cancel the effects of the
transit time of the photons, the propagation times of the drive signals to the switches, and the
propagation times of the signals from the detectors to the coincidence detectors.


5.5- The resulting detections were quite revealing. An overwhelming preponderance of them
consisted of horizontal/horizontal and vertical/vertical events, with a much smaller number of
horizontal/vertical and vertical/horizontal events. Since the response time of the optical switches
which changed the polarization of one of the photons was on the order of 10 nanoseconds and the
time required for light to travel the length of the experimental setup was 40 nanoseconds, such a
result could only have occurred if the polarization coupling between the paired photons propagated
at a velocity which was significantly larger than 4 times the velocity of light. The accuracy of this
determination is limited by the speed of the switches and by the length of the setup. While it is
probably quite difficult to improve the switches, the length of the setup is, in principle, limited by
the size of the Earth. It is not difficult to envision an experimental arrangement which would
demonstrate a propagation velocity for polarization coupling between paired photons greater than a
million times the velocity of light.


5.6- Consider a modification to the experimental setup, as shown in Figure 5.2. In the experiment
represented by Figure 5.1, care was taken to insure that the path lengths traveled by each of the
paired photons and the length of the signal paths from the optical detectors to the coincidence
detectors were equal. This was done to insure that the effect of any velocity that the laboratory
might have with respect to space on the transit times of the photons from the source to their
respective photon detectors was canceled by the effect of that same velocity on the propagation
times of the signals from the photon detectors to the coincidence detectors. As a result, the
experiment was unaffected by the velocity of the laboratory with respect to any velocity reference
frame arbitrarily chosen to be at rest. In the proposed modification of the experiment, the
independence of the results on the velocity of the laboratory through space is eliminated by moving
the coincidence detector to the left side of the setup and substituting adjustable delay lines in the
signal paths between the left side photon detectors and the coincidence detectors. The adjustable
delay lines compensate for the propagation delay of the signals between the right side photon
detectors and the coincidence detectors and are adjusted to provide the maximum level of
horizontal/horizontal and vertical/vertical detections. The settings of the delay lines which result
from that adjustment provides the output data for the experiment.


5.7- Since this experiment differs from the preceding one only in the location of the coincidence
detectors and does not differ in the treatment of the paired photons, it will also be capable of
demonstrating the hyperlight velocity of coupling of paired photons at the output of its coincidence
detector. For that coincidence to be observed the propagation delay of the delay lines must be
adjusted to be equal to the propagation delay of the signal in the cable which couples the photon
detectors at the right side to the coincidence detectors. The average of the settings of the delay
lines provides the output data of the experiment. If one arbitrarily assigns a velocity of +V to
represent the absolute velocity of the laboratory through space in a direction to the right, it should
be possible to determine that velocity from the average delay, Tay, set into the delay lines. As


observed in a velocity reference frame which is at rest, the velocity of propagation of the signal
through the cable is increased by V and becomes C+V, and the setting of the delay line must be
changed from its nominal value of T,,=C/L to compensate. The velocity of the laboratory through


space is then given by V=C-T,,*C2/L.


5.8- Since the value of V is a number which may be broadcast, the measured velocity of the
laboratory may be transmitted to a series of observers having velocities different from that of the
laboratory and different from each other. If the Aether Relativity Theory correctly represents reality,
the same number will be received by all of the moving observers and will represent the absolute
velocity of the laboratory through space. If the Special Theory of Relativity correctly represents
reality, the number which is broadcast from the laboratory will equal zero while the number received
by each of the other observers will be equal to the velocity of the laboratory with respect to himself.
All of those observers would receive a different number! (If any reader accepts such a result as
possible, the author would like to meet him. There is a bridge over New York City's East River that
he has been trying to sell for some time.) The success of the paired photon experiment of Figure 5.1
insures the impossibility of a result in which the delay line settings would remain unchanged at


Tay=C/L as the Earth rotated on its axis and moved in its orbit.


switch Command


Vertical
Folarizer


Detector


Horizontal
Folarizer


Detector Detector


Adjustable Adjustable
Time Delay Time Delay
T =0 to 2*L/C T =0 to 2*L/C


Coincidence
Detector


U = Unpolarized HP = Horizontally Polarized VP = Vertically Polarized
L/2 is length of path from photon source to switches. Both L/2 paths are equal.


Adjust time delays to maxinuze outputs of horizontal and vertical coincidence detectors.
The velocity of the experimental apparatus through space is given by equation in text.


Figure 5.2 - Block Diagram of Experiment to Measure Absolute
Velocity Through Space


5.9- The experiment of Figure 5.1 can be modified to eliminate its shortcomings as a communication
system by providing a phase coherent carrier for the information to be transmitted by the paired
photons. Figure 5.3 shows a means of providing phase coherency of the paired photons by
inserting additional polarizers at the photon source which are oriented parallel to each other and at
an angle of 45 degrees to the horizontal and vertical polarizers already described. Since the
purpose of this experiment is to demonstrate faster than light communication from right to left, the
switch is eliminated from the left side of the setup and the detectors at the right side of the setup
are replaced by photon absorbers. Data is inputted to the system through the switch at the right
side of the setup. In place of the switch at the left side, a crystal is provided which divides the
incident light into two polarized beams whose axes are perpendicular. The orientation of the
polarizing crystal is chosen such that one of the beams is vertically polarized and the other beam is
horizontally polarized. Each of these beams is sensed by a photon detector and the output of those
detectors is decoded to provide the received signal.


Data Input
45 Degree 45 Degree Vertical
Detector Polarizer Polarizer Polarizer Absorber
Polarization
Ans
Separator


Horizontal
Per Polarizer
Detector
| | Absorber


Data Output


L/2 is length of path. All paths so designated are equal. U = Unpolarized
HP = Horizontally Polarized
Polarization Axis Detector Separates Incoming Light Into VP = Vertically Polarized


Horizontally and Vertically Polarized Components XP = Polarized at 45 Degrees


Figure 5.3 - Block Diagram of Faster Than Light Communicator


5.10- Assuming that the addition of the coherency producing polarizers does not interfere with the
polarization coupling of the paired photons observed in the experiment of Figure 5.1 (yet to be
verified experimentally), the outputs of the decoder at the left side of the setup will contain a signal
identical to the signal inserted into the switch on the right side of the setup. A computer simulation
to determine the level of the signal received at each detector shows it to be more than adequate to
discriminate against noise. As in the arrangement of Figure 5.1, 50% of the photons generated by
the photon source will be received (assuming no spurious losses). Of these photons, 75% will be
directed to the detector which was selected by the transmitting switch and 25% will be directed to
the other detector. The resulting decoder output would then be expected to have a peak to peak
amplitude (ideal case) equal to 50% of the photon output of one side of the paired photon source. It
would be interesting to have such an experiment performed.


5.11- The Paired Photon Experiment described in Figure 5.1 clearly establishes that the Special
Theory of Relativity only survived because the necessary experiments to validate its special case
solution, the Aether Relativity Theory, were beyond the state of the art until several generations of
physicists had been brainwashed into ignoring the fact that, unlike the Aether Relativity Theory, it
contradicted common sense. The idea that quantum numbers, such as polarization, can propagate
at an infinite velocity and exhibit many (if not all) of the properties of tachyons does not violate the
concept that energy cannot be transmitted faster than velocity of light. The transmission of
information does not necessarily require the transmission of energy. Since the energy of a photon
does not change as a result of a change in its direction of polarization, there is no prohibition, even
in Special Relativity, against information represented by the direction of polarization of paired
photons propagating at an infinite velocity. Special Relativity has been experimentally
demonstrated to be incomplete. Its special case solution, the Aether Relativity Theory is the correct
interpretation of reality, and, for the remainder of this text, its subject matter will be referred to as
Velocity Relativity to distinguish it from the relativistic treatment of gravitation which will be
designated as Gravity Relativity. The Emperor does have clothes after all!


Chapter 6 - The Nature of Reality


6.1- Do The Effects Observed Between Velocity and/or Elevation Reference Frames Occur Because


of a Change in Reality or Because of a Change in the Units of Measurement By Which That Reality
is Observed?:- In the 19th century, it was universally assumed that there was an underlying reality


which existed independently of the means by which it was measured. The Lorentz
Contraction-Aether Theory of Relativity accepted this viewpoint, but, under the Special theory of
Relativity, the measurement itself became the reality and the reality beneath the measurement
became meaningless. To examine the difference between these philosophical approaches, let us
consider the implications of a simple thought experiment as shown in Figure 6.1A. In this
experiment, there are two rooms each containing identical clocks which may be interchanged
without affecting the results. Also in these rooms are electrically operated buzzers activated by a
common signal. An experimenter presses a button to sound the buzzers and observers in each
room note the time at which the buzzer sounds. An hour later, the experimenter again sounds the
buzzer, and the observers in each room again note the time. In room A, the observer reports that
one hour has passed between the soundings of the buzzer. In room B, the observer reports that 50
minutes have elapsed. Since the clocks are identical, the philosophy associated with Special and
General Relativity asserts that the observations show that time passes more slowly in room B than
it does in room A. There is, of course, a problem with this assertion, the duration of time between
the soundings of the buzzers was the same in both rooms since they were activated by the same
signal and the propagation time for that signal between the rooms is much smaller than the
difference in readings of the clocks. Repeating the experiment with the clocks interchanged
between rooms yields the same result and shows that a difference between the clocks was not the
cause of the difference in the observed durations.


Push Button Receiver and
: Atomic Clock


Room "A" Room "B"


Transmitter and


Clock Power Atomic Clock


A:- Clocks in Separate Rooms B:- Clocks at Top and Bottom of Shaft


Figure 6.1 - Clock Experiment to Show Change in Units of Time


6.2- The experimental results appear absurd until it is learned that the clocks are of the old
fashioned type driven by synchronous electric motors from an external A-C power source. What the
experiment actually reveals is that the clock in room A is operated from a 60 Hz. power source, as is
conventional in the USA, and the clock in room B is operated from a 50 Hz. power source, as is
conventional in Europe. The passage of time reported by each clock was determined by the room in
which it was placed as well as by the actual passage of time. To measure the actual passage of time


in each room, it is necessary to determine the effect of that room on the speed of its clock and to
correct each observation for that effect with respect to an agreed upon universal standard. Without
such a correction, the term GIGO applies to the experiment. (GIGO is an expression formulated in
the early days of the computer. It means garbage in = garbage out.)


6.3- The preceding rather fatuous description was provided to show the need for recognizing that,
when a quantity is observed using ideal instruments in reference frames which differ in velocity
and/or elevation, it is necessary to distinguish between two effects. The effect of interest occurs as
a result of a change of the quantity itself. Observation of that effect may be corrupted by a change
in the calibration (size of the units of measurement) of the measuring instrument(s) which occurs
between the reference frames. The predictions of General Relativity caused measurements to be
made which demonstrated that the rate of passage of time slows as the elevation in a gravitational
field is reduced. To be objective, one must determine whether the rate of passage of time actually
decreases or whether clocks run more slowly (units of measurement for time are larger) at the lower
elevation or whether both effects occur in combination. Fortunately, a physically realizable thought
experiment can provide the answer.


6.4- Consider next an experimental setup in a vertical shaft drilled into a mountain, as shown in
Figure 6.1B. A pair of identical atomic clocks are mounted at the top and bottom of the shaft. The
height of the shaft is sufficient, perhaps 10,000 feet, so that the clocks can accurately measure the
gravitationally induced difference in the rate of passage of time between the top and the bottom of
the shaft. At the start of the experiment, a signal is sent from the bottom of the shaft to the top and
the clocks are synchronized. At the end of the experiment, a second signal is sent from the bottom
to the top of the shaft and the elapsed time is read on both clocks. Since the duration of the
experiment will be affected by any velocity induced difference in the propagation time of the start
and stop signals between the elevations, the effect of propagation time error is minimized by
making the duration of the experiment equal to four years. This time span insures that the change in
velocity of the shaft through space as a result of the orbital motion of the Earth and of its rotation is
minimized. With this precaution, the difference in the duration of the experiment between elevations
can be reduced to less than one picosecond. Since four years is 1.25*108 seconds, the duration of
the experiment is the same at both elevations to an accuracy of better than one part in 1020. The
slowing of time, as measured by the difference in readings of these clocks, over the elevation
difference of 10,000 feet is about of one part in 3*1013. To an accuracy of better than 1 part ina
million, the difference which will be observed in the duration of the experiment between the upper
and lower elevation results from a difference in the speed of the clocks and not from a change in
the rate of passage of time. We may conclude therefore that the rate of passage of time is an
absolute which is independent of whether a measurement has been made and independent of the
characteristics of any instruments might have been used to make such a measurement.


6.5- The preceding paragraph leads to the conclusion that a change of reference frame (elevation or
velocity ) causes a change in the size of the units of measurement for time (duration of time
between the ticks of the clock) by which the clock gauges the passage of time while the rate of
passage of time itself is unchanged. If such a conclusion applies to time in a gravitational field,
consistency requires that it apply to all other measurements (force, mass, length, etc.) in which
relativistic effects are involved. The relativistic theories must then actually be a means of keeping
track of the consequences of changes in size of the various units of measurement which occur as a
result of a change in velocity or elevation. They do not involve the size of those quantities in the
absolute sense.


6.6- The Nature of Mass:- Throughout the science of physics, the concept of mass plays an
important role. Subjectively, the meaning of mass was brought home to the writer quite vividly
years ago as he stood on a dock while a large freighter was being moored. Apparently the captain
of the ship and/or the tugboat crew were not sufficiently skilled, and the ship was pushed toward
the dock at a speed equivalent to the crawl of a sleepy turtle. The ship contacted the group of pier
supports, each composed about a dozen 12 inch diameter wooden pilings, and kept right on


moving. Despite its extremely slow speed, before the ship came to rest it had pushed the massive
pier supports about four feet sideways and made necessary a significant degree of dock repair. One
only need to observe such an occurrence to appreciate the significance of the ship's inertial mass.


6.7- In the above experience, the author did not actually observe the mass of the ship, he observed
the effects of the force which resulted when the pier supports attempted to lessen the ship's
velocity. Observation of such a force is the only manner in which one can measure the inertial mass
of any object or particle. Inertial mass cannot be observed directly. It can only be observed as the
incremental impulse (force-time product) required to produce an incremental change in velocity
(length/time quotient) and is more properly defined in terms of force, length and time. Similarly,
gravitational mass is observable only in terms of force, length, and another known gravitational
mass in accordance with Newton's Law of Gravitation. Finally, if one considers the equivalence
between mass and energy, Thomson's E=M*C2, one notes that only two of the three terms in that
equation are independent. Since, unlike mass, both the velocity of light and energy are directly
observable, mass must be a dependent variable without existence as an entity in its own right.


6.8- The misapplication of the concept of mass has led physicists to some weird conclusions. For
example, the photon and the neutrino are considered to be massless particles despite the fact that
they represent the presence of energy and have inertial and gravitational properties consistent with
the level of that energy. (In the author's text "Gravity", it is shown that the gravitational mass
represented by the energy of a photon or neutrino is twice that of the gravitational mass of the
same quantity of energy in a the form of a material particle.) The reason that photons and neutrinos
are called "massless" particles is that they do not possess mass when they are at rest. Since these
particles only exist when they travel at the velocity of light, their designation as "massless"
particles would seem to be rather frivolous. More damaging, the designation of these particles as
massless obscures the fact that the gravitational mass of the background radiation in our universe
exceeds the gravitational mass of its matter by a wide margin. This faulty definition has caused
astronomers and cosmologists to spend a great deal of effort in searching for the dark matter
needed to account for gravitationally induced behavior observed throughout the Universe. A rough
calculation shows the so called "massless" particles easily contain enough gravitational mass to
account for that behavior. The inertial mass of the so called "massless" particles also provides
sufficient radiation pressure to prevent the Universe from contracting due to gravitational
arrtaction.


6.9- The classical concept of inertial mass is the incremental change of total energy, (dE), resulting
from an incremental change in velocity, (dV). Because E=M*C2, it follows that (dM)=(dE)/C2, and,
in terms of that definition of mass, the effect of mass is more properly provided by the derivative of
the conventional Lorentz Transformation for Mass with respect to velocity, the Lorentz
Transformation for Incremental Mass. The curves of Figure 6.2 provide the relationship between the
both the mass and the incremental mass of an object as a function of its velocity. It will be noted
that the Lorentz Transformation for Incremental Mass is the slope (first derivative) of the curve for
the Lorentz Transformation for Mass. When the Lorentz Transformation for Incremental Mass is
employed in the solution of relativistic problems, mass has the correct dimensional content and the
discrepancy between its use in classical problems and its use in relativistic problems vanishes.
Special Relativity's artificiality of substituting momentum for mass is no longer required.


Lorentz Transformation for Incremental
Mass and Incremental Energy. It Equals
the Slope of the Lorentz Transformation


Ener
8y 20 — for Mass and for Energy.


or Mass
Increase —


standard Lorentz Transformation
for Mass and Energy.
0 25 = oS


Slope =dM/d¥ or dE/d¥ = Mj
Velocity, V/C
aM or dE


Velocity = V/C
AVC


Figure 6.2 - Lorentz Transformation for Energy and Mass and for Incremental
Energy and Incremental Mass


6.10- The use of the Lorentz Transformation for Mass instead of the Lorentz Transformation for
Incremental Mass led to the false conclusion that, since Special Relativity was derived for reference
frames having relative velocity, it could not be applied to accelerated reference frames. That
conclusion is incorrect. Both Special Relativity and the Aether Relativity Theory provide
transformations for both length and time. Since velocity is the first derivative of length with respect
to time and acceleration is the second derivative of length with respect to time, if Special Relativity
and/or Aether Relativity can deal correctly with the effects of velocity, they must also be able to deal
correctly with the effects of acceleration. Contrary to dogma, General Relativity is not required for
that purpose.


6.11- The Mechanism Behind the Lorentz Transformations:- The Lorentz Transformations provide a
description of how matter behaves when its velocity is changed so that the Principle of Relativity is
satisfied and observers moving with that matter can always consider themselves to be at rest. It is
desirable to describe how these transformations come about in a manner which is consistent with
common sense so that the effect can be readily understood and is not beclouded by mathematical
obfuscation. In order to measure a length, one might use a yardstick (or meterstick if you prefer) as
the unit of measurement. In the ideal case, the length of this yardstick is composed of a chain of
atoms whose overall length is determined by the number of atoms in the chain and the distance
between them. If the velocity of the yardstick is changed, the spacing between the atoms in the
chain may change, but the number of atoms in the chain will not. The problem of determining
lengths then boils down to determining how atoms control their spacing. For example, the two
atoms in a hydrogen molecule maintain a separation of slightly over 10-10 meters and strongly
resist any outside forces attempting to change that spacing. Since the spacing between the atoms
represents a distance of 10° times the diameter of the proton in which 99.95% of the mass of the
atom resides, it is obvious that the atoms have some means of measuring their separation and
applying the forces needed to maintain that separation over what, to the atom, is an enormous
distance.


6.12- In the macroscopic world, there are three means by which distances can be measured by
electromagnetic means. They are triangulation, the radar principle, and comparison of the time


difference between two signals which propagate at different velocities (e.g.- the difference in time
between the observation of a lightning flash the obervation of the sound of the flash). Triangulation,
however, requires the pre-existence of a baseline of a known length, and, while it might seem to
answer the question of how two hydrogen atoms might measure and maintain their separation, it is
not a viable explanation because it requires that there be an independent means of defining the
baseline. Triangulation does not resolve the problem, it merely moves it to another location. The
radar principle does not suffer from this limitation and would seem to be a reasonable candidate.
The recognition, however, that Bell's Inequality shows that quantum effects propagate at an infinite
velocity suggests that the comparison of time difference (the sound of thunder and the flash of
lightning) is a more probable mechanism (circa 2003). (The writer rejects as foolishness the idea of
Parallel Universes.) This mechanism requires the existence of an entity exists which propagates at
a fixed velocity through the apparently empty space between the atoms. Electromagnetic radiation
propagating through an Aether fills this role nicely.


6.13- To bring the process into the common sense world, consider an example in which two boats
are station keeping with respect to each other and with respect to an indefinitely long straight
bulkhead along the shore, as diagramed in Figure 6.3. The only instrumentation which these boats
have to allow them to perform their station keeping function operates by sending sound waves
through the water. On each boat, time is measured by a sonic clock whose unit of measurement is
the round trip time of a sonic signal sent vertically from the bottom of the boat to a plate mounted a
short distance below and reflected back to the boat. Each boat also sends a sonic signal to the
bulkhead and measures the time, using its sonic clock, required to receive the reflection of that
signal. It is then steered so as to maintain that time unchanged. Finally, a sonic signal is sent from
the following boat to a retroreflector on the rear of the leading boat. The retroreflector returns that
signal to the following boat. The rear boat adjusts its speed to maintain the time for the round trip
signal, as measured by the sonic clock, unchanged.


6.14- The time required for sound to travel though water between two points is determined by three
parameters, one of which is dependent on the velocity of the points of transmission and reception
through the water. First consider the case of the round trip signal between the following boat to the
leading boat. While the signal is traveling through the water, it propagates at the velocity of sound
in the water, C. When the signal is sent from the following boat to the leading boat which is a
distance L ahead, the receiving point is running away from the signal at the speed of the boat, V,
and the time required for the outward trip is given by T,=L/(C-V). When the signal is returned, the
following boat approaches the signal at the speed of V, and the time required for the return trip is
given by T,=L/(C+V). The time for the round trip, T, is the sum of these times, T=2*L*C/(C2-V2), or


T=2*L/B,2 where By = (1-V2/C2)0-5,


Water
Sonic Signal sonic Signal sonic Signal fc C Sonic Signal
Retroreflector


- ponic Signals .
Following Boat Leading Boat


Velocity of Sound in Water Equals C


Bottom of Boat


LN X pA


Reflecting Flate


Detail of Sonic Clock Under Each Boat


Figure 6.3 - Station Keeping Boats Traveling at Velocity V


6.15- When the signal is sent in a direction at right angles to the velocity of the boats, as occurs in
the case of the signal of the sonic clock and in the signal reflected from the bulkhead, a different
result occurs. While the signal is en route, the receiving point moves laterally by an amount
determined by the velocity of the boat and the time for the signal to make the round trip. As a result,
the round trip signal has traveled a distance equal to the vector sum of twice the nominal distance
to the target plus the distance that the boat has traveled during the round trip. For this situation, the
distance the signal has traveled during the round trip has been increased by C/(C2-V2)0-5, or 1/B,,
in accordance with the Pythagorean Theorem for the sides of a right triangle. The effect causes the
round trip time for the signal between the boat and the bulkhead to increase by the same ratio and
also reduces the speed of the sonic clock by (C2-V2)9-5/C, or By. With respect to the measurement


of the distance between the boats and the bulkhead, the two effects cancel, and the distance the
boats maintain from the bulkhead is independent of their velocity through the water. Unlike the
situation occurring with the round trip of the signal to the bulkhead, the increase of the round trip
time for the signal traveling between the following and leading boats is only partially canceled by
the slowing of their sonic clocks. For this situation, the round trip time is increased in proportion to
the square of the slowing of the sonic clock. In order to maintain correct separation between boats,
as measured by signals sent through the water, it is necessary for the operator of the following boat
to move closer to the leading boat. He must reduce the distance between the boats by a factor of
(1-V2/C2)0-5, or By.


6.16- To confine the analogy further, let us assume that the observers on the boats can only
communicate between the two boats and between each boat and the bulkhead by means of sonic
signals sent through the water. With this limitation, their only means of measuring the velocity of
their boats through the water would be by timing a round trip signal between the boats using their
sonic clocks. As a result, they would always measure their velocity through the water as zero
regardless of their actual velocity. This is exactly analogous to what occurs in the processes


described both by the Special Theory of Relativity and by the Aether Relativity Theory. If we allow
the boats to communicate by radio as well as by sonic signals, they would quickly discover that
clocks which were supposedly synchronized by the sonic signals sent through the water were not
actually synchronized. The clock in the lead boat would be be set to an earlier time than the clock in
the following boat. The amount of time that the leading clock is early would provide the information
required to calculate the velocity of the boats through the water just as the ability to communicate
at a velocity significantly greater than the velocity of light would allow us to determine our absolute
velocity through space by establishing an absolute time reference. (Obviously, real clocks do not
function in the manner of the sonic clock described above, but they obey the same Lorentz
Transformation for Time as a function of their absolute velocity through space as does the sonic
clock as a function of its velocity through the water. The Lorentz Transformation for Time will be
discussed later.)


6.17- If we extend the station keeping analogy to a long convoy of boats, we obtain an analogy to a
yardstick in which the separation of its atoms (and therefore its length), and the speed of its clock
both are determined by the velocity though the medium (water or the Aether). The length of that
yardstick obeys the Lorentz Transformations for Length in both axes. As a result, it is impossible
for observers to determine their absolute velocity through space. Matter adjusts its size and clock
speed to conceal that velocity. The concealment is made possible by the fact that the establishment
of simultaneity between physically separated locations is limited by the finite velocity of
propagation of information imposed by the speed of light. We cannot observe our absolute velocity
through the Aether because Nature uses the velocity of light to determine the size of the matter
which comprise our instruments.


6.18- The Impossibility of Measuring the Velocity of Light:- The velocity of light is a sacred and
immutable quantity in the scientific community, no matter where or how or by whom it is measured,
it always has the value of 186,236 miles per second. The quantity is so basic that its measurement
is often part of the training process for PhD candidates. Now for the ultimate heresy. The velocity of
light has never been measured and it never will be measured! When experiments which purport to
measure that velocity are examined, it is found that they violate one of the basic rules of
measurement. When making a measurement, it is necessary to compensate for any effect that the
quantity being measured has on the scale factors of the instruments which are used. To the
author's knowledge, this step has never been included in the measurement of the velocity of light.


6.19- Consider an attempt to measure the velocity of light in which a measurement is made of the
time required for a pulse of light to be sent from the top of one mountain to a retroreflector on the
top of an adjacent mountain and returned to its source. The experiment requires the use of a
precise clock and a precise knowledge of the distance between the signal source and the
retroreflector. Atomic clocks of extreme precision and accuracy are available and are readily
transportable to the mountaintop. Determining the distance between the light source and the
retroreflector is difficult since it involves precision surveying over a long distance of mountainous
terrain. To overcome the difficulty of the survey, it is decided to measure the distance to the
retroreflector by radar. The resulting experiment produces the correct value for the velocity of light.
It concludes that C=C. Unfortunately, while such a result is correct, it is hardly useful.


6.20- While this example may appear frivolous, it is not. It is a valid analog of reality. Quantum
physicists have concluded that the force between material particles is electromagnetic in nature
and it is asserted to result from the exchange of virtual photons. As a result, they are also asserting
that the spacing between these particles is determined by the radar principle or its equivalent and
therefore is in agreement with the predictions of Velocity Relativity Theory. Any attempt to measure
the velocity of light must yield the meaningless conclusion that the velocity of light is equal to the
velocity of light.


6.21- The making of a measurement requires, in effect, the writing of an equation in which the
quantity to be measured appears only on the left side of the equal sign and all other quantities


appear only on the right side. If the velocity of light, C, is to be measured, it is necessary that both
the time, T, required for light to travel a distance, L, and the distance, L, be measured in a manner
which is independent of C. The velocity of light may then be found by solving the equation C=L/T.
The difficulty arises from the fact that both the measurement of time and the measurement of length
involve the velocity of light. The length of the yardstick used to measure the length is asserted to be
determined by the alleged exchange of virtual photons between atoms. The speed of the clock is
determined by the resonant frequency of an oscillating spring-mass system. One of the factors
which determines the frequency of such a system is the elasticity of the spring which is determined
by the exchange of the alleged virtual photons between its atoms. The other factor which
determines its frequency is the mass of the oscillating system as determined by the energy
represented by its mass divided by the square of the velocity of light. Obviously, the equation by
which one would expect to use in measuring the velocity of light is not quite applicable.


6.22- While the author has not attempted the derivation, he is drawn to the conclusion that the
correct equation for the measurement of the velocity of light is a rearrangement of the Fine
Structure Constant, e'*h*C/e2=137, where h is Planck's Constant, e is the charge of the electron,
and e' is the dielectric constant of space. (e' is required if the equation is to be dimensionally
correct. The current practice of omitting it from the equation of the Fine Structure Constant is
erroneous.) With this rearrangement, the equation for the measurement of the velocity of light
becomes C=137*e2/(e'*h). The reality of Relativity is that matter adjusts its size to satisfy this
equation and any measurement which attempts to measure the velocity of light actually measures
the Fine Structure Constant. Since this constant is dimensionless, it is the same at all velocities
through space and at all elevations. Unless a physicist has been completely brainwashed during his
education, he will recognize that the observed constancy of the velocity of light is not mysterious, it
is inevitable and is completely unrelated to the actual velocity of light.


6.23- In Figure 6.4 three velocity reference frames are considered, "x", "a", and "b". It will be noted
that, in accordance with the concepts of both the Special Theory of Relativity and the Aether Theory
of Relativity, the relative velocity of "b" with respect to "x", V,,, is provided in terms as the sum of


the velocity between "b" and "a", Vba, and the velocity between "a" and "x" as the sum of Vax and
Vba divided by a factor, 1+Vax*Vba/C?. The denominator is required to compensate for the effect of


the finite velocity of light on the measurement of the velocity differences. It is the effect represented
by this term which prevents the direct addition of relativistic velocities and which prevents the
observed difference of velocity between any two reference frames from exceeding the velocity of
light. The denominator in the equation results from the limitation that the velocity of light imposes
on the velocity of communication between reference frames. (The denominator becomes unity if the
experimenter communicates at an infinite velocity, possibly through the use of paired photons.) If
the product V,,*Vap in the denominator is small compared to the square of the velocity of light, its
effects can be ignored, non-relativistic mechanics are valid, and velocities may be added directly.
This conclusion will become important when we examine the deficiency of Special Relativity with
regard to accelerations.


Reference Reference Reference
Frame at Frame at Frame at
Velocity Velocity Velocity
of Wy" of " a" of "h"


Vox = Way +Vpa f U +V" Whal C?)


Figure 6.4 - Velocities Between Three Reference Frames


6.24- Consider that observers in reference frames "a" and "b" of Figure 6.4 wish to make
observations between their reference frames. In order to insure that their observations are based
upon the same reference frame, they agree to convert the results of their observations into
observations as they would have been made in reference frame "x". After making observations
within and between reference frames "a" and "b" they convert those results into the results which
would have been observed in that reference frame and communicate those results to each other.
After laborious manipulation of many pages of algebra they find that all of the terms in the
equations which refer to reference frame "x" cancel and they are left with only those terms which
refer to the effects occurring in and between velocity between reference frames "a" and "b".
Reference frame "x" does not exist in the solution, and, allowing that reference frame "x"
represents the velocity reference frame of the Aether, it becomes obvious why our velocity with
respect to that Aether cannot be observed.


6.25- The addition of velocities as defined by the Special Theory of Relativity and by Aether
Relativity produces a conflict with common sense. Under Special Relativity, when one adds the
velocity of one reference frame to the velocity of another reference frame, the denominator in the
velocity addition equation described above insures that the velocity difference between those
reference frames is not equal to the algebraic difference. When the velocities approach the velocity
of light, the effect is so pronounced that, when the algebraic velocity difference approaches twice
the velocity of light, the observed velocity difference remains less than the velocity of light. (See
Figure 6.5A. The strange nature of this curve results from the fact that, under Special Relativity,
observers in reference frames "a" and "b" are both free to consider themselves at rest and that the
other observer is moving. Both conclusions cannot be true, and as above, the only conceptually
valid means of dealing with the observations is for the observers in both reference frames to agree
upon a reference frame which they accept as stationary and to use the mathematics of either
Special or Aether Relativity to convert their observations to the results which would be obtained if
the observations had been made in the stationary reference frame. When that step is taken, the
addition of velocities between reference frames "a" and "b" becomes consistent with common
sense. (See Figure 6.5B.) Under the Aether Relativity Theory, the confusion about the adding of
velocities does not occur, the absolute velocity reference represented by the Aether forces the
observers to make the necessary corrections to their observations.


A: The Relativistic Addition of Velocities. B:- The Actual Addition of Velocities.
This is what we observe. This is what actually occurs.


Figure 6.5 - The Relativistic and Actual Addition of Velocities


6.26- At this point, a conventional relativist will ask why it should be necessary to assume the
existence of an artificially selected velocity reference frame when that reference frame does not
appear in the data. Perhaps the simplest response to that question is to direct the reader's attention
to the problem of navigation on the surface of the Earth. A position on the Earth's surface is defined
in terms of its latitude and longitude. The observation of latitude presents no problem, the equator
provides an observable absolute reference for zero latitude at a location 90 degrees away from the
spin axis of the Earth. The observation of longitude does present a problem. There is no absolute
reference for zero longitude. Our ancestors, however, were practical men. They arbitrarily defined
the zero meridian of longitude as passing through Greenwich England and based all observations
of longitude upon that artificially chosen absolute longitude reference. /n order for an observation
to produce rigorously correct results between reference frames, compensation of the effects of the
difference in reference frames on the units of measurement is required. This, in turn, requires that a
reference frame be arbitrarily chosen as a standard. If this step is not taken, GIGO prevails..


6.27- The Location of Kinetic Energy:-


When a bullet is fired from a gun, kinetic energy is added to the projectile by the expanding gases in
the gun barrel. That kinetic energy is eventually imparted to the target, but during the time of the
bullet's flight, it travels with the bullet. The Lorentz Transformations may be used to determine the
location of that kinetic energy. That determination is readily made with the use of a thought
experiment. Consider that the mass equivalent energy of each particle composing the bullet has
been stored in ideal massless springs by compressing and tying them, as shown in Figure 6.6.
Since the action of the spring is one dimensional, energy is stored along a single axis. Consider
next that the particles in the bullet consist of three springs with identical energies of compression
mounted orthogonal to each other with one of each set of springs being parallel to the bullet's
projected path. Since, for our thought experiment, the springs themselves are considered to be
massless, the only mass the particles in the bullet possess is the energy stored by the compression
of the three springs.


Eq = eq * (1 - ¥4/02)0.5
ep= fp* (dlp)?


F orf =fy*(dlpyV2
(aL) or (a) sA Fr * (dL )/2


Relaxed [tS aig Ep=Fp*(dLy)/2
Ep =ep*(1- V2/C2)0.5


Spring Spring


Spring is considered to be ideal and massless
with only the energy stored in the spring
having inertial mass.


Energy From Parallel Spring
to Stress Disk in Space
Ep *v2iCAy-¥2iC40.5


Disk of Stress in Aether which is
Perpendicular to Velocity Vector
and Moves With Object.


Velocity Vector
ET


"Stationary" Reference Frame "Moving" Reference Frame


Object consisting of energy stored in three mutually perpendicular springs as observed in
"moving" and" stationary" reference frames. When local reference frame is "stationary",
er= Er and ep = Ep.


In moving object, energy stored in the transverse springs is increased in proportion to the sum
of the stored energy plus its kinetic energy.

The energy stored in the parallel spring is reduced in proportion to the Lorentz Transformation
and equals zero at V = C. The remainder of the stored energy and the kinetic energy of the
parallel spring, equal to ¥2/C2 times the total energy, is transported as a perpendicular shock
wave in a disklike region of the Aether which moves with the object.


Figure 6.6 - The Location of Kinetic Energy


6.28- When the springs acquire a velocity, the acquisition of that velocity causes kinetic energy to
be added to the energy of compression which had been stored in them. Applying the Lorentz
Transformation for Mass and multiplying by the square of the velocity of light shows that the total
energy of the springs has been increased in proportion to 1/B,. The product of the Lorentz
Transformation for Transverse Length times the Lorentz Transformation for Transverse Force
shows that the energy stored in the transverse springs has been increased by the same factor. For
these transverse springs, therefore, it is apparent that their kinetic energy is stored as an increase
in their energy of compression and that stored energy is returned when the bullet is brought to rest.
In the parallel axis, the situation is more subtle. The product of the Lorentz Transformation for
Parallel Force times the Lorentz Transformation for Parallel Length, and therefore the total energy
transported within the spring itself, has been decreased by the factor B, even though the total


energy transported by the energy stored in the parallel spring has been increased by the factor


1/B,. For this to occur, the acquisition of velocity by the parallel spring requires that an amount of
energy equal to V2/(C2*B,), times the energy stored in the parallel spring leave that spring and yet
travel along with it. The motion of the parallel spring must cause the energy that has left the parallel
spring to be stored in a disk shaped region of space located in a plane perpendicular to the velocity
vector and which moves with the parallel spring. For that energy to be stored, the Aether must be
distorted and stressed in the region involved. For Newton's Laws of Motion to be valid, the
interchange of energy between the source/sink of kinetic energy and both the springs and the disk
shaped distortion and stress in the Aether must occur at 100% efficiency. It also follows that the
inertial forces associated with a change in velocity are not fictitious as modern physicists would
have you believe, they are, like the force of gravity, a real force exerted against the Aether.


6.29- A Model for the Neutrino? In the previous paragraphs it was pointed out that the Lorentz
Transformations for Force and Length require that part of the rest mass energy and all of the kinetic
energy associated with energy stored in a direction parallel to the velocity vector must be
transported in a disk shaped region of stressed space moving with that energy. One would
conclude, however, that if the original rest mass energy were greater than zero, the energy stored in
the disk would become infinite, exactly as would the energy stored in a direction perpendicular to
the velocity vector.


6.30- Let us consider a situation in which the rest mass energy is stored only in a direction parallel
to the velocity vector. As shown in Figure 6.6, the energy stored in the spring is given by
E,=e,*(1-V2/C2)0-5 and the energy stored in the disk of stressed space is given by
Ey=e,,*(V/C)2/(1-V2/C2)9-5. Now let us consider that the amount of the original rest mass energy is
reduced as a function of the velocity, V;, to be attained (a series of experiments is required, one for
each of the final velocities, V;) so that the energy in the disk will approach the nominal rest mass
energy, ep, asthe V; of the individual experiments approaches C. This can be achieved by
reducing the initial rest mass energy, ep in proportion to (1-V;2/C2)°-5. The expression for the
energy transported by the spring for each of the values of V; becomes E,=e,*(1-V;?/C2) and the
energy transported by the disk of stressed space for each of the values of V; becomes e,*(V/C)2.


6.31:- Let is now consider values of V; which approach the value of C as a limit. As V; approaches
C, the portion of the total energy stored in the spring approaches zero as a limit while the portion of
the energy which is stored in the disk approaches the original rest mass energy as a limit. A direct
determination of the energy in the spring when V; equals C is obvious, it is zero. A direct
determination of the energy in the disk would appear to be meaningless since it would involve the
multiplication of zero by infinity and, as a result, can have any value between the limits of +/-
infinity. The actual value can be determined however by using the same procedure as is used in
integral calculus, allowing V; to approach infinitesimally close to C and determining the amount
energy in the disk when the velocity of C is a limit. This approach allows us to conclude that, when
V; is equal to C, all of the energy is stored in the stressed disk in space and none of the energy is
stored in the spring. In the case under consideration, the amount of the energy stored in the disk is
equal to the energy e,. We have now described a particle Figure 6.7 which does not have a charge,
possess no rest mass, travels at the velocity of light and transports energy and momentum. Has a
neutrino been described? The author believes it has.


Centerline of Disk of
Stressed Space Travelling
at Velocity of Light.


Neutrino
0.7074 Times


Peak Amplitude
Direction of


Propagation


Edge View of Neutrino
On Axis View is Circular


Velocity of Disk of
stressed Space Traveling
at Velocity of C


Figure 6.7 - Instantaneous Side View of Neutrino


6.32- How Could Such a Neutrino be Launched and/or Absorbed? The mechanism of launching or
absorbing a neutrino which was constructed as described in the proceeding two paragraphs might
seem to pose a conceptual problem. This would be the case if the formation of the neutrino
involved an acceleration from rest to the velocity of light and/or if the absorption of the neutrino
involved a deceleration from the velocity of light to the rest velocity. There is no conceptual
difficulty however if the neutrino were formed or absorbed already traveling at the velocity of light.
Such an emission/absorption characteristic is already known. When photons are emitted or
absorbed, the process involved behaves in exactly this manner, at least when observed for a time
which is longer than the period of the photon. One would expect such neutrinos to have a discrete
frequency just as the photon has a discrete frequency and one would expect it to be emitted and
absorbed in discrete quasi-spectral lines analogous to the absorption and emission of the spectral
lines of photons from atoms. If neutrinos are emitted by nuclear processes in a star, frequency
shifts due to thermal Doppler and of gravitational time dilation should greatly reduce the observable
emission of neutrinos by a star. At present, experimenters are trying to account for the fact that the
neutrino emission from the Sun is about a third of what they expect. Perhaps the emission
spectrum of the neutrinos is sufficiently broadened so as to prevent their detection by present
methods.


Chapter 7 - Applying the Lorentz Transformations
Properly


7.1- In the gravitational field, it has been predicted and experimentally verified that differences in
elevation result in differences in the observed rate of passage of time. Earlier in this discussion, it
was shown that the difference occurs because a change in elevation changes the calibration of
clocks and does not, in contrast to present dogma, affect the absolute rate of the passage of time.
Since a change in reference frame (elevation) changes the speed of a clock, it is not only
reasonable to expect that the scale factor of other types of instruments also be affected, the rules of


Dimensional Analysis and the Principle of Relativity require that such be the case. If one is to
examine the effects of velocity and/or elevation therefore, it is necessary for him make observations
within each of the reference frames using the units of measurement of that reference frame (local
units of measurement). He must then choose a standard velocity reference frame and a standard
elevation reference frame and use the Velocity and/or Gravity Transformations to convert the
results of his observations into those which would have been obtained with the units of
measurement of the standard reference frame. The procedure is analogous to the practice
employed by surveyors who adjust distances measured with steel tapes for the error caused by the
difference between the ambient temperature and the temperature at which the tape was calibrated.
Somehow, it seems reasonable that physicists should be expected to adhere to the level of rigor
required of the more mundane field of surveying. (It is the change in the speed of clocks resulting
from a change in reference frames that produced the Twin Paradox of Special Relativity. There is no
paradox. A twin who returned from a high speed trip would be younger than his sibling who had
remained stationary because his biological clock would, on average, have run slower.)


7.2- In order to insure that the basic system of units represent directly observable entities, it is
necessary to convert the familiar Mass-Length-Time system of units to a Force-Length-Time
system. (For a definition of the basic units of this system see Table 7.2.1.) Unlike force, which is
directly observable and is a fundamental entity in its own right, mass has no independent existence
and cannot be directly observed. The mass of an object (or particle) can be observed in one or more
of three ways. It can be observed in terms of its inertia as the incremental impulse (force-time
product) required to produce an incremental change in velocity (length/time ratio). It can be
observed in terms of the gravitational force between the energy (force-time product) equivalents of
two masses divided by the square of their separation (length-length product). Or it may be
determined by the energy (force-length product) released when the object is converted to radiation.
Accepted texts on Special Relativity correctly provide the Lorentz Transformations for Time,
Parallel Length, Transverse Length, and Parallel Force. Unfortunately, an unrecognized error was
been made in the derivation of the Lorentz Transformation for Transverse Force. The transformation
provided in texts is 1/B, whereas the correct transformation is B,. The existence of this error is
revealed by the Right Angle Lever Paradox discussed below. (A rigorous derivation of the Lorentz
Transformations for Parallel and Transverse Force is provided in "Corrections to Errors in Special
Relativity" as provided at this Website.)


Table 7.2.1:- Revised Lorentz Transformations


==
=


Force


Length


By=(1-V2/C2)0.5


Quantit Dimensional Parallel Transverse
z a Entity T | —


Note on Table 7.2.1:- Current texts erroneously provide 1/B, as the Lorentz Transformation for
Transverse Force.)


7.3- Two errors in present Velocity Relativity Theory have been eliminated. The first error was
eliminated by the recognition that inertial mass is properly represented by its incremental mass,
M;, because inertial mass refers to effects which occur under conditions where the change in


velocity is small. This correction allows the mathematics of Velocity Relativity Theory, as Special
and/or Aether Relativity Theory will designated from this point on, to be valid for accelerated
reference frames. Indeed they must be valid for accelerated reference frames since acceleration is
the second derivative of length with respect to time and both terms are subject to their respective
Lorentz Transformations. The second error is eliminated by providing the correct Lorentz
Transformation for Transverse Force. With these corrections, it is possible to provide the Lorentz
Transformations based upon a Force-Length-Time system of units rather than the conventional
Mass-Length-Time system.


7.4 A paradox, known as the Right Angle Lever Paradox, was discovered early on in discussions of
the Special Theory of Relativity. As is the case with all paradoxes, its existence revealed that an
error has been made. The error occurred in the initial derivation of the Lorentz Transformation for
Transverse Force and correcting that error eliminates the paradox. (The correct transformation is
readily derived and is provided in "Special Relativity Corrections" available on this Website.)
However, instead of recognizing its existence and working to find the source of the error, the
academic community elected to accept the erroneous Lorentz Transformation for Transverse Force
as correct and seek an esoteric method of resolution. After all, a religion had been established and
it would not do for priests of that religion to admit to having been in error.


7.5- The Right Angle Lever Paradox is illustrated in Figure 7.1. Consider the condition where a right
angle lever having equal length arms in its own reference frame is moving with respect to a
reference frame which is considered to be stationary. A force is applied to the end of one of the
arms of the lever which is prevented from rotating by an equal force applied to the other arm. Since
the lever is observed not to rotate in either the stationary or the moving reference frame, it follows
that the net torque applied to it in each of the reference frames is zero. From the diagram we may
write, for the moving reference frame, Fim*Lpm=Fpm*Ltm and, since the arms are of equal length in
that reference frame, it follows that Fim=Fpm. We should also be able to write Fis*Lps=Fps*Lts, but,
in the stationary reference frame, the length of the parallel arm, Lps» is reduced by the effects of
the velocity in accordance with the Lorentz Transformation for Length, B,. For the net torque to be
zero in the stationary reference frame, F,, must equal to Fps/By. Minkowski correctly provided the
Lorentz Transformation for Parallel Force as equal to unity but the currently accepted Lorentz
Transformation for Transverse Force is the reciprocal of its correct value. This error forces one to
conclude that the observed angular acceleration of the Right Angle Lever of Figure 7.1 cannot be
zero in both the stationary and moving reference frames. The lever, not knowing this to be
impossible, does not undergo angular acceleration in either reference frame and the Right Angle
Lever Paradox results.


Los=Lpm*dl - ¥4/04)0>
Lts=Ltm


Under Special Relativity:-


Fts = Fim* (1 - ¥2/C2)0-


Torques are unbalanced in
Lever as observbed in Lever as obbserved in both reference frames.


"moving" reference frame. "stationary" refernce frame. Tp does not equal Ty.


Lever is moving to right at velocity V with After Error Correction:
respect fo "stationary" reference frame.
Fis = Fim! - V290


Torques are balanced in both
reference frames. Tp = Ts


Figure 7.1 - The Right Angle Lever Paradox


7.6- To by-pass the need to admit that an error had been made and correcting the Lorentz
Transformation for Transverse Force, relativistic theorists devised a rather imaginative explanation.
This explanation has appeared in more than one postgraduate text and conflicts so severely with
common sense that many teachers of Relativity by-pass the topic despite the brainwashing they
underwent in the process of attaining their positions. In this explanation, the rate at which the
torque unbalance of the lever, as observed in the stationary reference frame, increases its angular
momentum is countered by the rate that energy is added to the lever by the force, Fps. In


undergraduate Physics 101 (Mechanics), which is a prerequisite to receiving a PhD in Physics, one
is taught that the existence of a moment requires the existence of two equal and opposite forces
separated by a distance. In this case, the reaction force components existing at the hinge pin
provide the second forces. As a result, any energy added at the end of the lever is immediately
removed at the hinge pin and the rate of change of energy in the lever is zero. One is also taught in
Physics 101 that the angular momentum of an object is the product of its moment of inertia and its
angular velocity. Since the angular velocity of the lever remains zero in both reference frames, the
rate of change of its angular momentum is also zero. The supposed resolution of the Right Angle
Lever Paradox degrades to the statement that zero equals zero. This conclusion is most certainly
true, but it is hardly very useful The only means of resolving the Right Angle Lever Paradox is to
correct the error in the Lorentz Transformation for Transverse Force.


7.7- Dimensional Analysis as Applied to Relativistic Phenomena:- While it is not commonly
recognized, Dimensional Analysis is the most effective tool available for the investigation of the


effects of a change in velocity and/or elevation. Observations are translatable into equations, such
as V=(dL)/(dT). [This equation states that the velocity at which an object is moving is equal to the
incremental distance it travels, (dL), divided by the incremental time, (dT), required for it to travel
that distance.] Usage of Dimensional Analysis is simplified by the fact that only three independent
dimensional entities are required. (More than three dimensional entities are found to be redundant.)
The dimensional content of every parameter encountered in an observation may be derived from
those three entities because each term in an equation describing a physical process or phenomena
must have the same content of dimensional entities. Apples must not be equated to oranges.


7.8- While Dimensional Analysis obviously applies within a given reference frame, the Principle of
Relativity adds the requirement that, with the appropriate transformations, it must also apply


between reference frames which differ in velocity and/or elevation. (For reference frames differing in
velocity, these transformations are the Lorentz Transformations which will be termed Velocity
Transformations from this point on. For reference frames which differ in elevation, an equivalent set
of transformations termed Gravity Transformations is required.) Combining the rules of
Dimensional Analysis with the Principle of Relativity allows the phenomena associated with
relativistic effects to be unpeeled so that they may be understood at the common sense level. To
facilitate such a use of Dimensional Analysis, Table 7.8.1 provides the dimensional content of
various physical quantities. Based upon the earlier discussion of the meaning of mass, the table is
based upon the more rational force-length-time (FLT) system of units rather than upon the
conventional mass-length-time (MLT) system.


7.9- At this point, it is time to consider the observation of the velocity of light in a reference frame
different from the one in which the observer finds himself. Everyone who has been exposed to an
undergraduate level course in physics has been exposed to the idea that the velocity of light is
constant, yet, as has already been discussed, the velocity of light has never been measured and
can never be measured because the calibration of instruments is affected by changes in the
velocity of light. The velocity of light is constant only when it is measured by a local observer using
local units of measurement.


7.10- Consider the case of an observer in the stationary reference frame in communication with an
observer in a moving reference frame. The observer in the moving reference frame measures the
velocity of light in a direction along the relative velocity vector using local units of measurement
and reports its value as its standard value of C. The observer in the stationary reference frame,
knowing that the instruments used to make the measurement in the moving reference frame have
been distorted by the effects of its velocity, compensates the reported value of the velocity of light
in the moving reference frame using the appropriate Velocity Transformations and obtains
c=B,2*C, which may be rewritten as B,=(c/C)®-5. It follows that the Velocity Transformation term,
B,, is the square root of the ratio of the velocity of light in the other reference frame divided its
velocity in the base reference frame. As will be seen, when the behavior of the gravitational field is
correctly described, this definition holds for gravitational transformations between elevations as
defined in terms of Bg.


Table 7.8.1 - The Dimensional Entities Contained in Various Physical Quantities


Quantity Symbol <—s

Force, F
Length, L
Time, T
Energy

| Planck's Constant | H = F*L*T
Velocity V L/T
Acceleration A L/T?
Incremental Mass M;i F*T2/L
Momentum U F*T
Angular Momentum J F*L*T


-=


rrr
iit


4 4
Gravitational Constant |G LATA)


Ergo-gravitational Constant | D 1/F
Temperature & F*L
Charge Q L
Dielectric Constant of Space | e' 1/F
Permeability of Space u' F*T2/L2


By=(1-V2/C2)0-5


Notes on Table 7.8.1:-


7.11-


Current texts erroneously provide 1/B, as the Lorentz Transformation for Transverse Force.)


The dimensional content for velocity is unaffected by the relativistic correction term for the
addition of velocities since that correction terms is dimensionless.


The dimensional content of the gravitational constant is determined from the expression for
Newtonian gravitational force, F=G*M,,*Mjo/L2.


The ergo-gravitational constant is the conventional gravitational constant defined in terms of
the energy equivalents of the gravitating masses. It is identical to Dr. Einstein's Cosmological
Constant and is equal to G/C4.


Temperature is kinetic energy per available degree of freedom and has the dimensional
content of energy.


Evaluation of the dimensional content of the expression for the electrostatic force between
charges provides Q2/e'=F*L2.


Evaluation of the expression for the electromagnetic force between moving charges provides
Q2*u'=F*T2. The velocity of light is given by C=(e"u')®°.


o If one accepts the precept that the exponent of a dimensional entity must be an integer,
there are two possibilities. The first possibility is that the dimensional content of Q is
equal to L, the dimensional content of e' is equal to 1/F, and the dimensional content of
u' is equal to F*L2/(L*T2). The second possibility is that the dimensional content of Q is
equal to unity, the dimensional content of e' is equal to 1/(F*L2), and the dimensional
content of u' is equal to F*T2. The dimensional content for charge, Q, must equal to the
dimensional content for length, L, in order for the Principle of Relativity to apply, and this
value, and its related values for e' and u' is chosen for Table 7.8.1.


It has been suggested that mass could also be determined by counting particles, and, in


response, the following clarification is provided:


In attempting to use mass as a fundamental observable entity, care must be taken to insure
that the observation of mass does not require knowledge of another mass(es), unless that
mass(es) has been determined by an independent means. Otherwise, such an observation


defines mass in terms of itself, an obvious absurdity.


e When one determines mass by "weighing", the necessary independent means is available.
The laws of orbital mechanics allow the determination of the mass of a primary object to be
determined in terms of the orbital period of a satellite and the gravitational constant. The
gravitational constant, in turn, can be measured in terms of inertial mass by means of the
Eotvos Experiment of Figure 8.1.


e In order to determine the mass of an object by counting its particles, a similar independent
means of measuring the mass of the particles is required. This process is complicated by the
fact that the mass of a compound particle (e.g..- an atom having an atomic weight greater than
1, or a molecule) does not equal the sum of the masses of its component parts (e.g.- the mass
of a helium atom is less of the mass of four hydrogen atoms due to the energy released during
its fusion). A mass spectrometer could be employed to determine the mass of every particle,
atom, or molecule of interest, but, as is the case of "weighing", such usage would define mass
in terms of its inertial effects.


e İt would appear, then, that a refinement of our understanding is required. There are only two
primary means of observing mass. It may be observed by the energy released during
annihilation and it may be observed by "shaking". "Weighing" or "counting" are a secondary
means of observation which rely on the primary means for their validity.


Chapter 8 - Generating the Gravity Transformations


8.1- Enter the Principle of Equivalence:- Dr. Einstein made an enormous contribution to our
understanding of physical reality by incorporating the Principle of Equivalence into gravitational
theory. Proper use of this principle results in the assertion that the effects of velocity and gravity
are equivalent and that gravitation is a relativistic phenomena. If that principle correctly applies to
the gravitational field, it must be possible to generate Force-Length-Time Transformations
between gravitational reference frames which are equivalent to the Force-Length-Time
Transformations between velocity reference frames. Once derived, these gravitational
transformations allow the actual effects of a change in elevation to be observed and, as shall be
seen, will reveal far more about reality than one might reasonably hope.


8.2- It must be pointed out that, in most texts (including the writings of Dr. Einstein), the meaning of
the Principle of Equivalence is overstated. It is commonly asserted that there is no observable
difference between a gravitational acceleration and an inertial acceleration. This conclusion is not
quite true. The force observed as a result of inertial acceleration is always accompanied by an
observable change in velocity since inertial acceleration is the rate of change of velocity with
respect to time. The force due to gravitational acceleration, on the other hand, does not produce a
change in velocity, but it is accompanied by a gradient in acceleration due to the curvature
associated with all gravitational fields. (The force of gravity is less at the ceiling than it is at the
floor.) The force which is observed is the sum of these forces, greatly complicating the design of
the inertial navigation systems employed in aircraft and submarines by requiring that they be able
to distinguish between the two effects. The only conclusion that can rigorously be drawn from the
Principle of Equivalence is that the gravity transformations must be exactly analogous to the
Lorentz Transformations. These transformations are readily derived, as provided below.


8.3- Disillusion sets in, however, when one realizes that the use of the Principle of Equivalence in
the generation of General Relativity was based on the observation that inertial and gravitational
masses were identical when evaluated in terms of the force produced by acceleration, as expressed
by the equation F=M*A, and the force produced by gravitational attraction, as expressed by the


equation F=GM,*M,/L2. The most precise determination of the gravitational constant, G, was made


by the Eotvos Experiment illustrated in Figure 8.1. In this experiment, three identical metal spheres
were used. Two of these spheres were mounted in a dumbbell configuration on a horizontal rod
suspended from a fine torsion wire and the resonant frequency of their suspended masses was
determined. The third test mass was placed a known distance from one of the suspended masses
and the torsional deflection of the suspended masses resulting from the gravitational attraction
between the masses was also determined. From these observations it is possible to unequivocally
evaluate the gravitational constant, G. So far so good, but then circular reasoning was employed to
determine the relationship between gravitational mass and inertial mass using the same equations
and, surprise surprise, both types of mass were found to be identical in magnitude. It was then
concluded that both types of mass were identical. Of course they were observed to be identical, the
difference between them was compensated by the gravitational constant, G. The gravitational mass
of an object is actually G®-5 times as large as its inertial mass. Disillusionment set in even deeper
when the author read in several texts that the solution of the equations which led to General
Relativity also provided the value of the gravitational constant. The writers of those texts never
realized that the gravitational constant, G, was an input to the theory resulting from the false
assumption that inertial and gravitational masses of objects were numerically equal rather than
merely proportional to each other.


Torsion Wire


Distance Between
Centers of Mass


All three masses are equal. With test mass in position, torsional

With test mass removed, deflection of pair of masses about

torsional resonant frequency vertical axis due to gravitational

of pair of masses about attraction of test mass is measured

vertical axis is measured. Also measuredis the distance between
centers of the test mass and adjacent mass.


Figure 8.1 - The Eotvos Experiment


8.4- The first step in generating the Gravity Transformations is to define the gravitational equivalent
of the velocity ratio, V/C, which is the basis of the Velocity Transformations. That equivalent is the
gravitational potential, $, which exists between elevations. Using the upper elevation units of
measurement as a reference, $ is equal to the energy, (dE), released as the energy of fall by an
object of rest mass equivalent energy, E, as it is lowered from the upper to the lower elevation. [Its
value is provided by the relationship $=(dE)/E.] It is demonstrated in "Gravity" that the Gravity
Transformations are independent of direction (horizontal or vertical) greatly simplifying their
determination since only those resulting from elevation changes need be considered.


8.5- As derived in "Gravity", the gravitational transformation for time, T, is readily determined in
terms of the gravitational potential, $, and the Gravitational Transformations for force, F, and for
length, L, using the ideal thought experiment illustrated in Figure 8.2. In this thought experiment,
mechanical energy is stored in a spring which is then compressed and tied at the upper elevation.
The spring is then moved from the upper to the lower elevation and the stored energy is recovered
by releasing the spring.Along with this stored energy, the lower elevation also receives the energy


of fall of that stored energy along with the energy of fall of the relaxed spring. The energy of fall of
the relaxed spring is then used to return it to the upper elevation and plays no part in the thought
experiment. Remaining at the lower elevation is the stored energy and its energy of fall. The net
energy transported from the upper to the lower elevation is then converted to photons and
transmitted from the lower elevation to a receiver at the upper elevation and converted back to
mechanical energy at 100% efficiency. Since there are no losses in this hypothetical closed cycle,
the energy recovered from the photons at the upper elevation must equal the energy originally
stored in the spring. If this were not the case, it would be possible, in principle, to build a perpetual
motion machine which created energy from nothing. In "Gravity", this thought experiment is used to
derive the Gravity Transformation for Time as T=1/(1+F*L*$). It should be noted that if the F*L
product is arbitrarily made equal to unity, the time dilation provided by General Relativity is
obtained.


Received Photon Energy to be Stored in Spring


Compressed
Relaxed Spring and Tied Spring


Ideal Photon at Upper
Detector NNW b MW Elevation
f Compressed
NAVA) WW aiea Spine
Relaxed Spring at Lower
Elevation


Energy Stored in Spring Plus Its Energy of Fall


Energy Released by Mass of Relaxed Spring Moving to Lower Elevation
Equals Energy Required to Raise Relaxed Spring to Upper Elevation


Spring Acts As Passive Working fluid and does Not Affect
Energy Balance of Photon-Spring Compression Energy Loop.


$ = Energy of Fall divided by Mass Energy of Falling Object


To Satisfy first Law of Thermodynamics Gravitational
Time Transformation Must Equal 1/(1 + F'*L'*$)


Figure 8.2 - Spring - Lamp Thought Experiment


8.6- The next requirement which must be met is that the Gravity Transformation for Time must have
a property which the author designates as multiplicative commutivity. As an example, when one
goes from the first floor of a building to its third floor, it does not matter if the elevator happens to
stop at the second floor. The requirement that the time dilation be multiplicative commutative
means that the time dilation between the upper elevation and a middle elevation multiplied by the
time dilation between that middle elevation and the lower elevation must be equal to the time
dilation existing between the upper elevation and the lower elevation. Imposing this requirement
allows the time transformation of the previous paragraph to be factored into two transformations,
one for time, T, and one for energy, F*L, providing T=(1-$) and F*L=1/(1-$). The resulting
transformation for energy meets another requirement of a satisfactory gravitational theory. The
Gravity Transformation for Energy, F*L, brings the gravitational field into compliance with the Law
of Conservation of Energy and, in so doing, eliminates a serious flaw of both the Newtonian Theory


of Gravitation and of General Relativity. The Gravity Transformation for Energy shows that the rest
mass equivalent energy of an object, as measured with upper elevation units of measurement, is
reduced by an amount equal the energy released by lowering it to the lower elevation. The total
energy in the system remains unchanged as required by the Law of Conservation of Energy. The
requirement for multiplicative commutivity is not an invention of the author, it is characteristic of all
continuous fields. It is taught in undergraduate courses in Field Theory that the difference in
characteristics observed between two points in a continuous field is independent of the path which
is traveled between those points and, in order for this requirement to be met, the field must be
“multiplicatively commutative". Perhaps more significant is the fact that the property of
“multiplicative commutivity" is necessary if the Principle of Relativity is to be valid. It is the fact that
the Lorentz Transformations are "multiplicatively commutative" which allows the Special theory of
Relativity to work.


8.7- At this point, the determination of the Gravitational Transformations could be completed by a
literal application of the Principle of Equivalence and asserting that the relationship between the
Velocity Transformations for Parallel Length and for Time must bear the same relationship to each
other as the Gravity Transformations for Length and Time. One would then conclude that the
Gravity Transformation for Force was equal to unity and the Gravity Transformation for Length was
1/(1-$). As shown in "Gravity", the application of this triad of transformations to the gravitational
field around the Sun leads directly to the observational results (i.e.- time dilation, anomalous
precession of Mercury's orbit, bending of starlight) which supposedly have verified General
Relativity. Unfortunately, General Relativity introduced the idea that the presence of mass(energy)
causes the geometry of space to be distorted and it was this distortion which produced the
gravitational effects. If the presence of mass(energy) does distort space, some or all of the
observed bending of light and of the observed orbital precession would result from the curvature
resulting from that distortion rather than from the effects of the Gravity Transformations for Length
and Time. The introduction of non-Euclidian geometry into the concept of the gravitational field
thus allows the possibility of an infinite number of geometries in the vicinity of a gravitating object.
The only limitation on these geometries is the requirement that product of the Gravity
Transformations for Force and for Length compensate each other so that the Gravity
Transformation for Energy remains correct. While General Relativity introduced the idea of curved
space, it does not meet this requirement and cannot be a valid description of the gravitational
phenomena.


8.8- Since General Relativity has generated a dogma in which space is non-Euclidian, it is
necessary to disprove the concept. To do so, consider the ideal thought experiment diagramed in
Figure 8.3. In this experiment, a pair of ideal retroreflectors are mounted on opposite sides of a
massive object by ideally rigid and massless booms. Photons are reflected back and forth between
the retroreflectors in a non-divergent beam which passes close to the object. The object's
gravitational field causes the trajectory of the photons to bend as they pass by the object and strike
the retroreflectors at an angle to the geometric line between them. Since photons posses inertial
mass, the deviation of their path causes a reaction force to be exerted on the retroreflectors as they
are reflected. In the horizontal direction (of the diagram), the component of that force on one of the
retroreflectors is canceled by an equal and opposite component of that force exerted on the other.
In the vertical direction (of the diagram), the force components on the retroreflectors do not cancel,
they add and produce a net downward force on the object. This downward force must be balanced
by an upward force acting on the object which can only result from the gravitational attraction of
the beam of photons. The requirement for a force balance in the vertical direction is basic. If a net
force were to exist in the vertical direction, it would be possible, in principle, to construct a
perpetual motion machine. This machine would allow the system to continuously export energy
without any change in its internally and externally observed states. This is a NO-NO and cannot
occur.


Ideal Lossless Retroreflectors


Path of Force of Gravity
Reflected Between Object
Photons and Photons


Massive
Object
Reaction Force on Reaction Force on
Retroreflectors Ideal Rigid Massless Arms Retroreflectors


Figure 8.3 - Bending of Light Passing Gravitational Object


8.9- Conceptually, the bending of the path of the beam of photons can result from one or both of
two effects acting separately or in combination. One of these effects is conventional refraction. The
other effect is the apparent bending of their path because they are traveling in a curved three
dimensional non-Euclidian space and they are actually traveling along a straight line. To the degree
that the observed bending of their path is caused by refraction, the bending of the path of the
photons requires the force of gravity to act between the object and the photons. To the degree that
the observed bending of their path is caused by the curvature of non-Euclidian space, no change in
direction actually occurs and the force of gravity is not acting. In "Gravity", the writer derived the
gravitational force acting upon such a beam of photons and the net forces they apply to the
retroreflectors. By showing that these forces are equal, the derivation demonstrates that observed
bending of the path of light in a gravitational field results entirely from gravitational attraction. A
postulated curvature of space makes no contribution to the photon's path and space in the
gravitational field must be three dimensional Euclidian, exactly as common sense would require. It
is now possible to provide Gravity Transformations to match the Velocity Transformations already
provided. Defining B, as the velocity transformation, Bg as the Gravity Transformation, and Bge
as the gravity transformation of General Relativity, the Relativistic Transformations for Velocity,
Gravity, and for General Relativity may be provided in the same form, as shown in Table 8.9.1.


8.10- If the Principle of Equivalence apples to the gravitational field, a proper gravitational theory
will provide Gravity Transformations identical in form to the Lorentz Transformations for Parallel
Velocity. Gravity Relativity meets this requirement. Its basic transformations are:


F=1
L=1/(1-$)
T=(1-$)


The equivalent transformations for General Relativity are provided for reference. It will be noted
that, under General Relativity, both F and L are equal to unity. Applying these values to the results
of the Spring-Lamp Experiment of Figure 8.2, one obtains the time dilation, Bge, of General
Relativity as its accepted value of T=1/(1+$). The basic transformations of General Relativity
become:


F=1
L=1
T'=1/(1+$)


S =1/(1+$)


The above listing includes an additional line for the Gravitational Transformation for Space which
Dr. Einstein required to allow him to complete his derivation of General Relativity. It represents the
alleged curvature of space made necessary by the mathematical error in its derivation and which
arbitrarily forced the transformation for length to equal unity. It will be noted that these
transformations are inconsistent with the Velocity Transformations for Parallel Force and for
Parallel Length. As a result, General Relativity contradicts one of its postulates, the Principle of
Equivalence. Furthermore, because its transformations for force and for length are both equal to
unity, the effects of the transformation for time are not compensated between reference frames and
General Relativity also contradicts its other basic postulate, the Principle of Relativity. Somehow, it
seems reasonable to suspect the validity of a theory which contradicts the postulates upon which it
is based.


Table 8.9.1:- The Relativistic Transformations


Quantit Parallel | Transverse | Gravity General
á Velocity | Velocity | Relativity | Relativity
[ForceF |
a


Co ee
Length L

Time T

Space S Boe
Stiffness K'


Note 1:- By, Bg, and Bge are all equal to (c/C)?.


Note 2:- Current texts erroneously provide 1/B, as the Lorentz Transformation for Transverse
Force.)


8.11- Deriving the General Theory of Relativity presented Dr. Einstein with considerable difficulty.
He could not make it work in terms of three dimensional Euclidian space. After about a year and a
half of failure, he overcame his difficulties by resorting to the non-Euclidian geometry described by
Riemann in the middle of the 19th century and adding the extra degree of freedom that curved
space provided. The effect of that curvature is to add additional space as elevation is reduced, as
defined by S in Table 8.9.1. This modification allowed him to solve his mathematical equations in a
self consistent manner. The resultant theory provided predictions for the behavior of the
gravitational field which are more accurate than the predictions of Newtonian Gravitational Theory
because they did allow the theory to be relativistic, but the theory contains an error on the order of
$2. That error is about 5 orders of magnitude too small to be detected in the extremely weak
gravitational fields existing within the Solar System or by observations of the spectral lines of
distant stars. The small size of this error allowed Dr. Einstein to predict the bending of starlight, the
time dilation, and the precession of orbits caused by the gravitational field which are now accepted
as proof of the validity of General Relativity without fear of contradiction by the results of
observation. There is an indication that he suspected that his theory was defective since he is
reported to have had concerns about its extension to extremely strong fields such as those
associated with neutron stars. Unfortunately, direct observation cannot be used to distinguish
between General Relativity and Gravity Relativity. Both approaches yield the same predictions to
the foreseeable limits of observational accuracy. The difference between the two approaches can
only be observationally determined by close-up observation of objects having extremely strong
fields, such as a neutron stars. Such observations probably require the invention of Star Trek's


Warp Drive.


8.12-There is an observational test which can be applied to General Relativity and to Gravity
Relativity using current technology. We live in a Universe which approximates a gravitationally
collapsed object. At present, its observed radius is several times larger than the radius of the Event
Horizon resulting from its estimated mass. However, astronomical observations indicate that the
Universe started expanding from its origin as a point source about 15 billion years ago. At its start,
the Universe was significantly smaller than its Event Horizon. Apparently, between 3 and 5 billion
years ago, the Universe expanded through and is now several times larger than its Event Horizon.
Since General Relativity predicts that nothing can escape from within the Event Horizon, the
astronomical observations directly deny the validity of General Relativity. Gravity Relativity, on the
other hand, is more than merely compatible with astronomical observations, the cosmology which
follows from the Gravity Transformations seems to agree quite well with observation.


8.13- As derived in "Gravity", the gravitational potential, $, is equal to R,/R, where Rp is


designated as the Horizon Radius and is equal to the radius of the Event Horizon and R is the actual
radius of the object, both as observed externally. Table 8.13.1 provides the Velocity Relativity and
Gravity Relativity Transformations of the dimensional entities listed in Table 7.8.1 evaluated in
terms of the velocity ratio, V/C, in terms of gravitational potential, $, and in terms of the externally
observed ratio of the Horizon Radius to the actual radius, R/R.


8.14- A school of thought exists which is associated with the Inflationary Theory of the origin of the
Universe. This school teaches that, although the components (stars, galaxies, etc.) of the Universe
are observed to be separating at a high velocity, they are actually stationary in space. It is the space
that is expanding instead and outside of the Universe there is no space! Such an argument might be
acceptable but for two reasons. Firstly, for such to occur, energy would be required to be
continuously added to that Universe from some unnamed source. This requirement is evidenced by
the fact that, if the matter present in the Universe were to elect to fall back in on itself, it would have
further to fall and would release more energy as time passed. This concept suffers from the same
difficulty, but in reverse, as does the Universe of the preceding paragraphs. It cannot reconcile the
observed Universe with the Law of Conservation of Energy and must be dismissed unless a strong
justification can be provided. Secondly, such a Universe would not provide a reciprocal relationship
between the gravitational energy and time transformations, and, without that reciprocal
relationship, the Principle of Relativity would not apply and physics would change as elevation
changed. It would seem that such a concept must be dismissed. The required effects do not seem
to occur.


Table 8.13.1:- Dimensional Content of Various Physical Quantities


Quanity [ymmo | Farle [Teaver | Gravity

Force F 1 B, 1

Length L 1/B, 1 =
Time T

Energy E

Planck's Constant H

Velocity V 1/B,2 IB, 1/B,?
Acceleration A 1/B,3 1/B,? 1/B,°


Incremental Mass

Momentum U B,2 Bo?
Angular Momentum J B,2

Gravitational Constant G 1/B,8 1/B,5 1/B,8
Ergo-gravitational Constant | D 1 1/B, 1
Temperature & 1/B, B, 1/B,
Charge Q VB, |B, 1B,
Dielectric Constant of Space | e' 1 1/B, 1
Permeability of Space u' B,4 1/B,3 B,4
Stiffness k' B, B, Bg


Note 1:- B, = (1 - V2/C2)0.5


Note 2:- By = (1 - $) or (1 - R,/R)


Note 3:- Velocity Transformations are modified by (1+V,*V2/C2) in the denominator as described in
Chapter 6.


8.15- The Source of Gravitational Energy:- When the author was in high school, he asked his
physics instructor where the energy was stored when a weight was lifted from the floor to the
ceiling. The answer given was that "the energy was stored in the gravitational field". The instructor
believed that his answer explained everything when, in reality, it was an admission that the
scientific community did not know how or where gravitational energy was stored and it did not have
the intellectual integrity to admit that it did not know. ("We don't know" would have been a
reasonable answer, but hiding the fact that the answer was unknown is inexcusable.) The author
had, and still has, what might be considered to be the unreasonable conviction that the primary
purpose of a gravitational theory should be to provide a description of the relationship between
elevation and energy which is consistent with the Law of Conservation of Energy. It is the energy of
fall, and the force through which that energy is manifested, which is the only first order effect of the
gravitational field. The precession of planetary orbits, the time dilations, and the bending of the path
of light rays are second order effects which pale into insignificance in comparison. As we have
seen, and as rigorously shown in "Gravity", when they are properly applied, the combination of the
Principles of Relativity and Equivalence yield a description of the gravitational field which is both
consistent with Law of Conservation of Energy and the observed second order effects which are
erroneously supposed to have validated General Relativity.


8.16- The gravitational transformations provided in Table 8.13.1 show that the release(absorbtion) of
energy as an object changes its elevation results from the release(absorbtion) of a portion of its
mass equivalent energy. (Because these transformations are multiplicatively commutative, any
elevation may be considered to be the upper elevation, a second elevation closer to the center of
the field may be considered to be the lower elevation, and the gravitational potential, $, considered
to be defined in terms of the upper elevation units of measurement.) Since the locally measured
energy represented by the mass of the falling object is the same at both elevations, as required by
the Principle of Relativity, its mass equivalent energy as measured by upper elevation units of
measurement, has been reduced by $ at the lower elevation. This reduction in absolute mass
equivalent energy equals the energy released by gravitation and the Law of Conservation of Energy


is satisfied. To release this energy of fall, the gravitational field causes the force of gravity to act
over the distance of fall.


8.17- Returning to Table 8.13.1, it will be found that the transformation for velocity is 1/(1-$)2. This
transformation shows that the velocity of light, which remains unchanged when measured locally,
is reduced in the absolute sense at a rate equal to the square of the reduction which occurs in the
mass equivalent energy of the falling object. Effectively, the proximity of energy modifies the Aether
and produces a local reduction in the velocity of light. (The Aether has already been shown to be
the underlying structure of space.) In this sense, the gravitational field is actually a velocity well for
light. This velocity well, in turn , allows an object within it to shed some of its internal energy by
moving to a lower elevation. It does this by pushing itself downward against the Aether. This push,
which we cannot directly observe, is the fictitious force of gravity currently described in texts. We
can only observe the equal and opposite reaction to this fictitious force required by Newton's
Second Law of Motion (for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction) as the force of
gravity. The Gravity Transformation for Energy requires that the falling process cease when, as
observed with upper elevation units of measurement, the energy released by falling equals the
original energy content of the object. This cessation of falling does in fact occur as the end state of
gravitational contraction and will be discussed in detail later.


8.18- The reduction of the velocity of light in a gravitational field not only produces the force of
gravity by allowing energy contained within an object to be released, it refracts the path of a ray of
light (and all radiation) passing through the field in the same manner as the slowing of light ina
lens refracts its path and allows your eyes to focus on this sentence. When a photon is ina
gravitational field, it experiences the same impulse to release its energy as does matter. However,
unlike a material object, a photon cannot transform its energy into kinetic energy as its elevation is
lowered because it must always travel at the local velocity of light. As observed with upper
elevation units of measurement, the energy (frequency) of that photon remains unchanged. As
observed at the lower elevation, where the units of measurement for time are larger and the units of
measurement for energy are smaller, its frequency and energy have increased. Gravitational
refraction of the path of light is accompanied by a gravitational force of attraction. As derived in
"Gravity", the gravitational force acting on photon is twice the gravitational force acting ona
material particles of the same energy. What does not seem to have been recognized is that the
gravitational attraction of the photons (and neutrinos) associated with the background radiation
level of space can easily represent the dark matter currently sought by astronomers and
cosmologist.


8.19- The Effect of the Gravitational Field on the Velocity of Light:- From the time that Special
Relativity was published until the early 1980's, it was accepted as an absolute truth that the velocity


of light in a vacuum was a constant that was unchanged by any change in velocity or elevation
reference frame. Along with this viewpoint was the idea that a straight line was defined by the path
of ray of light between two points. The author was rather startled to read in a book entitled "Was
Einstein Right?" by Dr. Will that the velocity of light was no longer considered to be unchanged in a
gravitational field, but was reduced in proportion to that theory's time dilation. Even more startling
was the fact that the change in viewpoint was made by the academic community without the
slightest embarrassment even though its change undermined the philosophical foundations of both
Special and General Relativity.


8.20- The correct effect of changes in elevation on the velocity of light is provided by the Gravity
Transformation for Velocity in Table 8.13.1 as a function of the ratio between the distance, R, to the
center of a gravitationally attracting object and its Horizon Radius, Rp, both as measured with the
units of measurement existing at an infinite radius. The departure of the velocity of light from its
nominal value of C when R approaches Rp is provided in Figure 8.4. It will be noted that, because
of the minus sign in the transformation, as the radius approaches the Horizon Radius, the velocity
of light abruptly approaches zero. The effect of this drop in the velocity of light causes the path of a
ray of light to be refracted by the gravitational field for the same reason that the lenses in your eye


refract the light to bring the image of this text to a focus on the retina of your eye. The velocity of
light is slowed down by the nature of the space through which the light is passing. This change in
the velocity of light is concealed from a local observer who, of necessity, measures the velocity of
light with units of measurement which have been altered by the gravitational field.


8.21- If one could observe, from a distance, an object which has collapsed to less than twice its
Horizon Radius, he would find that the effects of refraction causes it to appear to have a radius of
6.75 times the Horizon Radius. This occurs because the line of sight from the observer to the
surface of the object is refracted towards the object and causes it to appear larger than it actually
is. The effect is shown in Figure 8.5. A hypothetical observer on the surface of the object would find
that the angle between the zenith and the horizon became smaller than 90 degrees as the object
contracted to a radius smaller than twice the Horizon Radius and became equal to zero when the
object had contracted to the Horizon Radius. The possible paths of rays of light leaving the surface
of a collapsed object are illustrated in Figure 8.6. Surprisingly, gravitational refraction has no effect
on the ability of the object to radiate energy to space. As the object contracts, the approach of the
horizon towards the zenith reduces the solid angle from which radiation can escape from its surface
to space, but the effect is exactly counterbalanced by the fact that the surface from which the
radiation is effectively emitted to space has the optical size of 6.75 times the Horizon Radius. In
terms of the ability of the object to radiate energy to space, refraction may be ignored.


0
10-20 1015 qp10 103


Actual Velocity of Light, Compared to Nominal Value
Exponential Scale


Note:- Actual Radius and Velocity Measured with Units of Measurement
Which Exist at an Infinite Radius. As Measured with Local Units of
Measurement (Existing at Radius F). Light Travels at Nominal Velocity of C.


Figure 8.4 - Velocity of Light Reduction in Region of Horizon Radius


8.22- As shown in "Gravity", the slowing of light in a gravitational field not only refracts the path of
light, it refracts the paths of moving objects. This refraction of path is in addition to the orbital
effects of gravitational attraction and is responsible for the anomalous precession of planetary
orbits which supposedly prove the validity of General Relativity. The basic Law of Motion of
Newtonian Physics which states that "an object having a velocity will retain that velocity unless it is
acted upon by an outside force" is still true, however, the velocity which obeys this law is the
velocity of the object as measured in terms of the locally observed velocity of light.


8.23- Experiments have been proposed, and may already have been performed, to provide
additional verification of General Relativity. These experiments consist of placing extremely
accurate gyroscopes in orbit and observing the precession of their axes as a result of their orbital


velocity. Such experiments will indeed verify that gravity is a relativistic phenomena since the
relativistic gyroscopic effects which will be observed are a direct consequence of the gravitational
refraction of the velocity vector. They will not show that General Relativity is the correct relativistic
gravitational theory.


8.24- Gravity results from the fact that the velocity of light is slowed by the proximity of energy. This
slowing of the velocity of light results in the changes in the size of the units of measurement
illustrated in Table 7.2.1, Table 7.8.1, Table 8.9.1, and Table 8.13.1.


Actual Size of Object


Apparent Size
of Object


Distant Observer


Ry = 6.75*Rp at R< 3*Ry,


Figure 8.5 - Optical Size of Collapsed Object


Path of Vertical Path of Light Ray
Light Ray Which Easily Escapes


Path of Light Ray
Which is Trapped


Path of Light Ray
Which Barely Escapes


Radius of Object Light Circles Endlessly at
R= 3*R, Unstable State)


Figure 8.6 - Path of Light Rays Leaving Collapsed Object


Chapter 9 - Dr. Einstein's Error and the Introduction of
Curved Space


9.1- Where did Dr. Einstein go wrong? - Since the General Theory of Relativity yields results which
are in conflict with the postulates upon which it is based, it is apparent that at least one significant
mathematical error was made in its derivation. In order for the existence and nature of that error not
to have been recognized by Dr. Einstein and his contemporaries, it must be of a type which would
not be obvious to individuals of sufficient stature and scientific sophistication to be in a position to
question his work. It is likely that the error was recognized from time to time by bright
undergraduates, but their objections would not be accepted by an academic priesthood dedicated
to preserving the true faith. Questions from such sources would be brushed aside because
obviously they could only have resulted from a lack of understanding on the part of questioners
who were not sufficiently trained (brainwashed?) to understand the subject matter and who did not
as yet possess the proper 'yup's.


9.2- In deriving the General Theory of Relativity, Dr. Einstein employed a mathematical tool called
Tensor Calculus. Properly applied, this tool is extremely useful and normally insures that the effects
of all possible variables are considered. It does have a limitation however, it cannot be used for
deriving a relativistic theory. Tensor Calculus, in its simplest form, is a process in which partial
derivatives of the variables of interest are arranged in a set of simultaneous equations similar to
those encountered in conventional algebra. A typical group of Tensor Calculus equations is
illustrated below:


A11*(dX)+A12*(dY)+A13*(dZ)=W:;
A21*(dX)+A22*(dY)+A23*(dZ)=W3


A31*(dX)+A30*(dY)+A33*(dZ)=W3


9.3- In this group of equations, the symbols A44 through A33 are constants determined by the
problem, the symbols X, Y, and Z are the variables whose value is to be determined, W4, W3, and
W, are the sums of each of the equations, and the symbol d within parenthesis indicates that the
term is a partial derivative. Solution of equations of this type requires a mathematical procedure
known as integration. Therein lies the rub. To perform that integration, it is necessary to know that
the coefficients (eg:- A,, through A33) of the partial derivatives are independent of the variables.
To understand why, consider the use of the rules of Elementary Calculus to integrate the
expression K*(dX). If K is independent of the value of X, the result of the integration is K*X+C",
where C" is the constant of integration. However, if K is equal to X, the result is X2/2+C", an
entirely different result. A basic rule of all types of Calculus, including Tensor Calculus, is that the
variable to be integrated must be completely defined in the expression itself and not be hidden
within other terms, in this case, K.


9.4- It is because the solution of a problem in Tensor Calculus requires the performance of
mathematical integration that Tensor Calculus is unsuitable for the derivation of a relativistic
theory. The partial derivatives in the Tensor Calculus matrix used to derive the General Theory of
Relativity involve length. It has been demonstrated that the units of measurement of length change
between reference frames which differ in velocity. Since the derivation of General Relativity is
based upon the Principle of Equivalence, it follows that the effect of a change in elevation on the
units of measurement for length must be known in order for a meaningful, mathematically valid,
integration to be performed. (The size of the units of measurement are analogous to the "size" of K
in the previous paragraph.) Unfortunately, the effect of a change in elevation on the units of
measurement for length cannot be known until the integration has been performed correctly and a
valid integration cannot be performed until the effects of a change in elevation on the units of
measurement for length are known. Consequently a valid derivation of gravitational theory is not
possible by this method. When the attempt is made, it arbitrarily forces the Gravity Transformation
for Length to equal unity regardless of its correct value. Until the Tensor Calculus equations have
been solved, the required information needed to solve them is not available. It is difficult to
understand, however, why Dr. Einstein did not recognize that, in employing Tensor Calculus to
derive General Relativity, he was incorporating an erroneous loop of circular reasoning. /f an
undergraduate student of elementary calculus persistently made an equivalent error he would
receive a failing grade for the course.


9.5- Dr. Einstein's mathematical error made it impossible to achieve a solution of the General
Relativity Tensor in a manner which is consistent with Euclidian geometry. He is reported to have
struggled with this difficulty for about 18 months and finally resolved his impasse’ by adding
another, otherwise superfluous, degree of freedom. He did this by incorporating the curved space
described by Riemann Geometry. This addition permitted the mathematical equations to be solved,
but the results were clearly not rigorously correct since, as Table 8.9.1 shows, the resultant General
Theory of Relativity clearly violates the Principles of Relativity and Equivalence upon which it is
based. Unfortunately, the fact that gravity is a relativistic phenomena insured that General Relativity
contained enough truth to enable it to gain acceptance by refining the predictions of Newtonian
Gravitational Theory to agree with the observed anomalous precession of Mercury's orbit, the
observed red shift of Solar spectral lines, and the bending of the path of starlight by the Sun's
gravitational field to within the limits of observational error.


9.6- During the Solar eclipse of 1919 when the bending of the path of starlight by the Sun's
gravitational field predicted by General Relativity was verified, Dr. Einstein's confidence in the
outcome surprised many of his contemporaries. In expressing this confidence, he was on safe
ground. He knew that gravitation was a relativistic phenomena and that it didn't matter whether
General Relativity was rigorous. The fact that General Relativity made its predictions based upon
relativistic effects insured that any residual error would be about a million times too small to be


revealed in the Sun's puny gravitational field. There is a suggestion that Dr. Einstein recognized that
General Relativity was not rigorous since he is reported to have expressed misgivings as to its
application to the strong fields such as exist around neutron stars. The question that can never be
answered is whether Dr. Einstein believed that the curved space solution of General Relativity was
valid, or whether he engaged in scientific fakery with the confidence that it could not be unmasked.
One must remember the comment made in a meeting in which General Relativity was evaluated,
“why shouldn't we consider space to be curved, nobody can prove that it isn't". The author finds it
difficult to differentiate Dr. Einstein's use of curved space to allow him to complete his derivation of
General Relativity from the actions of a mechanic who installs the wrong part into a machine by
hammering it into place.


9.7- The Meaning of Curved Space:-The most significant property of the gravitational field is not
revealed in the effects represented by the precession of orbits, the time dilation, or the bending of
the path of a ray of light as it passes the Sun. These are second order effects. The only first order
effect of the gravitational field is typified by the force which holds you to your chair as you read this
sentence and the energy of fall which you will experience if you fall from the chair. This force, and
the energy of fall it implies, is the primary reality of the gravitational field. There is no way in
(expletive deleted) that a curvature of space can account for that force and that energy without the
presence of an attractive gravitational force. It is irresponsible to assert, as proponents of General
Relativity must, that "the apparent ability of the gravitational field to create energy from
nothingness does not constitute a violation of the Law of Conservation of Energy because the
energy which is created cannot climb out of the field". Any proper gravitational theory must explain
the reason for the force which holds you to your chair and the source of the energy which is
released when you fall in a manner which is consistent with the requirement that energy be
conserved. The author was once reminded by a physicist that some texts assert that General
Relativity has eliminated gravity as a force. For some reason that physicist became strangely silent
when it was suggested that he step through an adjacent second story window so that we could
discuss the subject across the window sill.


9.8- Under Newtonian Theory, gravity is an attractive force acting between two concentrations of
energy (masses), E,; and Ez, in inverse proportion to the square of their separation, R, in


accordance with F=D*E,*E,/R2. The theory makes no attempt to explain the source of that force


and the energy it represents. Since it is a descriptive law derived several centuries before the Law
of Conservation of Energy was recognized, there is no need for it to apologize for that omission
unless, of course, one intends to retain it as the theory which represents reality. Its conclusion that
the force of attraction between objects varies inversely with the square of their separation
reasonably follows from the fact that the area of a spherical surface varies as the square its radius.
General Relativity, on the other hand, does not have the luxury of ignoring the source of
gravitational force and gravitational energy since it claims to represent reality and was derived at a
time when the Law of Conservation of Energy was well established.


9.9- At first glance, the non-Euclidian geometry of Riemann which was used by Dr. Einstein in
formulating General Relativity appears sophisticated. When one examines Dr. Riemann's geometry
in detail, he finds that it is a subset of conventional Euclidian geometry in which a non-Euclidian
geometry of three spatial dimensions is used to describe the properties of a "surface" which can be
considered to be contained in a Euclidian geometry of four spatial dimensions. As the author
pointed out in "Gravity", any non-Euclidian geometry of N spatial dimensions can be contained in a
Euclidian Geometry of N+1 spatial dimensions. (An example of non-Euclidian geometry as a
subset of Euclidian Geometry is the two dimensional non-Euclidian geometry which describes the
surface of our three dimensional Euclidian Earth).


9.10- For a reasonable and conscientious man to accept the concept that gravity results from the
distortion of our familiar three dimensional Euclidian space into a four dimensional non-Euclidian
space, he must be provided with a reasonable description of the nature of that distortion as it
appears in the four dimensional Euclidian space. The closest approach to such a description seems


to be speculation as to whether our three dimensional space is positively curved, as is a sphere, or
whether it is negatively curved, as is a saddle. It is commonly asserted that if our observable three
dimensional space is positively curved, it encloses a four dimensional space of finite volume, while
if its curvature is negative, the volume of the four dimensional space enclosed is infinite. Actually, a
common sense understanding of the concept easily reveals that there is no connection between
whether the four dimensional space is enclosed by the three dimensional surface and therefore has
a finite volume and whether the curvature of the three dimensional space is positive or negative. As
an example, the two dimensional non-Euclidian surface analogous to the reflector of an automobile
headlight is positively curved but the volume of the three dimensional space it encloses is infinite.
On the other hand, the two dimensional non-Euclidian surface represented by the inner portion of
an automobile inner tube is negatively curved, but it encloses a finite volume. The factor which
determines whether the geometry of the surface contains an infinite or a finite volume is determined
not by the polarity of its curvature but by whether the curvature along each of its axes is greater or
less than the curvature of a parabola. For some unexplained reason these same mathematical
physicists assume that whether or not our Universe reverses its expansion and collapses in upon
itself to produce a cosmic crunch is determined by whether space is positively or negatively
curved. The word ‘assume’ provides valuable advice. Divided into syllables, it is a reminder that
when you ass*u*me, you run the risk of making an ‘ass' of 'you' and ‘me’.


9.11- In terms of Newtonian Theory, gravity is a rather straightforward phenomena. As Figure 9.1
illustrates, an object suspended above a central gravitational mass and having no orbital velocity
experiences a force impelling it towards that mass. This is the force you feel applied to the seat of
your pants as you sit in your chair. Under General Relativity, as illustrated in Figure 9.2, an object
suspended above a central gravitational mass and having no orbital velocity experiences the same
attractive force. However, that force is of enormous magnitude, is inversely proportional to the size
of the central mass, and acts in a direction at right angles to our observable three spatial
dimensions. The force holding you to your chair is the component of that enormous attractive force
which is observable in our three dimensional space as a result of its distortion into the fourth
spatial axis. Under General Relativity, the actual gravitational force which produces the observable
force component holding you to your chair is on the order of 218 tons. Under both Newtonian
Theory and General Relativity, gravity is an attractive force acting at a distance. The difference
between the two concepts is that, under Newtonian Theory, gravity is an attractive force acting
towards the central mass responsible for the field, while General Relativity asserts that the
presence of a central mass creates an enormous attractive force aligned with an unobservable
fourth spatial axis and simultaneously distorts our familiar three dimensional flat space towards
that axis to allow a component of that enormous force to appear as the force of gravity. General
Relativity does not eliminate gravity as a force, it converts it into an incredibly large force acting
along an unobservable fourth spatial axis towards a source which does not seem to have a physical
existence and which produces infinite energy from nothingness. Come on fellows, give us a break.


9.12- The only reason for considering that space is curved by the presence of mass into a fourth
spatial axis and the existence of that enormous attractive force acting along that axis is that
mathematical error made by Dr. Einstein in deriving General Relativity. The concept of curved space
has survived because of the effectiveness of the defenders of the faith in suppressing the
questioning by heretics who would dare to challenge the revealed truth. Lately, however, there
seems to some hedging on the question of whether space is curved among senior members of the
academic community. For example, in a recently published book, a respected authority in the field
(who had received a copy of "Gravity" in 1988) states that there is no difference in the results
obtained when one considers space to be curved by the gravitational field and when one considers
lengths to shrink as elevation is lowered.. (Needless to say, the author takes issue with that
assertion.) Remember, as mentioned earlier, it has been demonstrated in "Gravity" that, if space is
curved, it is possible, in principle, to build a perpetual motion machine of the first kind. That
machine would be capable of exporting energy forever without any change in its internally or
externally observed states. Again, if any reader believes that such a machine is possible, there is a
bridge that the author has been trying to sell.


Object Restrained st
From Falling Gravitational Force


Horizontal Axis:-
Second axis is redundant
and is not shown.


Central Attracting Object f , , l
Vertical Plane in 3 Dimensional Flat Space.


(Third spatial axis is not shown.)


Figure 9.] - Gravitational Attraction in "Flat" Space


Observable Component of


Gravitational Force Fourth Spatial Axis Horizontal Axis:-


Second axis is redundant
andis not shown.


Vertical Plane in 3 Dimensional Flat
Space (Third spatial axis is not shown)


Object Restrained W Curvature of 3 Dimensional
From Falling Space Into 4th Spatial Axis.


Vertical Axis
a@— Central Attracting Object


Unobservable Actual
Gravitational Force
Along Fourth Spatial Axis


Figure 9.2 - Gravitational Attraction Under Curved Space Concept


9.13- The author's contention in "Gravity" (1988) that any non-Euclidian geometry of N dimensions
can be contained in a Euclidian geometry of N+1 dimensions or higher seems to have been
acceptable to the academic community since it has subsequently appeared in books written by at
least two individuals who have received copies of that text, although one of these individuals
asserted that a Euclidian geometry of N+3 dimensions was required. It is desireable, therefore, to
re-examine the geometry of Riemann.


e The primary difference between the axioms of Riemann geometry and Euclidian geometry is
that Riemann's geometry does not require that parallel lines never meet while Euclidian
geometry does have that requirement. The writer understands that both geometries define a
straight line as the shortest distance between two points.


e Since the non-Euclidian geometry of N dimensions can be contained within a Euclidian
geometry of N+1 (or N+3) dimensions, the shortest distance between two points does not lie
within the non-Euclidian geometry. It leaves that geometry between the two points and travels
through the Euclidian geometry of N+1 (or N+3) dimensions. (To illustrate, if one considers
the surface of the Earth to represent a two dimensional non-Euclidean geometry, the shortest


distance between New York and Los Angleses is not a great circle, it is through a tunnel which
passes almost two hundred miles beneath the Mississippi River.)


e The straight line of non-Euclidan geometry is the shortest distance between two points which
remains within the non-Euclidian geometry (e.g.- the great circle path between New York and
Los Angeles.) Since the straight line of non-Euclidian geometry does not meet the rigorous
definition of a straight line, it seems reasonable to question the rigor of non-Euclidean
geometry except as a convenient means of describing the properties of a curved "surface"
contained within a "volume" defined by Euclidian geometry.


e The author asserts that a rigorous theory should not be based upon Riemannian geometry
without an adequate and relavent treatment of the higher order Euclidian geometry it implies.


9.15- The idea that a Euclidian geometry of at least six spatial dimensions (N+3) was required to
contain a three dimensional non-Euclidian geometry is supported by the assertion that each plane
in a three dimensional non-Euclidean space, (X-Y), (X-Z), and (Y-Z), requires a separate degree of
freedom in the higher order space. The requirement for the additional dimensions (N+3) would be
reasonable if one considered the three planes to be independent. However, these planes are not
independent, they are interlocked into the three dimensional non-Euclidean space as a unit.
Consider three dimensional Euclidean space to be composed of a series of (X-Y); planes, (X-Z);
planes and (Y-Z), planes (where i, j, and k are integers between one and infinity. These planes
meet at vertices "ijk". If the three dimensional Euclidean space is curved into a non-Euclidean
space about any or all of its principle axes, the vertices of the planes must remain coincident, point
"ijk" must remain point "ijk". As a result, it seems reasonable to conclude that only one extra
degree of freedom is required and the three dimensional non-Euclidean geometry may be validly
considered as a hyperplane contained in a four dimensional Euclidean geometry.


9.16- Whether the writer's assertion that a Euclidian space of (N+1) dimensions is adequate to
contain a three dimesional non-Euclidian space correct is unimportant. It is rigorously shown in
"Gravity" that our universe is a three dimensional Euclidian space. The curvature of that space that
is currently accepted as representing reality results from Dr. Einstein's attempt to overcome the
error introduced by his misuse of Tensor Calculus in the derivation of General Relativity.


Chapter 10 - Gravitational Contraction and Collapse


10.1- The Formation of a Gravitational Object:- Common experience reveals that an accumulation of
matter creates a gravitational field which attempts to compact that matter into a mathematical point.
We experience that field as a force which impels us towards the center of the Earth and would fall to
that center if it were not for the material of which the Earth is composed. Each layer of that material
is attracted towards the center and is supported by increased pressure in the underlying layers until
the pressure maximum is reached at the Earth's center.


10.2- For an object the size of the Earth, normal matter is able to withstand the gravitationally
induced pressure and nothing dramatic occurs. For larger objects, gravitational compression is
more complicated. Typically, such objects have the same composition as the interstellar gases
(99% hydrogen and helium) from which they were formed. As the object contracts, its gases are
compressed and the temperature at its center increases due to the temperature rise of adiabatic
compression. (Adiabatic temperature rise is the phenomena which causes the temperature of the
Earth's atmosphere to decreases with increasing altitude and causes the surface of Venus to be hot
enough to melt lead.) If the mass of such an object is more than 10 times that of Jupiter, adiabatic
temperature rise and gravitationally induced pressure cause the temperature and pressure at its


center to reach a level where hydrogen fuses to form helium. This fusion releases large amounts of
energy and raises the temperature, and therefore the gaseous pressure, at the core to the point
where it is capable of resisting gravitational pressure and the contraction stops. The object has
then become a star in which fusion energy released at the core produces the temperature needed to
allow gaseous pressure to balance gravitational pressure. Simultaneously, energy flows from the
hot core to its surface, is radiated to space, and must be replaced by the fusion of more hydrogen.


10.3- Eventually, enough hydrogen has fused to helium to make the hydrogen burning process
ineffective and the core contracts to release gravitational energy to replace the energy flow no
longer provided by hydrogen burning. Core contraction continues until a temperature and pressure
is reached where helium can fuse into still heavier elements and again supply the energy flow
needed to resist gravitational pressure. This stage in a star's evolution is dramatic. The switch from
hydrogen burning to helium burning requires a large increase in the temperature of the core and
produces a correspondingly large increase in the rate of heat flow to the surface. To radiate that
larger rate of heat flow, the star requires a much larger surface area and it expands to become a red
giant. (In about five billion years, our Sun will reach this stage and its surface will encompass the
orbit of Mars.) When the helium fuel is exhausted, the successively heavier elements which are the
ashes of the lighter elements already burned are themselves burned into even heavier elements.
Their burning, however, does not induce a significant increase of core temperature and burning rate
and the star contracts from its red giant state to approximately its original size. The generation of
energy in the core by the fusion of progressively heavier elements ceases when the core has been
burned to iron because the formation of elements heavier than iron absorbs energy instead of
releasing it. The future of the star from this point on depends upon its mass.


10.4- If the star is smaller than about 1.4 solar masses, the matter in its core is capable of resisting
the pressure exerted by the overlying material and it eventually cools to the temperature of space. If
the star is larger, normal matter in the core is not capable of resisting gravitational pressure and
atomic electrons are squeezed into the atomic nuclei to form neutrons. Since neutrons do not repel
each other, the core collapses almost instantaneously from the density of compressed atoms to the
density of neutrons. This collapse produces a shock wave which raises a significant portion of the
hydrogen overburden to fusion conditions and the star explodes. If the star is smaller than about 3
solar masses, the gaseous overburden is not able to contain the explosion and a supernova results.
The remnants of such an explosion are a neutron star at the center of an expanding shell of gas. If
the star is between 3 and 4.5 solar masses, the overburden is sufficient to limit the explosion and
the object sheds a portion of its gaseous envelope. That explosion, known as a nova, is much less
severe, and may occur several times as the star reduces its mass to the point where its neutron
core can support the overburden of stellar gasses.


10.5- Gravitational collapse occurs when the size of the collapsing star exceeds 4.5 solar masses.
Such stars are not capable of reducing their mass by exploding. The gaseous overburden is too
great and a collapse of the star which results from the inability of the neutrons in its core to resist
gravitational pressure goes to completion. Under both Newtonian Gravitational Theory and General
Relativity, such an object has no choice but to collapse almost instantaneously to a mathematical
point called a Singularity. (Recently a suggestion was made that electrons will collapse to form
kaons under sufficient pressure. Even though kaons, like photons and neutrinos, compress rather
than collapse under pressure, the mathematics associated with both theories show that kaons are
not capable of preventing the final gravitational collapse.)


10.6- The fact that both Newtonian Gravitational Theory and General Relativity predict that large
objects eventually contract to a mathematical point at a velocity greater than the velocity of light to
form Black Holes, Singularities and Wormholes should have led to the conclusion that the theories
were defective and/or incomplete. Unfortunately, in this area at least, science has been converted
into a religion. As a result, physicists are prevented from raising embarrassing questions either
because of the lemming effect characteristic of all religions or because challenging the true faith
would end their careers. Since the author is neither a lemming nor is he dependent upon the


goodwill of the defenders of the true faith, he is free to challenge that faith and assert that a proper
gravitational theory must yield the following results:


It will predict the cessation of contraction at the radius where the velocity of fall from an
infinite distance is equal to the velocity of light.


It will be consistent, in the absolute sense, with the Law of Conservation of Energy.


It will be consistent with the Principle of Relativity.
e It will be consistent with the Principle of Equivalence.
e It will yield predictions which are consistent with observation.


Of the above, General Relativity only satisfies only the last requirement and that satisfaction is
superficial. Gravity Relativity, on the other hand, meets all of the requirements.


10.7- Modeling the Gravitational Object:- In "Gravity", the author has examined gravitational
collapse by assuming a highly artificial model of the gravitational field to allow its inherent
characteristics to be examined while retaining sufficient simplicity to allow easy solution. This
model is diagramed in Figure 10.1. The assumptions which were made are tabulated below:


e The mass of the object is contained in an infinitesimally thin shell which is at a constant
radius from the center. All of its gravitational mass and its entire internal volume is at the
same gravitational potential.


o This model is structurally unstable and will collapse in response to the slightest
deformation, just as a plastic soft drink bottle will collapse under a slight external
pressure even though it can withstand considerable internal pressure. This instability
does not limit its usefulness in analyzing the gravitational field.


e Where it is necessary in the discussion to eliminate the effects of energy loss by radiation, the
surface of the object is considered to have zero emissivity.


Infinitesnally Thin Shell Containing
All gravitational Mass of Object


External Observer
(Uses Actual Units) OL Y
Internal Observer
Test Mass (Uses Local Units)


surface of Shell Has Zero Emissivity to
Prevent Radiatio of Energy to Space


External Observer Uses Units of Measurement Gravitational Potential is the Same
Existing at an Infinite Radius. His Results are - Throughout Volume of Object
Termed "ACTUAL"


Internal Observer Uses Units of Measurement
Existing at Gravitational Potential Within Object
His Results Are Termed "LOCAL


Note:- Computation of Energy Density Violates This Model as it Assumes Energy is
Uniformly Distributed Throughout Volume of Sphere


Figure 10.1 - Idealized Model of Gravitationally Contracted Object


10.8- These simplifications allow the object to be treated as if it had a single radius, R, instead of
requiring it to be an infinite series of nested shells of decreasing radii which are at an increasing
gravitational potential, density, temperature and pressure as the center of the object is approached.
The simplified model does not accurately represent the interior conditions of a gravitationally
contracted object, but it is rigorous outside of the object. While conclusions based upon such a
model will quantitatively differ from what actually occurs, they will be a reasonable approximation.
In "Gravity", this model is solved for the two end limit cases. One case results when none of the
energy released by gravitation is radiated to space. The other results when all of the energy
released by gravitation is radiated to space. (Actual gravitational contraction follows a path between
these end limit cases and is determined by the portion of the initial total energy which has been
radiated to space.) To provide clarity to the discussion, observations made with the units of
measurement existing at a quasi-infinite distance from the object are described as "actual" or
“actually observed". Similarly, observations made with the units of measurements existing near or
within the object are described as "local" or "locally observed". It must be reiterated that the
"actual" units of measurement remain unchanged as a result of a change of elevation while the
"local" units of measurement change in a manner which satisfies the Principle of Relativity both
within and between elevations, as provided by the Gravity Transformations of Table 8.13.1.


10.9- In "Gravity" it is shown that the gravitational potential, $, may be determined from the actual
radius, R and the Horizon Radius (designated as the Schwarzchild Radius in "Gravity"), Rp, using
the expression $=R,/R. (To provide a reference for the reader, the Horizon Radius for an object the
mass of the Sun is about 1.38 kilometers.) Substituting this expression into the gravitational
transformation (1-$) provides the basic gravitational transformation as also being equal to

(R-R,)/R. The Horizon Radius is determined, in turn, by the total energy content, E, of the
gravitating object, the Ergo-gravitational Constant, D, and the portion, #, (the range of # is 0 to 1) of
the total energy content which is in the form of radiation. Its value is defined by the equation:


Ry=(1+#)*D*E;


The term, #, is added to the expression for the Horizon Radius derived in "Gravity" because, as that
text shows, energy in the form of radiation gravitates at twice the rate as energy in the form of
matter. The portion, #, of the total energy of a contracting object which is in the form of radiation
changes as the object contracts due to the release of gravitational energy as radiation or the
conversion of radiation into matter. The material which follows has been simplified by normalizing
the radius of the object in terms of R/Rp-


10.10- Since the gravitational field results from a reduction in the velocity of light in the Aether
caused by the proximity of energy, the first effect to be considered is the effect of gravitational
potential on the velocity of light. That effect is shown in Figure 8.4. Unless the actual radius, R/R,,
is less than about 10, the actual velocity of light, is essentially unchanged from its standard value of
C. As the radius, R/R,, approaches unity, the actual velocity of light rapidly approaches zero. As
observed locally, of course, the velocity of light remains unchanged at its nominal value of C.


10.11- The Actual and Locally Observed Size of a Gravitationally Collapsing Object:- Since matter
controls its size and its separation from other matter by a method akin to measuring the local


velocity of light, the reduction of that velocity by the presence of the energy represented by a
gravitating object reduces the size of all of the units of measurement by which distances are
observed. At first, as an object contracts from a large radius, the contraction, as both actual and
locally observed, proceeds in the manner one would anticipate from classical physics. As the actual
radius, R/R,, approaches unity, the minus sign in the basic Gravity Transformation causes the
local units of measurement for length to shrink more rapidly than the actual observed radius. To an
internal observer, the effect causes the velocity of contraction to slow to zero when the locally
observed radius, R/R,, has fallen to 4. (The actual value of R/Rp is 2 at this point.) As the actual
value of R/Rh of that object contracts from 2 towards its limiting value of 1, the resultant reduction
in size of the unit of measurement for length causes the locally observed value of R/Rh to
approach infinity. The effects are shown in Figure 10.2.


Locally Observed Radius Locally Observed Radius


ed aR a Actual Radius, a
Figure 10.2 - Locally Observed vs. Actual Radius of Object


10.12- The simplified model of the gravitational field described above and illustrated in Figure 10.1
is useful in providing insight into the nature of gravitational collapse. For this purpose, the author
has written a program for use on a PC to allow him to approximate the gravitational contraction of
an object having a selected mass, as expressed in units equal to the Solar Mass, between the radii
of 1019 and 1410-19 times its Horizon Radius.


e As the object contracts, the velocity (as a fraction of the local velocity of light) and the kinetic
energy of a particle falling to the object from an infinite radius increases.


e The increase of kinetic energy of the falling particle raises its temperature until its kinetic
energy becomes equal to its rest mass energy. At that point, its temperature no longer rises
because the creation of additional matter is a higher entropy path for the absorption of the
energy of fall than is an increase in the temperature of existing matter. The locally observed
temperature then remains constant at about 4.25 trillion Kelvins until the final portion of the
locally observed expansion phase.


o The simulation assumes that once the matter creation stage is reached, internal
pressures balance gravitational pressures and the velocity of fall no longer increases.
The simulation was also run without allowing the creation of additional matter by
allowing the actual contraction velocity to increase to the velocity of light. The only
difference in the results obtained was a reduction of less than one second in the time for
the process to go to completion. It seems reasonable, therefore, to accept that any
effects resulting from having erroneously assumed that the velocity of collapse is limited
by matter creation may be ignored.


e The locally observed velocity of the expansion stage is limited to the velocity of light.


o This limitation is not imposed by Velocity Relativity because the locally observed
expansion is not caused by velocity. The particles which are observed to be separating
from each other are essentially stationary. It is the reduction in the actual velocity of light
which makes them appear to be separating at a high velocity.


o This limitation would result if the propagation velocity of gravitational effects is limited to
the velocity of light. Since the gravitational force producing collapse propagates through
the interior of the object, the force causing the collapse would then cease to act once the
locally observed expansion velocity became equal to C.


= Since gravitational energy is released from the energy contained in the matter and
radiation within the field rather than from the field itself, there is no reason to
believe that the gravitational field itself contains energy in any form. Velocity
Relativity then does not impose its velocity limits of +/-C on the propagation
velocity of a gravitational field. To the author's knowledge, there has been no
experimental determination of the velocity of propagation of gravitational effects.


o The computer simulation was run both with and without a limitation on the velocity of
propagation of gravitational effects. The only significant difference was, that without this
restriction, the expansion phase, as locally observed, is so rapid that nucleons begin
receding from each other at faster than light velocities within a second after the
expansion phase starts. Since our Universe is most certainly an ancient gravitational
object which is expanding and which contains a large number of observable nucleons,
the author accepts that gravitational effects propagate at the local velocity of light.


10.13- The Actual and Locally Observed Rate of Contraction of a Freely Contracting Gravitational
Object:- The first result of interest provided by this simulation is the actual velocity of contraction of


the object as a function of the ratio between its actual radius and its Horizon Radius, R/R,, as
shown in Figure 10.3A. As the object contracts from a large radius (R/R,=1019), the velocity of
contraction increases to slightly less than the velocity of light and remains at that level as the
energy of fall begins to create additional matter instead of increasing the temperature of the matter
that already exists. Beyond this point the effects of the gravitationally induced reduction in the


actual velocity of light begin to become significant. The actual velocity of contraction reduces
abruptly when the actual radius falls below 4*R/R,, and runs into a figurative "brick wall" when the


actual radius, R, has fallen extremely close to Rp because, at that radius, the actual velocity of light


has become very close to zero. The locally observed velocity of contraction behaves differently as
the actual radius, R, approaches Rp, as shown in Figure 10.3B. At large radii, the locally observed


and actual velocities are nearly identical, but at an actual ratio, R/R,, of about 5, the locally
observed velocity of contraction begins to decrease from its value near -C (contraction), comes to
rest at an actual radius ratio, R/R,, of 2, and increases to its maximum value of +C (expansion) at
an actual radius ratio of about 1.5. It maintains the locally observed expansion velocity of +C
indefinitely as the actual radius, R, approaches the Horizon Radius, Rp, and the locally observed
radius approaches infinity.


10.14- The Effect of Gravitational Collapse on the Observed Rate of Passage of Time:- The next
result provided by the computer simulation is the relationship between the locally observed and


actual time for the object to collapse, as shown in Figure 10.4. Since the mass of the object affects
the time required by the collapsing process, the results are provided for the smallest object which
astrophysicists predict as being subject to collapse, 4.5 solar masses. (The plot starts one
microsecond after the start of the expansion phase in order to permit the use of an exponential
scale.) It will be noted that the passage of time, as observed with local clocks, increases in
proportion to the square root of the passage of time as observed with external clocks. Thus, the
passage of one year inside the object requires a passage of time outside of the object which is
greater than the age of our Universe. It must be emphasized that the difference in the observed
passage of time does not result from a change in the actual rate of passage of time, it results from
the slowing of "clocks" within the object.


Note:- Velocities Denoted in Terms of V/C


Absolute Barrier
Results Because
Velocity of Light


-0.5 0.0 0.5
A:- Actual Velocity of Contraction B:- Locally Observed Veloci


Figure 10.3 - Externally and Internally Observed Velocity of Collapse


Observed 10? Actual Years


Sh 10° Actual Years
econds 107 Actual Years


One Actual Year


Actual Time, Seconds
(Observation Starts One Microsecond After Actual Minimum)


Figure 10.4 - Internally Observed Time vs. Externally
Observed Time of Internal Expansion


10.15- The Actual and Locally Observed Energy of a Nucleon During Gravitational Collapse:- The
actual slowing of the velocity of light to zero at the Horizon Radius insures that gravitational
collapse will not allow the radius of an object to decrease to less than Rp in a finite time. One
would hope, however, that Nature had a less namby-pamby means of terminating the process, and
indeed it does. The termination of gravitational collapse occurs because, as the actual radius
approaches the Horizon Radius, the radiation pressure of photons and neutrinos increases
sufficiently to balance gravitational pressure. As the object contracts, its locally observed radius, as
diagramed in Figure 10.2B, decreases from the radius of the star from which it was formed to a
minimum of four times the its Horizon Radius. From that point on, the locally observed unit of
measurement for length decreases more rapidly than the actual radius of the object. This causes
the object, as locally observed, to expand rather than contract, with the locally observed radius
approaching infinity as the actual radius approaches R,. During the locally observed contraction,


the energy density (mostly in the form of matter) of the object increases from that of normal matter
to that of neutrons and finally to an energy density which, if the object is not too large, far exceeds
the energy density of nucleons. When the inflection point shown in Figure 10.2B has been passed,
the locally observed energy density of the object begins to decrease because of the locally
observed increase in volume and eventually falls to the energy density of a nucleon. During this
portion of the expansion process, the energy which had been stored as a result of the compression
of the original nucleons is released by the expansion to form additional nucleons at an internally
observed temperature of 4.25 trillion Kelvins. The process generates a large increase in the locally
observed energy content of the object, both in terms of the number of nucleons present and its
radiational energy, as shown in Figure 10.5A. (The reduction of the actual energy present in
nucleons is shown in Figure 10.5B.) As the locally observed expansion continues, the object
becomes normal matter which then expands to become a gas. The expansion associated with this
phase acts to reduce the temperature of the object.


Exponential Scale Exponential Scale


10-8 106 104 102


A:- Locally Observed Energy B:- Actual Ene Decrease Per Nucleon
Increase Per Original Nucleon


Figure 10.5 - Locally Observed and Actual Total Energy
Change of Nucleon Due to Actual Contraction of Object


10.16- As the internally observed expansion phase proceeds and the temperature drops below its
limit of 4.25 trillion Kelvins, matter can no longer reduce the absolute energy represented by
individual particles of matter, as required by the Principle of Relativity, by creating additional
matter. After this point has been reached, matter has no choice but to release energy in the form of
radiation. For the small portion of its energy which is electromagnetic in nature
(electrons/positrons, charge of protons/antiprotons, and the electromagnetic energy associated
with the orbiting of electrons/positrons) there is no problem. The resulting radiation consists of
photons and adds to the observed background electromagnetic radiation of space or, if the matter
is contained within an object such as a planet or star, serves to warm that object. (Planets, for
example, are observed to radiate more energy than they receive from the Sun.) The 99.95% of the
energy content of matter that is contained within atomic nuclei is a different matter. Based upon the
arguments provided in Chapter 13, it would seem that the required shedding of energy must be
accomplished by broad spectrum radiation of neutrinos similar to the black body radiation of
electromagnetic energy. Such a broad spectrum radiation of neutrinos, however, is not directly
observable within the current state of the art and, indeed, may never be observable. Neutrinos are
currently detectable only by their absorption by atomic nuclei. Since that interaction occurs at
sharply defined frequencies, analogous to the electromagnetic spectral absorption lines of atoms,
only a small percentage of the emitted neutrino radiation traversing space can be detected.
(Gravitationally induced time dilation between the center of the Sun and the Earth can easily
provide enough frequency shift to account for the failure of experiments designed to detect the
expected emission level of neutrinos produced in Sun.) Unlike photons, neutrinos are not trapped
by matter and they escape directly to space without heating the object through which they are
passing. It seems reasonable to expect that the distribution of energy between photons and
neutrinos in the background radiation of space would closely match the ratio of electron mass to
nucleon mass of atoms. If this is the case, 99.95% of the background radiation level of space would
consist of undetectable neutrinos. While this conclusion may seem extreme, in terms of
background radiation temperature it is not hard to accept. Since the energy of radiation varies as
the 4th power of absolute temperature, the required energy ratio is achieved if a very reasonable
background neutrino radiation temperature of 22.3K coexisted with our Universe's background
electromagnetic background temperature of 3.5K.


10.17- The Endpoint of Gravitational Collapse:- "Gravity", using the above model, provides the
gravitationally induced pressure and the energy density of an object having a total energy of E;, as


observed with actual units of measurement and in terms of the gravitational potential, $
(alternatively expressed as R,/R). The derivation of these expressions did not consider that energy


in the form of radiation gravitates at twice the rate of energy in the form of matter. When this effect
is considered by the inclusion of the factor #, these expressions, with no energy radiated to space,
become:


Gravitational Pressure = R,,4/[4*(Pl)*D3*(1+#)2*R4*E,?]
Radiation Energy Density = 3R,,°/[4*(Pl)*D°*#2*R3*E,2]


And, since radiation pressure is proportional to the energy density of the radiation, the radiation
pressure, P,, is given by:


Radiation Pressure = 3R,,°/[4*(Pl)*D3*#2*R3*E,7]


Equating the expressions for the gravitational pressure and the radiational pressure enables the
relationship between the gravitational potential, R,/R, and the portion, #, of the object's total
energy which is in the form of radiation enables the value of # at which a pressure balances occurs
to be determined. The result is plotted in Figure 10.6 as a function of the gravitational potential. The
curve has been adjusted to include the effects resulting from the fact that energy in the form of
radiation gravitates at twice the rate of energy in the form of matter.


As Locally Observed
Contraction ote Expansion


iz Radiation Pressure Exceeds
Gravitational Pressure


Content in


Content = cal ial
orm o i
Radiation i ERr eee


Linear
Scale Gravitational Pressure Exceeds
l Radiation Fressure
“0 0.25 0.5 0.75 1.0
Gravitational Potential, Ry/R, Linear Scale


Figure 10.6 - Pressure Balance Between Radiation
and Gravity vs. Gravitational Potential


10.18- As a result of radiation pressure, actual gravitational contraction comes to a halt at a radius,
R, which is close to the Event Horizon radius, Rp, because further actual contraction increases the
locally observed radiation pressure. Actual contraction from this point on can only continue as a
result of the radiation of energy to space. For this to occur, the actual temperature of the object
must be warmer than the space in which exists. As provided in "Gravity", the gravitational
equilibrium temperature between space and the collapsed object imposed by the Gravitational
Transformation, (1-R,/R), in terms of the temperature of the external space, &, in Kelvins, is given


by:


(1-R,,/R)=4.85*&0-5*10-7


The characteristics of a collapsed object in which all of its energy has been radiated to space has
also been derived in "Gravity". Actually, the object has shrunk to the size of a mathematical point
which contains zero energy. As observed locally, the object has shrunk to the radius of its original
Event Horizon and contains an amount of energy which is equal to the energy originally contained
in the matter from which it was formed. This energy, however, will be entirely in the form of
radiation. Gravitational collapse of an object will not go to completion as long as the temperature of
the space surrounding the object exceeds absolute zero.


10.19- The Conservation of Angular Momentum During Gravitational Contraction:-When a figure
skater is spinning on the toe of a skate, her rate of spin is increased dramatically by the simple act


of bringing her extended arms to her side. The effect is one of the most familiar examples of the
Law of Conservation of Angular Momentum and results from two effects. In retracting her arms, the
skater increases the kinetic energy of her arms by doing work against the centrifugal force of the
spin. This energy, along with the original kinetic energy stored in her arms must be conserved and,
in order for this requirement to be met, her angular velocity must increase. The effect obeys the Law
of Conservation of Angular Momentum which states, that in the absence of external torques, the
product of an object's moment of inertia and its angular velocity must remain constant. By
withdrawing her arms, the skater reduces the moment of inertia of her body and her angular
velocity increases accordingly.


10.20- The effect also applies to rotating objects undergoing gravitational collapse. At all points in
the process, angular momentum must be conserved, both actually and as locally observed.
Handbooks provide the moment of inertia of a sphere in terms of its mass, M, and its radius, R, as
0.4*M*R2. Since both of these quantities, and the measured rate of the passage of time are subject
to the Gravity Transformations of Table 8.13.1, the relative change in the angular velocity of a
collapsing object as a function of its locally observed radius is readily determined. As shown in
Figure 10.7B, the relationship between the locally observed angular velocity and the locally
observed radius of the object during the contraction phase is conventional. Its angular velocity
increases in inverse proportion to the square of its radius. During the expansion phase, however,
the locally observed angular velocity decreases in inverse proportion to the cube of its locally
observed radius. The reason for the difference in behavior between the locally observed expansion
and contraction phases is that the locally observed release of gravitational energy increases the
object's locally observed mass. At the large locally observed radius existing late in the expansion
stage, the internally observed angular velocity is indistinguishable from zero.


Exponential Scales Exponential Scales
pe ee


w j Fath of
A e
sie EELSE
Observed 104
Radius, ——

Path of Expansion ANN, |


aha haw SS


-20 -10 0


A: Actual Angular Velocity :- Locally Observed ular Veloci
Zero Reference Arbitrarily Chosen Zero Reference Arbitrarily Chosen


Figure 10.7 - Actual and Internally Observed Angular Velocity vs. Radius


10.21- Actually the angular velocity of a collapsing object follows a different path. For the case
where no energy is lost by the collapsing object by radiation to space, the mass of the object varies
inversely with the square of the velocity of light in accordance with Thomson's E=M*C2 and is
proportional to 1/(1-R,,/R)4. Figure 10.7A shows that the effect of the mass increase is small for
radii which are large compared to the Horizon Radius and the object obeys the conventional Law of
Conservation of Angular Momentum as it contracts. When the radius approaches the Horizon
Radius, the effects of the increased mass predominate and the rotation of the object comes to a
screeching halt. The abruptness of the stoppage is illustrated by Figure 10.8.


10.22- When one recognizes that our Universe is itself a gravitational object of a radius essentially
equal to its Horizon Radius, as determined by the gravitational mass of the matter and the radiation
it contains, it is obvious that the net angular velocity represented by that matter and radiation must
be vanishingly close to zero. The gyroscopically observed zero angular velocity of our Universe is
caused by the Law of Conservation of Angular Momentum operating in an ‘expanding’ Universe. It
is not the result of the net angular velocity of all of the matter in the Universe as Drs. Einstein and
Mach asserted without having presented any indication as to how such a miraculous effect might
come about. Modern General Relativists assert that as a rotating object forms a Black Hole, it drags
space along with it and its rotation comes to rest with respect to that space. If any reader believes
either of these assertions, the author would like to hear from him. That bridge over the East River is
still for sale.


Exponential Scale


Angular Velocity
Equals Zero at R= Rh


10-30


Change in Actual Angular Velocity
Zero Reference is Arbitrarily Chosen


Figure 10.8 - Actual Angular Velocity vs. Radius


10.23- Gravitational Waves and Gravitons:- Since every accumulation of energy generates a
gravitational field, it follows that the energy comprising every object which is undergoing spatial
acceleration, such as the Moon in its orbit around the Earth, emits gravitational disturbances. If the
acceleration is cyclical, the disturbances are in the form of waves which propagate throughout
space and are sufficiently strong to allow their detection, at least in principle, at extreme distances.
As is the case for all types of radiation, the wavelength of such a gravitational wave is determined
both by the frequency of the cyclical motion generating it and the velocity of the wave's
propagation. (If one assumes that the velocity of propagation of a gravitational effect is infinite,
gravitational waves can be considered to be a waves of infinite wavelength.) Gravitational waves are
implicit in both Newton's and Einstein's concepts of gravitation as well as in Gravity Relativity.
Since it has had to be obvious to anyone who has thought about the subject during the intervening
years since Newton that gravitational waves propagate throughout the Universe, the practice of
crediting Dr. Einstein with predicting their existence seems to be somewhat of a reach.


10.24- A gravity wave is emitted by an accelerated source, such as an object in orbit about another
object. Newton's Second Law of Motion requires that interacting objects maintain a common center
of gravity which remains stationary. As an example, the Moon does not orbit the center of the Earth.
The focus of the orbits of both the Earth and the Moon is at their common center of gravity, about
1000 miles below the Earth's surface on the side nearer to the Moon. As they move in their
respective orbits about this focus, both the Earth and the Moon radiate gravitational waves. This
radiation can be observed in the near field as separate gravitational waves produced by the orbital
motions of the Earth and of the Moon. It cannot be observed in the far field because detectors in the
far field lack sufficient angular resolution to distinguish the Earth and the Moon as separate
sources of gravitational radiation and sense only the net gravitational field from their stationary
center of gravity. In the far field, the gravity wave from the Earth is canceled by the gravity wave
from the Moon.


10.25- The meaning of near field and far field detection of radiation can be understood by
considering the observation of a police car approaching at night along a straight desert road with
its headlights flashing alternately. While each headlight is alternately turned on and off, the total
light emitted from the car remains constant with its source moving from one side of the car to the
other. When the car is 5 miles away, the limited resolution of the observer's eyes prevents him from
seeing the headlights as individual light sources, he sees them in the far field as a single source of
constant intensity. When the car approaches to within 1 or 2 miles, near field detection begins
because the observer's eyes are capable of resolving the two headlights as separate sources. He
then observes the cyclical flashing of each headlight, and the light source is seen to move from


side to side.


10.26- Near field observation of the gravitational waves of the Earth-Moon system has been a fact of
life throughout history. We live in proximity to a highly effective near field gravitational wave
detector, the ocean. The output of this near field detector is the daily change of the time of high tide.
However, when it comes to the detection of gravitational waves from, for example, closely spaced
binary stars, any detector which can be built on Earth will be a far field detector. Its angular
resolution is limited by the size of the Earth and will be many orders of magnitude too coarse to
allow it to resolve the gravity wave components of any possible source. The gravity waves will be
there, but the detector will be unable to find them. Attempts to detect gravitational waves are
doomed to failure and consequently are a waste of time, money, and even more significantly,
valuable talent. The only evidence we see, or probably ever will see, of gravitational radiation from
distant orbiting objects is the decay of their orbits resulting from the loss of energy that such
radiation implies. The Universe completely surrounds any source of gravitational radiation and
consequently behaves as a near field absorber of its energy.


10.27- There are numerous mentions in the literature of as yet unobserved particles named
gravitons as being the carriers of gravitational force. The concept of gravitons arises as an analog
to the virtual photons which allegedly produce the electromagnetic forces. Aside from whether or
not virtual photons exist, there is no requirement for gravitons to be any more than a figment of the
mathematical physicist's imagination and are generated by his need to explain gravity's ability to
act at a distance without accepting the existence of the Aether. Since the gravitational field does not
contain energy itself, but only modulates the behavior of the energy which is already present, there
is no theoretical requirement for it to be quanticized. Unless they are observed or are shown to be
required, it seems reasonable to take the position that they are a fiction.


Chapter 11 - Gravitational Collapse and the Creation of a
Universe


11.1- If one examines the implications of Figure 10.2, it is apparent that every object which
undergoes gravitational collapse creates another universe within a sphere having an actual radius
slightly in excess its Horizon Radius. As we have seen, as the object's actual radius contracts
towards the Horizon Radius, its locally observed radius initially contracts and then expands. From
this point on, gravitational contraction causes the object's locally observed radius to increase and
approach infinity. The fact that the Gravity Transformations for Length and for Energy are identical
causes both the locally observed energy content of the object and its locally observed radius to
approach infinity at the same rate. Since the volume of a sphere varies in proportion to the cube of
its radius, once the locally observed expansion phase begins, the locally observed energy density
of the object decreases in proportion to the square of its locally observed radius. (The combined
effects of the Gravity Transformations on the units of measurement of both length and energy
cause the point of maximum locally observed energy density to shift from its nominal value of
4*Rn to 4.1*Rp-)


11.2- As shown in Figure 11.1A, computer simulation reveals that the maximum locally observed
energy density of the collapsing object, expressed in terms of nucleon energy per original nucleon,
varies inversely with the square of the the actual energy content of the object. At the point of
maximum locally observed density, the nucleons of objects smaller than 185 actual solar masses
are compressed and energy is stored within them. As the subsequent locally observed expansion
phase proceeds, the excess locally observed energy stored within the compressed nucleons is
released in a manner which follows the highest entropy path. As a result, the additional nucleons
shown in Figure 11.1B are created while the locally observed temperature of 4.25 trillion Kelvins


generated during the contraction phase remains unchanged. Local observations made late in the
expansion phase and extrapolated backwards in time to the beginning would lead to the conclusion
that matter boiled into being from nothingness and then expanded to become normal matter
embedded in a sea of intense radiation. The object, as locally observed, then continues to expand
and cool as a gas and, as the locally observed expansion proceeds, additional energy is released
from matter to retard but not stop the cooling process. Eventually the object, as locally observed,
becomes sparsely populated with matter and the bulk of its energy content is in the form of
radiation. The actual contraction and the corresponding locally observed expansion, are finally
limited by a balance between gravitational and radiational pressure as a function of the factor #, as
shown in Figure 10.6. The collapse of objects more massive than 185 solar masses does not cause
compression of nucleons because the volume of such objects at R=2*R,, is sufficient to prevent
nucleon compression. For such objects, the energy of fall from an infinite distance causes an
increase in the number nucleons by a factor of 4.59.


11.3- Since astrophysicists teach that only objects having an externally observed size larger than
4.5 Solar Masses will undergo gravitational collapse, it is reasonable to use the Gravitational
Transformations to examine the interior of such objects after they have undergone that collapse but
have not radiated energy to external space. Late in its locally observed expansion stage we would
find that:


e The object consists of mostly empty space filled with radiation.


e Nucleons within the object are organized in strings of varying lengths up to a significant
portion of the size of the object. If the object is sufficiently large, these strings eventually
contain stars and galaxies.


o Workers in the field of plasma physics have shown that electric and magnetic fields in
space are capable of organizing matter in this manner. ("The Big Bang Never Happened"
by Eric Lerner, Times Books.)


e The object will be observed to be expanding towards an infinite radius with the fraction of its
total energy which is in the form of radiation, #, approaching unity.


e Extrapolation of observations of the expansion process backwards in time will lead to the
conclusion that the object began with an eruption of matter into existence. Simplistically, it
would be concluded that the matter was created from nothingness at a single point in space.


e The radius of the object will appear to be increasing at the velocity of light.


e The object will be composed entirely of normal matter or of anti-matter but it will not contain
both types.


o Mutual annihilation will cause matter and anti-matter in the original cloud to annihilate
each other until only the predominant type of matter remains.


Exponential Scales Exponential Scales


Nucleon Caused by
Equivalent squashing of
Energy per Nucleons
Nucleon


Caused by Kinetic
Increase in Energy of Fall


Compressed Neutrons Pi al i er of
= ucleons
Compressed Normal Matter Pee |


10
10-20 10-10 100 1010 10-20 10-10 100 1010
Actual Size of Object in Solar Masses Actual Size of Object in Solar Masses
A:- Locally Observed Addition of B:- Nucleon Multiplication Resulti


Ene to Nucleons at Peak of From Locally Observed ansion
Locally Observed Compression


Figure 11.1 - Effects of Locally Observed Compression on Energy Added to
Initial Nucleons and to Number of Nucleons Present After Re-expansion


This description might well apply to our own Universe if it were not for one difficulty. Our Universe
contains 1089 nucleons. As shown in Figure 11.2A, the nucleon content of a collapsed object is
determined by its actually observed size and, for the collapsed object to contain 1080 nucleons, the
actually observed size of the collapsing object would have to be on the order of 2*1012 kilograms
(approximately that of a rock having a diameter of a kilometer), as shown in Figure 11.2B. Since
gravitational collapse does not occur in objects smaller than 4.5 actual solar masses, our Universe
could not be formed in this manner unless an additional factor was present.


Numbers of
Nucleons


109 1910


Actual Size of Object in Solar Masses Actual Size of Object in Solar Masses


A:- Number of Nucleons Before Contraction B:- Number of Nucleons After
Locally Observed ansion


Figure 11.2 - Number of Nucleons Before Contraction and
After Locally Observed Expansion vs. Size of Object


11.4- While it might be questioned as to whether the process of gravitational collapse qualifies as
the creation of a universe, such an objection is groundless. Initially the object is collapsing in an


existing universe. As observed in that universe, the object collapses to a small ultra dense and ultra
hot sphere containing a greatly increased number of collapsed nucleons which shrink in size until
the object appears to be virtually devoid of matter and is filled almost entirely with radiation. As
observed within the object, the description of the initial stages are virtually identical until after the
point of maximum energy density has been reached. From that point on, additional matter boils into
existence from what seems to be nothingness and the object then expands and cools until it
becomes an extremely large object expanding at the velocity of light. At that point. the density of
matter has become low and the object consists primarily of radiation. The large locally observed
size and energy content of what is actually an extremely small object containing almost no energy
results from the gravitationally induced change in the size of the units of measurement acting in
concert with the Principle of Relativity. Even though the boundaries of the object are no longer hot
or dense, there is no possible escape from the universe represented by the interior of the collapsed
object to the universe in which it resides. The energy required for a nucleon to escape from the
object is too great. It would be hard to imagine anything which is more qualified to be classified as a
universe as the collapsed object.


11.5- It remains to be explained how a universe the size of the one in which we live might be formed
by gravitational collapse if collapse does not occur in objects smaller than 4.5 solar masses. To
illustrate how the author believes our Universe was formed, the radii ratios, R/R,, where the


gravitational squashing of nucleons occur, are plotted in Figure 11.3A. In order to magnify the
effects of interest, the vertical scale is plotted in terms of (R/Rp-1) rather than R/R}. (It is the minus
sign in the Gravitational Transformation which produces the effect of the field.) As an example, the
gravitational collapse of an object of 4.5 solar masses is shown on this plot under conditions where
no energy is lost by radiation. (In reality, energy is always radiated.) To show how the loss of energy
to space by radiation allows the creation of an extremely large universe, the region of squashed
neutrons is replotted in Figure 11.3B with the vertical axis shown in terms of actual meters. This
plot shows the gravitational collapse of an object of 4.5 solar masses with the effects of radiational
heat loss included. (With the plot scale employed, the region of locally observed expansion is
sufficiently narrow to be contained within the width of the lower line.) As the object collapses, it
radiates energy to space. That energy loss moves it to the left in Figure 11.3B, as typified by the
arrow from point '1' to point '2'. The movement to the left, in turn, means that in terms of its Horizon
Radius, it is now too large and must contract further, as typified by the arrow from point '2' to point
'3', to again coincide with the lower line, generating more nucleons in the process. The process is
continuous and the loss of energy to space by radiation causes the object to move to the left along
the lower boundary line. Eventually the object achieves a thermal balance with the external space
and, from that point on, the object remains on the lower line of the curve with a # factor virtually
equal to unity. Further actual collapse and locally observed expansion can only result from a
reduction of the temperature of the space surrounding the object. (That space is colder than the
lowest temperature achieved or likely to be achieved in a laboratory.) It is interesting to note that
Figure 11.3B indicates that the actual radius of a universe having the locally observed size of our
own is about 1/1000 of the size of the neutron! Talk about making more and more from less and
less.


Radius of Object, Meters Object Collapses


squashed
Neutrons


Expansion Region

Contained Within
Present T Width of Line
Universe On This Plot


10-10 108 1910
Actual Size of Object in Solar Masses Actual Size of Object in Solar Masses


Actual Radius Shown As R/Rh-1 to Provide Actual Radius Shown in Meters.
Resolution, Both Scales Are Exponential Both Scales Are Exponential.


Steps in Fillowing Path of Collapse

1 - Heat Loss Reduces Size of Object

2 - Object is Now Larger Than Horizon Radius
3 - Object Collapses to Horizon Radius


A:- Squashing of Neutrons in Object B:- The Creation of a Universe?


Figure 11.3 - The Compression of Nucleons and the Creation of a Universe


11.6- The examination of gravitational collapse does, however, answer the question as to the final
fate of our Universe. In "Gravity", the parameters of a gravitationally collapsed object which had
radiated all of its energy to the external space are provided. Such an object has actually reached a
zero radius and zero energy content and consequently has ceased to exist. To the local observer,
the radius of the object and its Horizon Radius have become infinite. The cosmic crunch which has
been postulated as the possible end of our Universe will not occur. The Universe, as locally
observed, will expand and cool forever as it shrinks to an actual mathematical point.


11.7- The process of gravitational collapse implicit in the Gravity Transformations suggests an
interesting scenario. Initially, a single universe contains particles of matter and anti-matter which
annihilate each other and release radiation when they meet. In turn, radiation of sufficient energy,
after a time, recreates particles of matter to replace the matter which has been annihilated.
Eventually the process causes matter and anti-matter to sort themselves into separate groups from
which gravitational objects composed of either normal matter or anti-matter can form. Any such
objects having a size of at least 4.5 solar masses then contract to form independent universes
which may eventually become as large or larger than our own. Within each of these universes, an
enormous number of gravitational objects form and undergo their own gravitational collapse to
become the next generation of universes. As long as the key parameters which determine the
behavior of matter, radiation, and gravitation have Gravitational Transformations equal to unity, the
number of generations of universes which can result from this process would seem to be unlimited.
The relevant transformations listed in Table 8.13.1 meet this requirement. The Gravity
Transformations for Planck's Constant, the Dielectric Constant, the Ergo-gravitational Constant and
the Fine Structure Constant are all equal to unity and, if the Principle of Relativity is rigorously
valid, then all other fundamental parameters will meet this criteria. There may be, however, an
observational disagreement with the concept of an unlimited number of generations of universes.
The velocity at which astronomical objects recede from each other due to the "expansion" of our
Universe has been reported to vary in steps of about 70 kilometers per second rather than varying


uniformly with distance. If this effect actually occurs and if it does not result from an explainable
cause, the absolute validity of the Principle of Relativity, and more particularly the knowledge which
flows from that principle, would be in question. Otherwise, reality may well be the grandfather of all
fractals with its basic pattern being that of an individual universe.


11.8- As will be discussed in the next chapters, the possibility exists that, in the original universe
(an ancestor of our own) the velocity of light and the velocity of the quantum field are equal but,
while the velocity of light is reduced by the proximity of energy (gravitation), the velocity of
quantum field(s) may be affected to a much smaller degree, if at all. If this is the case, the physics of
the original universe would differ greatly from the physics of subsequent generations of universes.
However, the physics of the later universes should be essentially identical.


Chapter 12 - The Space Time Continuum


12.1- In our conventional experience, an event is normally considered to take place at a location
described in terms of three spatial coordinates and one temporal coordinate. For example, if a light
bulb is turned on in a room, the source of that light might be described as being four feet from the
north wall, three feet from the east wall, and five feet from the floor and the time at which the light
was turned on might be described as 2:04 PM on July 3, 1996. One might then ask why Nature
employs three spatial dimensions and one time dimension as the basic structure of reality. Why
isn't reality built with a different number of spatial dimensions (eg:- one, two, four, or five)? Why
does it have a single time dimension along which reality progresses in a single direction from past
to future?


12.2- Three Dimensional Euclidian Space:-To examine such questions consider first the
possibilities inherent in continuums differing in the number of spatial dimensions they contain. A
space consisting of zero dimensions is a mathematical point and events cannot occur. There would
not be room. A space consisting of one dimension is a line and, while it can exist, events still
cannot occur because points located along that line cannot pass each other to change their
sequence. For events to occur, a space of two orthogonal spatial dimensions is required so as to
allow points to change their relative locations by going around each other but, for those events to
occur, energy must be present to cause them. Energy is a force acting through a distance and, as
distance uses up one of the two spatial dimensions, the force must be applied to the remaining
spatial dimension. Since that single spatial dimension is a line, it has zero cross-sectional area and
the slightest force applied to it will produce an infinite pressure. Energy and the events that energy
cause cannot exist in a continuum of two spatial dimensions because infinite pressure is infinitely
destructive. Adding a third spatial dimension relieves the difficulty. A force acting along one of the
spatial dimensions is then applied to the area represented by the remaining two spatial dimensions
and the pressure resulting from the presence of energy remains finite. Except for the conceptual
detour introduced by General Relativity, three spatial dimensions would seem to be adequate for
Nature's purposes. (Some authors have stated that stable orbits are not possible in a universe
having four or more spatial dimensions.) While the author is certain that many physicists will object
strongly to the author's conclusions with respect to the dimensional content of space, their
disagreement can only considered to have substance if it is accompanied by a demonstration of a
small displacement, perhaps a fraction of an inch, in a direction which is orthogonal to our three
familiar spatial dimensions. The only justification for a belief that space is represented by a three
dimensional non-Euclidian geometry are observations which have been made between reference
frames differing in elevation without a correction for the effect of elevation differences on the units
of measurement having been made. There is no kind way to Say it, those observations represent
bad science. When the proper corrections are made, the geometry of space is found to be three
dimensional Euclidian.


12.3- Lest there be a misunderstanding, the author has no quarrel with the use of non-Euclidian or
multi-dimensional geometry in the mathematical solutions of physical problems. Because the
pseudo-dimensions of non-Euclidian and/or multi-dimensional geometry have a property which
they share with spatial dimensions, non-interaction between axes, their pseudo-geometry can be
quite useful in the solution of physical problems. It is not clear, however, that non-Euclidian
geometry can deal correctly with phenomena which involve energy. The author's objection occurs
when physicists who have learned their profession by rote assert that the pseudo-geometry of
curved space represents reality. Such individuals are apparently satisfied to perform their
calculations without understanding the reality they represent and, as a result, can easily be misled
when they interpret their findings.


12.4- The Time Dimension:- Nature requires one more dimension in order to function. It requires the
dimension of time. The three spatial dimensions provide the room for events to occur and allow the
energy required to impel those events to exist. The changes which events represent occur in a
sequence which may be considered to be a translation of the three spatial axes along an axis which
is orthogonal to them. The effect of that translation of the three spatial axes results in the passage
of time in which the present follows the past and the future follows the present. The fourth
dimension does not relate to where, it relates to when.


12.5- The passage of time is intuitively obvious. The question which that passage poses is why it
progresses from past to future and not from future to past. If the events which are considered are
simple enough, there is no way to tell the direction of time. A motion picture showing the impact of
two billiard balls appears quite reasonable when it is projected in the forward or in the reverse
direction. The situation is different if the motion picture shows the initial break of the balls ina
game of pool. If the motion picture is run in the normal direction, the cue ball is observed to strike a
triangular cluster of 15 balls. The 16 balls then move in 16 different directions at 16 different
velocities and the observer considers the display to be quite reasonable. If the motion picture is run
backward, 16 balls approach each other at 16 different velocities from 16 different locations and
arrange themselves with 15 of them in a compact stationary triangle and with a single ball departing
from the apex of the triangle at a high velocity. An observer viewing such a display will conclude
that the motion picture has been run backwards because the probability of the events, as displayed,
occurring naturally is vanishingly small.


12.6- There is a fundamental difference between the two examples. In the case of the impact of the
two billiard balls, there is no change in the amount of information present before and after their
impact. The total relevant information prior to impact is the position and velocity of two billiard
balls. The situation is different in the case of the breaking of a rack of pool balls. Prior to impact, of
the 16 balls involved, 15 of them are locked into a pattern which has a single position and zero
velocity while the 16th ball has both a velocity and position. Only four significant items of
information exist. Following the impact of the cue balls, 16 balls have individual positions and
velocities and 32 significant items of information exist. (Two items of information are required to
represent position and velocity on the surface of the two dimensional table. They are each treated
as a single item to avoid complicating the discussion.) One is led to the conclusion that the flow of
time from the past to the future is accompanied by an increase in the total amount of information or
its equivalent, the total quantity of entropy, in the Universe. Since both gravitational collapse and
the universe creation process described earlier involve an enormous increase in total information
content, time must progress in the direction of that collapse, from past to present to future. In
Chapter 10 it was shown that the energy content of all matter was higher in the past and will be
lower in the future. A reversal of the flow of time, even locally, would require an enormous input of
energy.


12.7- Surprisingly, there seems to be a school of thought among physicists that Special Relativity
allows it to be possible to transfer information from the future to the past if faster than light
communication could be achieved. Their concept is based upon the idea that if points A and B were
physically separated but moving at the same velocity, an observer at point A could consider that


points A and B were moving in a direction from B to A. As a result, a signal sent to point B ata
velocity greater than the velocity of light would arrive before it was sent. Similarly, an observer at
point B could consider that points A and B were moving in a direction towards point B and that a
signal sent to point A at a velocity greater than the velocity of light would also arrive before it had
be sent. They then conclude that if a faster than light signal were sent from B to A the instant that a
faster than light signal was received from A, the round trip signal from A to B to A would be
received before it had been sent and a signal would have been received from the future. Fortunately
for the casino industry, faster than light communication will not achieve such a result. The fallacy is
that, while it is legitimate to accept that a faster than light signal sent from A to B can be considered
to arrive before it was sent and it is also legitimate to consider that a faster than light signal sent
from B to A can be considered to arrive before it was sent, it is not legitimate to hold both
viewpoints simultaneously because that view point requires A and B to be moving at two different
velocities at the same time. Communication or travel from the future to the past is not possible
under any legitimate physical theory. It only appears possible if one's reasoning processes are
limited.


12.8- The Barrier at the Past-Future Interface:-The concept of negative time appears many times in
mathematical treatments of physical problems ranging from Dr. Feynmann's observation that it is
impossible to distinguish between a positive electron traveling forward in time and a negative
electron traveling backwards in time to an analysis of AM radio communication. While many
individuals consider that because mathematics allows and in many cases requires the concept of
negative time, that, in natural processes, time must actually be able to flow in reverse. This presents
another situation where one must never ass*u*me.


12.9- A similar effect occurs in suppressed carrier modulation of radio signals, as shown in Figure
12.1. Mathematically, the process consists of the multiplication of the input signal (simplistically
shown as a simple sine wave at a frequency of w.) by the sinusoidal carrier frequency, we. The
result of the multiplication process is two signals, one of which is the sum of the two frequencies
and the other is the difference between them, as shown. Passing the composite signal through a
low pass filter rejects the higher frequency signal and provides a single signal at the difference
frequency which contains all of the information originally present and which occupies half of the
bandwidth and requires one quarter of the peak power of a conventional AM radio transmission.
(Passing the signal through a high pass filter eliminates the difference frequency signal and
transmits the sum frequency signal.) The spectrum of the suppressed carrier modulated signals is
shown in Figure 12.2A. With a zero frequency signal, the sum and difference frequency signals
superimpose at the carrier frequency. When the signal frequency is equal to half of the carrier
frequency, the difference frequency signal also appears at half of the carrier frequency while the
sum frequency signal appears at 1.5 times the carrier frequency. The interesting case occurs when
one considers the signal frequency to be higher than the carrier frequency. A simple minded
mathematical analysis suggests that, for a signal frequency 1.5 times the carrier frequency, the sum
frequency will be 2.5 times the carrier frequency (perfectly reasonable) but the difference frequency
will have the unreasonable value of minus one half of the carrier frequency. In order for that to
occur, time would have to flow in reverse. Nature, however, does not allow this to occur. Instead,
the actual physical process relies upon the symmetry of the sinusoidal function to allow the
reflection of the difference frequency signal from a "mirror" at the past-present interface and appear
as a phase inverted signal at half of the carrier frequency. The reflection process at the past-present
interface is analogous to the reflection of an image from the mirror of Figure 12.2B.


Carrier Input,


sin +f


Suppressed Carrier
Signal Input im Modulated Signal Low Pass | Sin (Wc - Ws) +t)


4


f 0.5*[Sin(W, + We)"t) + Sin(We - W)*1)]


A Aste


Note:  Low-pass filter rejects upper sideband to produce signal of frequency lower
than carrier frequency as shown. Substitution of high-pass filter rejects
lower sideband and produces signal higher in frequency than carrier frequency
(not shown). Both sidebands contain identical information.


Figure 12.1 - Suppressed Carrier Modulation of Electromagnetic Signals


12.10- There is an additional factor involved in the passage of time. Information about the past can
be remembered in the present while information about the future cannot, at least to a degree which
is subject to rigorous verification. This leads to the conclusion that information can only flow from
the past to the present, but that conclusion may not be completely true. The Bible recounts the
predictions of the Prophets and asserts that many of them have come to pass. It is claimed that
psychics can, at times, foresee the future. Individuals have reported experiences which might be
interpreted as a memory of a future event and, in the process, some have predicted significant
events prior to their occurrence but their reports are invariably attributed to coincidence or outright
fakery. Rejection of the possibility by orthodox science may be not be rigorously valid. Information
does not necessarily involve energy (e.g.- information represented by the polarization axis of a
photon) and, if the information does not involve energy, its transfer is not necessarily subject to all
of the limitations that Nature imposes upon the transfer of information represented by energy.
Perhaps there is a backflow of information from the future to the present, but, if that back flow is
small compared to the the forward flow of information from the past to the present, experiments will
always prove that the reverse information flow path does not exist. Cultural bias acts to prevent the
experimental recognition of such an effect, particularly since even the smallest degree of reverse
information flow would result in severe philosophical paradoxes.


12.11- Space, Time and Coordinate System- One must recognize that space is a basic characteristic
of reality and as such is instinctively understood by all mobile creatures. It is only symbol using
mankind that associates a coordinate system with space in order to be able to quantify it. Matter
exists in space just as you currently exist in the room in which you are reading this text, but like
your room's relationship to you, it continues to exist when you are absent. Space is an unchanging
volume (in the "absolute" sense) which may or may not contain energy or matter but which does
contain something since it has observable properties such as a dielectric constant, permeability, a
barrier which prevents energy from exceeding the velocity of light and perhaps other properties
which are yet unknown. It is characteristic of space that those properties are affected by the
presence of energy and cause matter to reduce its size and to lose energy thereby causing an
internal observer to falsely conclude that space has been created by the proximity of energy.


Mathematical Treatment Does
Not Recognize Reflection and
. Predicts Virtual Image Behind
Negative Positive signal at Zero Frequency Mirror K


Both Sidebands at Wg


Frequencies f Frequencies
S Lee
Sidebands mage
05W — Mirror


Signal at 0.5*W, Surface
Math Places Upper


Lower Sideband Mirror at Sideband Reality is Affected By
at -0.5*W Past - Future at 2.5*W, Reflection, Actual
Boundary Signal at 15*W, Object is in Front
of Mirror
“@— Lower Sideband is Phase Inverted
and Reflected to 0.5*W/,


Carrier Frequency = VW,


A: Spectral Components of Suppressed Carrier Modulated Signal B:- Optical Analog of
Showing Reflection at Pasit-Future (Zero Frequency) Interface Time Reflection


Figure 12.2 - Reflection at Interface Between Past and Present


Chapter 13 - The Nature of Particles


13.1- As shown earlier, logical deductions based upon physical observation and experiments by
quantum physicists have demonstrated that space must be filled with the Aether of the Lorentz
Contraction-Aether Theory rather than the nothingness asserted by adherents of Special Relativity.
Furthermore, not only must the Aether be a solid in order for it to propagate the transverse
vibrations of electromagnetic radiation, that solid must be absolutely continuous if the marvelous
mechanism we experience as reality is to function. (If one observes a conventional automobile
traveling down a road, he is safe in concluding that the car has a driveshaft of some type between
its transmission and wheels even though he cannot observe that shaft.) The conceptual difficulty
that remains is that, while a solid Aether is compatible with the propagation of radiation, solid
particles should not be able to move through it. One might conclude that space must both be filled
with the Aether and be devoid of the Aether, an obvious absurdity. Nature, however, is a resourceful
old bird and has apparently solved the problem in what may be the only way possible. The author
believes it configures a wave so as to cause it to behave as if it were a particle. To examine this
possibility, it is first necessary to examine the electromagnetic wave and the photons which
comprise that wave.


13.2- Consider an electromagnetic wave resulting from the transmission of a vertically polarized
signal by a radio transmitter, such as illustrated by Figure 13.1. While it is common practice to
consider that such a wave is continuous, progressively reducing its intensity eventually reveals it to
be composed of discrete packets of energy called photons. In order for this to be the case, the wave
must be composed of synchronized photons which reinforce each other so as to propagate as an
apparently continuous wave. Photons must have the following characteristics:


e Separately, the photons must be electromagnetic impulses propagating at the velocity of light.


e The net electric, magnetic, and mechanical effects of each impulse must equal zero when
averaged over time.


Electric Field Strength Electric Strength at Time = T


x


Magnetic Axis Magnetic Field Strength Magnetic Strength at Time = T


Figure 13.1 Electromagnetic Wave Propagating at Velocity of ©


e When a sufficient number of these impulses are superimposed with the appropriate timing and
phasing, they must produce the apparently continuous electromagnetic wave of Figure 13.1.


Amplitude Axis ——p 4+
Fast-Present Interface
e-t


Time Axis


Figure 13.2 - Impulse Function


13.3- To describe how the photon meets these requirements, a mathematical device known as an
impulse function, such as shown in Figure 13.2, is required. (There is a class of mathematical
functions known as impulse functions. The one shown is the simplest and was therefore selected
for the discussion which follows but it must be remembered that Nature may employ a different
version in the photon.) Multiplying the electromagnetic wave of Figure 13.1 by an impulse function
provides a suitable configuration for the photon, as shown in Figure 13.3. This configuration can
travel through the Aether either by itself or, when grouped in a synchronized sequence, as an
electromagnetic wave.


13.4- The energy content of a photon has been determined to be directly proportional to its
frequency (inversely proportional to its time duration) with the constant of proportionality being
equal to Planck's Constant. As a consequence, we may conclude that the amplitude of a photon's
electric and magnetic vectors increases in proportion to the square root of its energy, in an manner


analogous to the storage of energy in a compressed spring (doubling the distance by which a
spring is compressed also doubles the force in the spring and increases the energy stored in the
spring by a factor of four). Figure 13.4 illustrates the vectors of two photons which differ in energy
by a factor of two. The increased frequency of the higher energy photon corresponds to its having a
time duration which is shorter than that of the lower energy photon.


13.5- There is another type of radiation which requires discussion, the radiation represented by
neutrinos. Other than the facts that neutrinos lack electromagnetic properties, making them
extremely difficult to observe, and they have never been observed to combine into a continuous
wave, the neutrino seems to be of the same nature as the photon. It seems reasonable, therefore, to
postulate the existence of neutrinic radiation which is akin to, and may actually be a form of
electromagnetic radiation. Conceptually, however, propagation of the neutrino presents a difficulty
which does not occur with the photon. Propagation of the photon requires the interchange of
energy, phased 90 degrees apart, between two mutually perpendicular axes (the electric axis and
the magnetic axis). While one might consider the neutrino to result from an impulse of mechanical
stress in the Aether along one axis (e.g.- corresponding to the electric stress of the photon), the
energy storage mechanism along the other axis (corresponding to the magnetic stress of the
photon) is not apparent. However, neutrinos exist and that energy storage mechanism must also
exist. In turn, analogous phenomena to those produced by photons and electromagnetic waves
should be possible. The author would hope that the subject will be examined more extensively by
others in the future.


Electric Axis


Electric Vector Pulse Components Move


r to Right at Velocity C


Magnetic Vector


Magnetic Axis — Plane of Past-Present Interface


Figure 13.3 - Configuration of Photon


Electric Vector
Magnetic Vector Magnetic Axis


rgy .
Low Ene Photon Electric Axis


Electric Axis
High energy photon shown has twice
the frequency and energy of the low
- Magnetic Axis energy photon shown. The strength
Magnetic ofthe electric and magnetic vectors of
the high energy photon is 2°0.5 times
the strength of those vectors in the low
energy photon. The time width of the
low energy photon is twice that of the


High Energy Photon high energy photon.


Electric
Vector


Figure 13.4 - Effect of Energy and/or Frequency on Photon


13.6- Implicit in the conclusion that solid matter cannot move through a solid Aether is the
unproven assumption that solid matter is actually solid. Experiments in particle physics have
shown that electrons and nudleons contain no detectable solid structure larger than the
observational limit of 10-18 meters. This fact and the fact that matter can move effortlessly through
a solid Aether require that the assumption that matter is solid be questioned. It is necessary to
examine how, what appears to be a solid particle, may actually be a vibration traveling at the
velocity of light and thus be capable of moving through the solid Aether as easily as photons or
neutrinos. Since particles of matter exist when they are at rest or moving slowly, it would seem that
such a possibility must be ruled out, but one must never ass*u*me. Solid matter could move at a
low velocity and yet consist of a vibration traveling at the velocity of light if that vibration were
traveling in a circle. For this to be the nature of solid matter, single or multiple cycles of radiation
would have to be bent into a circular path with the ends joined to form a loop. Providing such loops
contain an integral number of cycles, their vibrations will reinforce and there would seem to be no
inherent reason why they could not persist indefinitely. Since the loops are vibrations, they are free
to travel through the solid Aether at any velocity between the limits of +/-C as easily as photons or
neutrinos. (As will be discussed later, these loops imply the existence of enormous local
gravitational fields.) In additional, a process which changed the number of cycles contained in such
a loop would result in the release or absorption of a photon(s) or a neutrino(s).


13.7- To an observer, such a loop of vibration would appear to be a material particle. If the loop is
unstable, it will decay after a time and release some or all of its energy in the form of radiation with
the remaining energy in the form of a lower energy particle(s). If the configuration of the loop is
stable, barring a severe external disturbance, it will exist forever as a material particle. Of all of the
observed solid particles, only electrons and protons and their anti-particles exhibit the stability
required for infinite life. Neutrons are slightly unstable and decay into protons and electrons after a
few minutes unless they are confined along with protons in the interiors of atomic nuclei. (Perhaps
they should be classified, along with all other atomic and sub-atomic particles, as unstable
configurations of radiation loops. A possible cause of the neutron's instability will be discussed
later.)


13.8- To understand how such a loop of radiation might form a material particle, consider the
implications involved in curling one cycle of the continuous electromagnetic wave shown in Figure


13.1 about its magnetic axis to form a loop, as shown in the left side of Figure 13.5. Curling of the
single cycle of radiation results in the production of a fixed polarity electric vector rotating at twice
the angular rate of the electric vector which formed the original electromagnetic wave.
(Mathematically, the process is equivalent to squaring the expression for the electric amplitude
vector, cos[w*t], to obtain 0.5+0.5*cos[2*w*t]. The presence of the term, 2*w*t, indicates that the
frequency of the vector rotation has doubled.) As one would expect, the rotation of the
electromagnetic wave about its magnetic axis produces a stationary magnetic dipole. It also
produces a monopole electric charge because its electric vector is the square of the electric vector
of the original electromagnetic wave and, being a squared term, does not change polarity. (As the
cycle proceeds, the polarity of both the electric vector and its direction reverse every 180 degrees
of the electromagnetic wave and the product of two negative terms is positive.) Positive unipole
charges (electrons) would be produced by rotation about the magnetic axis at 0 degrees on the time
axis. Negative unipole electric charges (positrons) would be produced by rotation about the
magnetic axis at 180 degrees along the time axis.


13.9- It will be noticed that the resultant locus of the electric vectors in the left side of Figure 13.5 is
lopsided. It seems likely that electrostatic repulsion would redistribute that locus into a spherical
configuration and the magnetic dipole would move to the axis of the sphere, as shown in the right
side of Figure 13.5. This configuration seems consistent with the properties of electrons and
positrons in that the resultant particle consists of a point charge and a magnetic dipole and which
repeats its original state after two rotations about its magnetic axis. The principle objection to the
configuration would appear to be the fact that the curling of the electromagnetic wave into a loop
requires a variation in the velocity of light along the electric axis such as the radial variation in the
velocity of light shown in Figure 13.9. A variation in the velocity of light is not without precedent,
the lenses of your eyes do exactly that in order to focus the light reflected from this page as you
read it.


Locus of Electric Vector Spherical Locus of Electric Vector


Electric Axis PY ‘Electric Vector


Electric Vector


Rotation of


Rotation of Electric Vector


Electric Vector


Magnetic Dipole Magnetic Dipole


Electric Vector Rotates at
Twice the Rate of
Electromagnetic Vector to
Produce Electric Charge


Magnetic Axis


Curling of a single cycle of elctromagnetic radiation about the magnetic axis to form a closed loop
generates a charged particle with a magnetic moment and which rotates at twice the rate of the
particle's physical roatation. Curling about the magnetic axis at zero degrees generates a positron.
Curling about the magnetic axis at 180 degrees generates an electron. Configuration at left should
not be stable and repulsion between electric vectors having same polarity should cause their locus
to bbe spherical. Configuration at right would then represent positron or electron as a small charged
volume with a magnetic dipole.


Figure 13.5 - Configuration of Charged Particle


13.10- The concept that matter consists of radiation loops can be subjected to a reasonableness
test by examining the known size and energy content of the nucleon since the size and energy
content of particles formed of radiation loops must be consistent. The radius, r, of a cycle of
radiation having an energy of e, in terms of Planck's Constant, h, and the velocity of light, C, is
given by r=h*C/[2*(Pl)*e]. Scattering observations have shown that nucleons (protons and
neutrons) contain three inseparable internal entities named quarks. Apportioning the energy of the
nucleon, about 1.503*10-19 joules, equally among the three quarks leads one to the conclusion that
their radii are 6.315*10-1© meters, or 63% of the observed radius of the nucleon. This is an
interesting percentage because it is equal to 1-1/e", a function which appears frequently in
electromagnetic equations. (In this expression, e" represents natural number similar to PI having a
value of 2.718.) It would appear that the radius of the nucleon is determined by the radius of a loop
of radiation having the energy of a single quark. Since the nucleon differs greatly from the electron
and it is neutrinos which are emitted and absorbed by processes which are associated with
nucleons, one is led to the supposition that the quark is a loop of neutrinic radiation. (Applying this
line of reasoning to the electron provides its radius as 3.9*10-13 meters. This size seems to be
consistent with its behavior within atoms.)


13.11- If energy is added to a particle consisting of a loop of radiation, one would expect the
wavelength of the radiation composing the particle, and therefore its radius, to reduce because the
energy of the particle is Planck's Constant divided by its wavelength, as illustrated by the difference
between the low energy particle of Figure 13.6A and the high energy particle of Figure 13.6B.
However, if the diameter of a particle is prevented from becoming smaller, it has the alternative of
absorbing discrete packets of energy by increasing the number of cycles it contains and/or by
absorbing unquantified energy by increasing the velocity of light within the loop (hypothetical
possibility for further consideration). These alternatives are illustrated by the difference between
the low energy particle of Figure 13.6A and the high energy particle of Figure 13.6C. The
significance of these possibilities will become apparent shortly. Recent experimental observations
have shown that, like electrons, quarks are also devoid of an internal structure down to the
observation limit of 10-18 meters. These observations are consistent with the view of the quark
described in this Chapter and the requirements of a solid Aether.


Particle consisting of a closed loop of a single cycle of
radiation will have a radius which is inversely proportional
to its energy. Adding energy to the particle causes it to
shrink. If shrinkage is prevented, the added energy is
absorbed in discrete quanta and adds additional cycles to
the particle or itis absorbed incrementally and raises the
local velocity of light.


Added Extra Half
“@— Cycle Af Applicable) —


High Energy Particle Prevented From
Shrinking Must Add Extra Cycle(s) Or
Increase Local Velocity of Light


Added Extra Half
t Cycle (If Applicable) >


B:- High Ene Particle C:- High Ene Particle, Stretched Co uration
Normal Co uration


Figure 13.6 - Two Methods of Increasing Energy of Loop of Radiation


13.12- Quarks have an interesting property. They are sociable and cannot be separated. They exist
permanently only in groups of three to form the structure of nucleons and they exist temporarily
either separately or in pairs (pions and kaons) as the short lived debris products of high energy
nuclear collisions. Attempts to separate quarks from the nucleon are extremely difficult because,
when quarks are in close proximity the force holding them close together is small but is reported to
increase rapidly to a constant level, independent of the separation, as they are moved apart.


13.13- If one compares the size of a quark with the size of a nucleon, it would seem to be impossible
that three quarks could fit within it, unless of course, their loops are intertwined. This possibility
brings to mind the logo of a popular beer which consists of three intertwined circles (Figure 13.7). If
the quarks in a nucleon are intertwined in loops analogous to that logo, the attractive force between
them will behave in the manner ascribed to the strong force defined by particle physicists. When
the loops in the logo configuration are nearly centered on each other, virtually no forces are exerted
between them. If energy is added to such loops of radiation, one would expect their intertwining to
prevent them from absorbing that energy by reducing their size because there is no room in the
center to permit shrinkage. The loops composing the quarks in a nucleon would then have to
absorb any extra energy in another manner. Their options would seem to be to incorporate the
addition of extra cycles and/or increase the velocity of light within one or more of the loops. Both
these possibilities suggest that the force required to stretch a quark would be independent of the
distance it is stretched and this is what seems to be observed, as illustrated by Figure 13.8.


sutface of Nucleon


Quark #1
Quark #2


Quark #3


Figure 13.7 - Internal Configuration of Nucleon


13.14- Conventional particle physics ascribes the attraction between the three quarks which form
nucleons or the two quarks which form pions and kaons to the action of extremely massive and
short lived virtual exchange particles named gluons without any explanation as to how such
particles can produce attractive forces. With the configuration described above, the forces between
quarks in nucleons, pions, and kaons would result from their topological configuration and the
strength of their radiation loops. The massive gluons of theoretical particle physics not only would
be unnecessary, they cannot exist within the nucleon without causing the nucleon to be
considerably more massive than it is. The only force required to explain the behavior of the
intertwined quarks is the tensile strength of the radiation loops of which quarks are composed and
the intense gravitational attraction caused by the slowing of the velocity of light within them, as
discussed below.


13.15- Protons (or anti-protons) within an atomic nucleus repel each other as a result of
electrostatic force acting between like charges. At the distance represented by the size of the
nucleon, the level of that force is on the order of 17 pounds. This force is about 1049 times as large
as the attractive force between the gravitational masses of nucleons as predicted by Newton's Law
of Gravitation. Obviously, protons (or anti-protons) in the nucleus of an atom cannot be held
together by gravitation. Again it must be repeated, never ass*u*me. As has been shown earlier, the
force we experience as gravity results from a gradient in the velocity of light existing as a function
of elevation. In order for the quark or the electron to exist as a loop of radiation, it is necessary for
the velocity of light within the quark or electron to reduce linearly from its nominal value of C at its
periphery to a value of zero at its center, as shown in Figure 13.9 for the quark. In the quark, the
gradient in the velocity of light is enormous, and, at its periphery, the author estimates the
Newtonian force of gravity acting on the mass of a nucleon as a result of this gradient to be on the
order of 11 million pounds. While the simplistic representation of Figure 13.9 suggests that the
gradient abruptly falls to zero at the surface of the quark, experience with fields suggests that such
cannot be the case. The gradient must decrease smoothly towards the conventional gravitational
gradient level in the vicinity of the quark's surface. It is not difficult to believe that enough residual
gravitational attraction exists between the quarks in nucleons to overcome the relatively puny
electrostatic force which attempts to separate protons or anti-protons and, when nucleons are in
close proximity, they should be extremely sticky. (This is the type of question that physicists
trained by rote handle extremely well and the author hopes that a few of them will be sufficiently
antagonized to examine this conjecture even if their only motivation is to prove it foolish.) With this
interpretation of the nature of the nucleon, the electroweak and electrostrong forces postulated by
particle physicists are not only unnecessary but are impossible.


sutface of Nucleon


Configuration Assumed by Quark
#2 When Particle Collision Attempts
to Remove It From Nucleon


Figure 13.8 - Effect of Collision Energy on Nucleon


13.16- The size of the electron should not be confused with the size of its orbit in an atom. The
circumference of that orbit is the wavelength determined by the orbital kinetic energy of that
electron. Quantum Mechanics imposes an additional restriction on its size. The circumference of
the orbit must contain an integral number of cycles of radiation and the total energy of those cycles
must equal the energy of that orbit. As a result, the electrons in an atom are confined to discrete
orbits which can change only as a result of a change in the number of cycles contained in them.
That change in the number of cycles requires the absorption or emission of a photon of
electromagnetic radiation of exactly the correct energy level (wavelength). Diagrammatically, the
effect is identical with that shown in the illustrations of Figures 13.6A and 13.6C.


13.17- It appears that, for the loops of radiation which comprise matter to be stable, the presence of
charge of either polarity is required. As mentioned, electrons and protons are stable on their own
while neutrons are stable only in the proximity of a proton's charge. This is not an unreasonable
result. The electric charge of the proton is repulsive and would act to expand the radius of the quark
loops. At a larger radius, these loops contain less energy and would allow a neutron to reduce its
internal energy by expelling an electron to become a proton. Apparently, this process is restrained
in the neutron by the proximity of a proton, and in atomic nuclei, neutrons and protons seem to
perform a symbiotic function. The positive charges of the protons prevents neutrons from decaying
by emitting electrons to become protons while the extremely strong gravitational attraction between
neutrons and protons resulting from the effects implied by Figure 13.9 prevents the mutual
repulsion of the proton's charges from destroying atomic nuclei by causing them to fly apart. One
might conclude then that the stability of the various atomic nuclei is determined by the parameters
of this nuclear symbiosis for each particular atomic weight and number. (The preceding description
also applies to anti-particles.)


Reduction
in Velocity
of Light in
Quark in
Terms of Its
Freespace


Velocity
T An
l 0.4 .


Distance From Center of Quark, Femptometers


Figure 13.9 - Velocity of Light Within Quark


13.18- With the interior of nucleons observed to contain three quarks of a size and aggregate mass
equivalent energy essentially equal to the mass equivalent energy of nucleons, the question as to
whether quarks are fundamental particles or whether they have an internal structure of their own is
readily answered. Since quantum mechanics teaches that the size of a particle is inversely
proportional to its energy equivalent mass, it follows that quarks are fundamental and do not
contain an internal structure. If the quark consisted of more than one particle, the mass equivalent
energy of each of those particles would either be proportionally smaller than that of the quark and,
as a result, they would be larger than both the quark and the nucleon which contained them, an
obvious absurdity. Alternatively, if the quark were composed of multiple particles small enough to
fit in the space available, the mass equivalent energy of both the quark and the nucleon which
contained it would be larger than their observed values, again an obvious absurdity. Even in the
microscopic quantum world, blivits are impossible. (A blivit is defined as two pounds of excrement
in a one pound bag.) The short lived high energy particles created in nuclear explosions and
collision experiments are consistent with the interpretation that they are loops of radiation of high
energy content either because they are single cycle loops which have been compressed into a
smaller radii and/or have become larger by incorporating additional cycles into their loops or by
locally increasing the velocity of light. It would seem reasonable to expect such particles to be
unstable and to decay rapidly. There is no stable structure in Nature which is smaller or more
massive than the quark or the nucleon in which it is contained.


13.19- The experimental activity in particle physics consists of bombarding particles with other
particles at high energies and examining the debris resulting from the collision. This type of
experiment is performed, not because of its innate relevance, but because it the only means
currently available. In order for such an experiment to provide the desired resolution, it is necessary
to generate collisions between particles, at least one of which has a kinetic energy which is large
compared to the rest mass equivalent energies of the particles. These experiments yield a large
number of short lived particles. Many of those particles have mass equivalent energies which are
larger (Sometimes by a factor of over 500) than the mass equivalent energy of the quark within the
nucleon under test. Those particles are conventional particles whose energies have been increased
by the process shown in Figures 13.6A and 13.6B or higher energy particles which temporarily form
from the excess energy provided by the collision. Such particles apparently cannot be stable and
they decay quickly into combinations of the stable particles (electrons, photons, neutrinos,
nucleons and their anti-particles). Particle physics experiments involving energies large compared
to the mass equivalent energy of quarks may be about as meaningful in determining the nature of
matter as an experiment which attempts to determine the nature of fine crystal goblets by shattering
them with rifle bullets and studying the fragments while they are in flight. It would appear that what


is really under test in high energy particle experiments is the ability of high energy radiation loops
to form within the Aether and the stability of those loops.


13.20- The computer program used to evaluate gravitational contraction showed that the maximum
internally observed energy density of an object undergoing gravitational collapse is about 105
times the energy density of a nucleon. Since this energy density ratio is of the same order as the
collision energy to be attained in the now canceled Superconducting Supercollider Program, it
might have been hoped that experiments performed on that machine would have revealed
information about conditions which existed at our Universe's beginning. But, if the machine had
been built, the information it would have provided would probably not be relevant to cosmology.
The high energy content imposed on nucleons at the beginning of our Universe resulted from
compression while the collision energy of particles produced by the Supercollider produces tension
within the particle products. The effects of tension and compression are not the same. The tensile
strength of ball bearing steel is on the order of 250,000 pounds per square inch (PSI). The ultimate
strength of that steel under the type of compression occurring in bearings is several million PSI!
When compression failure (brinelling) does occur in such a bearing, it results from tensile stresses
induced by the compression in the region around the area of contact and not from the compression
stress itself. Since compression and tension do not produce equivalent results in ordinary
mechanics it is hard to justify a belief that they produce equivalent results in particle physics.


Chapter 14 - Adding Quantum Effects to Our
Understanding


14.1- The Two Slit Experiment:- There is a classic experiment which leads to one of two
interpretations, both of which appear absurd, and which have led to two mutually exclusive schools
of thought. Under one interpretation every particle of energy continuously and instantaneously
tests all of space to determine the path it should follow and its ultimate destination. Under the other
interpretation, every particle in the Universe follows every possible path to every possible
destination and furthermore repeats this process at every intnt of time since the Universe began. In
so doing each of these possible paths creates an alternate universe with the Universe we observe
as one of a quasi-infinite number of Parallel Universes. Each of those Parallel Universes is as
complex as our own, each occupies the same volume of space as our own, and each represents the
results of all of the decisions made by particles since time began. While there is a considerable
number of physicists who ascribe to the latter viewpoint, it suffers from objections more significant
than its quasi-infinite complexity. The creation of each of those alternate Parallel Universes requires
the creation, from nothingness, of an amount of energy equal to the energy content of our own
Universe and requires them to co-exist in the same volume of space. The trashing, to such a
degree, of both the Law of Conservation of Energy and the requirement that no more than one
object occupy the same space at the same time suggests a degree of foolishness on the part of
those who hold this viewpoint, particular since no justification not involving some form of
mysticism has ever been offered. On the other hand, the idea of a what might be defined as a
quantum stress field continuously testing all of space and controlling the paths of particles does
not violate accepted physical laws and allows a reasonable explanation for the results of the Two
Slit Experiment and for the behavior of polarized light.


14.2- When a particle (e.g.- photon, nucleon, etc.) passes through an opening, its direction is altered
by diffraction through an angle which is inversely proportional to the size of the opening as
compared to the wavelength of the particle (Planck's Constant divided by the energy of the particle).
When particles pass through a slit, the angle of their diffraction in a direction perpendicular to the
slit is large compared to their angle of diffraction in a direction parallel to the slit and its use allows
diffraction to be studied as a one dimensional problem. The Two Slit Experiment is illustrated in


Figure 14.1. Figure 14.2, and Figure 14.3. In this experiment, a beam of particles, such as electrons
or photons, strike a mask which contains two slits. Particles passing through these slits are
diffracted and are distributed in a diffraction pattern as they strike the screen. The relative rate at
which the particles strike the screen, as a function of position behind a mask with a single slit, is
illustrated by the diffraction pattern shown in Figure 14.1. If the mask contains two slits, one would
expect the diffraction pattern at the screen to be the sum of the individual diffraction patterns of
each slit, as illustrated in Figure 14.2. Instead, the actual diffraction pattern which results is that
shown in Figure 14.3. Furthermore, this diffraction pattern persists as the long term distribution of
the particles striking the screen even if the the possibility of interaction between particles is
precluded by reducing the rate of particle flux to a level where there is not more than one particle in
transit at a time.


Rate of Particle Impacts Rates of Particle Impacts


Blocked


Flux of Photons or Flux of Photons or
Electrons Striking Mask Electrons Striking Mask


Figure 14.1 - Actual Diffraction Figure 14.2 - Expected Diffraction
Pattern With One Slit Pattern With Two Slits


14.3- The observations described in the preceding paragraph lead to the conclusion, apparently
accepted by a significant number of quantum physicists (and the author as well), that somehow,
while energy exists in discrete localized packets, the path which those packets follow as they move
from point to point is determined by a continuous field propagating throughout all of space at a
quasi-infinite velocity. That field, which the author designates for convenience as the Quantum
Field, tests the probability of each of the possible paths of each and every particle in the Universe
and causes those particles to adjust their paths so that their statistical distribution produces the
diffraction patterns characteristic of waves. (The Quantum Field is not directly observable, it is only
recognizable by its effects on the behavior of particles.) The author came to this conclusion in the
1980's after reading a book based upon a series of four lectures given by Dr. Richard Feynmann on
the subject of Quantum Electrodynamics. His description of the process that determines the path
that photons take when they travel from point A, are reflected from a mirror, and arrive at point B,
led to what seems to be an obvious conclusion. For Nature to behave in accordance with the
concepts of Quantum Electrodynamics, two requirements must be met. There must be an absolute
velocity reference frame (i.e:- the Aether) and the photons must be capable of testing the probability
of all of the possible paths between A and B virtually instantaneously and adjusting their paths
accordingly while en route. Since Quantum Electrodynamics has been the most successful concept
ever devised in its ability to accurately predict the results of experiments, it would seem that the
concept of a continuous Quantum Field propagating at a quasi-infinite velocity has been
observationally verified and the concept of the all pervading Aether has been re-verified.


Rate of Particle Impacts


Screen


Flux of Photons or
Electrons Striking Mask


Figure 14.3- Actual Diffraction Pattern with Two Slits


14.4- It is quite certain that the scientific community will not accept the material in Dr. Feynmann's
book as evidence of the existence of the Quantum Field or of the Aether. Their record in recognizing
the obvious is rather poor. Acceptance of new knowledge by any group requires that the knowledge
be made obvious to the group's least intelligent member in a manner which does not require that
member to face up to his inadequacy. One need only note the derision heaped upon Dr. Wigner in
the early part of this century for suggesting that the matching continental shapes, geology, flora,
and fauna of South America and Africa proved that they were once part of acommon continent.
When the author first read of Dr. Wigner's conclusions as a pre-High School student in the late
1930's he found it incredible that anyone could look at the continental shapes and not recognize the
obvious validity of Dr. Wigner's ideas. It seemed to him that the only legitimate question remaining
was how the continental separation could have come about. Acceptance of Wigner's Continental
Drift concept should not have had to await the discovery of the lines of reversed magnetic
polarization alongside of a central rift in the ocean's floor. Once Dr. Wigner's ideas had become
known, the concept of tectonic plates should have been immediately obvious to any one in the field
who was aware of the fact that the core of the Earth was molten and covered with a thin solid crust.
It would seem that, in this case, the performance of the academic establishment left something to
be desired. The same comment can be made regarding the difficulties that Dr. Shoemaker had in
gaining acceptance of the idea that the Earth is periodically bombarded with very large rocks from
space. It had already been accepted that rocks of all sizes orbit the Sun and that smaller rocks fall
from the sky continuously as meteorites. One would have to be pretty simple minded if he looked at
a picture of the Barringer Crater and did not recognize that it could only have been caused by the
impact of one of the large space rocks (asteroids or comets) known to exist. The observation of a
comet striking Jupiter should have been frosting on the cake, but as a verification of the certainty of
periodic asteroid strikes on the Earth, it should have been considered trivial.


Second Polarizer Locus of Randomly
First Polarizer Polarized Amplitudes of
Beam of Electromagnetic Wave


Photons of Entering First Polarizer
Intensity B


Amplitude of Components of


Electromagnetic Wave
Absorbed By Second Polarizer


Amplitude and Amplitude and
Polarization of Polarization of


Electromagnetic Electromagnetic


Beam of Beam of
Photons of Axes of Photons of
Intensity A Polarization Intensity C


@ is Angle Measured With Wave After It Wave After It
Respect to First Polarizer Passes Through Passes Through
First Polarizer second Polarizer


Photon Flux is Proportional


A
to Square of Amplitude ngle @


Figure 14.4 - Electromagnetic Wave and/or Beam of Photons
Passing Through Polarizers


14.5- The experimentally validated concepts of quantum mechanics yield information which, as did
the relativity concepts, modify classical Newtonian Physics. These modifications involve the
sub-microscopic world. The modifications of interest to this discussion are provided below:


e In its observable form, energy is not continuous. It appears only in the form of discrete
packets which may be photons, neutrinos, protons, neutrons, or their anti-particles, and which
are designated as quanta.


e Each quanta, whether it be a photon, a neutrino, or a material particle, has a frequency equal
to its energy content divided by Planck's Constant.


e Each quanta couples to the Aether. Any quantum stress induced in the Aether by that
coupling pervades all of space at a quasi-infinite velocity and probably obeys the inverse
square law with respect to distance.


e Some quanta, such as photons which have been created in pairs, have quantum numbers (the
axis of polarization in the case of photons) which are permanently coupled. This coupling is
infinitely stiff, virtually instantaneous, and is unaffected by the distance between the paired
particles.


e Information as to the state and position of each quanta is transported at a quasi-infinite
velocity and with infinite resolution by quantum stress in the Aether.


o The stress pattern in the Quantum Field at any point in space is modified by the
configuration of obstacles in the path of the particles producing the stress.


e Particles in motion follow a path which is consistent with the path of the information
transported at a quasi-infinite velocity by the stress in the Quantum Field.


o Since the Quantum Field is continuous and the particle is quanticized, the transport of
information by the two effects cannot match on an instant by instant basis. The match
becomes proportionately more precise when the number of particles observed becomes
large enough to allow their positions to be a statistically accurate representation of the
information represented by the stress in the Quantum Field. The instantaneous peak to
peak error in the information match is equal to the energy of the quanta.


14.6- The Behavior of Polarized Light:- The wave-particle duality of nucleons, photons and
neutrinos revealed by the Two Slit Experiment is probably most easily understood by considering
the effect of polarizers on a beam of light. As shown in Figure 14.4, a beam of electromagnetic
radiation (light) is directed through a pair of polarizers having their polarizing axes at an angle @
with respect to each other. The beam of light entering the first polarizer from the left is unpolarized.
While the polarization of each photon in the entering beam is at a random angle, providing the
entering electromagnetic wave is sufficiently intense, its intensity is independent of direction, as
shown by the circular locus diagram in Figure 14.4. When the electromagnetic wave passes though
the first polarizer, the randomly polarized input wave is organized into a vertically polarized wave,
as shown by the vertical component in the vector diagram of Figure 14.4, with an intensity of 1/295
times the intensity of the incoming wave. That single vertical polarization vector may be considered
to be the vector sum of two orthogonal components. One of those components is parallel to the
axis of the second polarizer while the other component is perpendicular to that axis. As one would
expect, the second polarizer will pass only the parallel component. With the loss of the orthogonal
component, the relative intensity between the electromagnetic wave leaving the second polarizer,
as compared to the intensity of the wave leaving the first polarizer, is further reduced in proportion
to the magnitude of the cosine of the angle between the polarizers. The polarizing process and the
preceding analysis may be repeated as often as desired in a series of successive polarizers. A
monochromatic electromagnetic wave actually consists of a flow of photons having the same total
energy, and the intensity of the wave is proportional to the square root of its energy. As a
consequence, the photon flux associated with each of the intensity vectors described varies in
proportion to the square of that intensity vector and its polarization is identical to the polarization of
the equivalent wave, as shown in Figure 14.5.


14.7- It is both customary and somewhat incorrect to consider that the rate of arrival and the axis of
polarization of photons comprising an electromagnetic wave are random. In a monochromatic
electromagnetic wave of unchanging intensity, the average rate of arrival of photons is constant.
Their instantaneous rate of arrival, however, is a random variation about that average rate. Similarly,
if the electromagnetic wave is unpolarized, the average axes of polarization of its photons are
uniformly distributed, while their instantaneous angles of polarization are random. If an
electromagnetic wave is polarized, both its intensity and the average rate of arrival of its photons
vary as a function of their angle with respect to the axis of polarization, as shown in Figure 14.6,
and both the instantaneous rate of arrival of the photons and the variation of their axes of
polarization are random. In addition, because the intensity of the electromagnetic wave and the
distribution of photons are defined by cosine and cosine? functions respectively, the effect of
cascading polarizers may be predicted by multiplication of the effects defined by Figure 14.6 for
each polarizer in the chain. [Since the relative randomness of N events varies in proportion to
1/(2*N)9-5, the random arrival and polarization of photons in electromagnetic waves is insignificant
unless the intensity of the wave is low.]


AT T
A of Wave N
f ø| Intensity Vectors


Locus of Photon
Flux Rate Vectors


Relative
Intensity 0.5


Sa

NY

E

R

of Rate of | b
sA ra

2

a


Typical
Vectors


I
2
7 Angle @
i


D


04 02 0.0 0.2 0.4
Relative Intensity or Rate of Photon Flux


Figure 14.5 - Intensity and Rate of Photon Flux
vs. Angle to Polarization Axis


14.8- Understanding the Quantum Nature of Energy:- The instantaneous time of arrival of photons
and their polarizations are individual events which apparently occur at random, yet somehow, in the
aggregate, they are organized in an accurate pattern. This is a reasonable result for an unpolarized
electromagnetic wave because it can occur by pure chance. This easy answer does not explain the
rate of arrival and angle of polarization of photons which comprise a polarized electromagnetic
wave. Those photons are organized and that organization requires the action of an organizing
mechanism. To understand the characteristics of that mechanism, a brief detour into the operation
of a device currently used in digital audio systems is useful.


Effect of Poarizers on Electromagnetic Field Effect of Polarizers on Rate of Photon Flux


Relative
Rate of


Field
mesir LAL | AY S


Absolut
| eee YO
0 90 180 270 360


Angle @ Between Polarizer A Axis Angle @ Between Polarizer A Axis
and Polarizer B Axis, Degrees and Polarizer B Axis, Degrees


360


Figure 14.6 - Effect of Pair of Polarizers Crossed at Angle @ on
Field Intensity and Photon Flux From Unpolarized Light Source


14.9- The device of interest is the Sigma-Delta analog to digital converter used for digital signal


processing in audio systems. It converts the varying analog audio signal provided by a source
(microphone, tape deck, etc.) into a pseudo-random string of digital bits which is subsequently
decoded to form digital words corresponding to the analog amplitude of the incoming signal. (See
Figure 14.7.) The input portion of the circuitry can be considered to be a simple integrator
consisting of an amplifier, a feedback capacitor, and a resistor in series with its input. The output
voltage of such a circuit changes at a rate which is proportional to the voltage applied to that input.
The input to the integrator is the average value of the output of the SPDT switch subtracted from
the input signal. Since the switch is driven by a clocked flip-flop in response to the polarity of the
amplifier output and the state of the flip-flop is determined by the output of the amplifier, the
average value of the pulse train driving the switch must equal the average value of the analog input
signal. By combining the switch drive signal with the clock signal in an and-gate, a digital pulse
train results whose average level accurately represents the low frequency spectrum of the analog
input signal. Superimposed on this low frequency output is a noise at the clock frequency having
an amplitude of one clock pulse. The device converts an analog signal, analogous to a quantum


stress in the Aether, into to a quasi-random sequence of standardized pulses, analogous to the
quanta represented by discrete particles.


Integrating Capacit
Analog Input ntegrating Capacitor


, Train of Reference
Resistors Data Polarity 9 Clock Pulses


Reference Clocked Data
Voltage Flip-Flop Quasi-Random


Pulse Train Output
WY- SPDT Switch


S77 te Zero Voltage "AND" Gate
Reference
OL) hg Switch Drive Signal


Figure 14.7 - Simple Sigma-Delta Analog to Digital Converter


14.10- In order for the Sigma-Delta converter analogy to apply satisfactorily to the Two Slit
Experiment, the conditions tabulated below must be met:


e Each quanta must apply a quantum stress to the Aether.
e Quantum stress in the Aether must propagate in all directions at a quasi-infinite velocity.
e Quantum stress in the Aether probably must obey the inverse square law.


e Quantum stress in the Aether must be refracted by the geometrical configuration of matter.


e The quantum stresses imposed on the Aether by multiple quanta located throughout all of
space must superimpose to produce a single quantum stress level at any given point.


e A quanta moving in a free trajectory follows a path consistent with the diffraction pattern of
the quantum stress it generates in the Aether.


o Since a quanta represents a discrete amount of energy while its contribution to the
stress level in the Aether is continuous, the path of a particle cannot follow its diffraction
pattern in the Aether exactly. A residual quantum stress level remains after the arrival of
each particle.


o The Aether minimizes its residual quantum stress level by adjusting the paths of
subsequent particles to produce the observed diffraction pattern in the rate of particle
arrival.


e Since the localized stress in the Aether results from the superposition of all of the stress
sources in the Universe, the diffraction process affecting individual particles is extremely
noisy.


o While quantum effects appear random, they are more correctly described as
deterministic but enormously chaotic. Dr. Einstein's statement that "God does not play
dice with the Universe" is correct after all. (As an example, the variations in the paths of
objects in the Asteroid Belt are deterministic, but those variations are sufficiently chaotic
as to prevent rigorous analysis of their orbits, forcing them to be considered as having
quasi-random deviations about their nominal orbits. Occasionally, those quasi-random
orbital interactions are sufficient to throw an asteroid out of the Asteroid Belt completely.
Occasionally, a radioactive atom throws one or more of its component nucleons from its
nucleus.)


o One would expect that the summation of quantum stresses from all of the events
occurring throughout the Universe would occasionally combine to produce extremely
large momentary quantum stresses at a given point. The effect would be analogous to
the production of an unexpectedly large wave, called a rogue wave, in the ocean by the
combination of a large number of different waves of considerably lower amplitude.


14.11- A clear picture of reality emerges when examines the various aspect of quantum theory and
the results of experimentation once one's thinking is no longer constrained by the unproven
assertion of Special Relativity that information cannot travel faster than light. Velocity Relativity, or
Special Relativity if the reader prefers, and Quantum Theory prove only that the propagation of
information encoded in the form of energy is limited to the velocity of light and the attendant
requirement that such information be quantified. There is no observational or theoretical
requirement that subjects information which does not involve energy to those limitations. It is at
this point that rote trained physicists can make a contribution. Their skills in the use of
mathematics should allow them to apply flesh to our understanding of reality, even though they
seem to deny the significance of that reality.


14.12- The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle and the Wave Equations:- One of the earliest
incursions of quantum concepts into classical physics was the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. It


asserts that it is impossible to determine the product of the position and velocity of a particle to an
accuracy smaller than the numerical value of Planck's Constant. This observational limit results
from the fact that, in order to determine the position and/or velocity of a particle, whether it be an
electron or a baseball, it is necessary to strike the particle to be measured with another particle,


such as a photon, and observe the result. Since both of these particles possess their own inertial
masses and velocities, they exchange momentum as they interact. To illustrate, if an electron is
examined by a photon of much lower energy than its mass equivalent energy, the photon is
physically large compared to the electron and cannot measure the electron's position accurately.
On the other hand, its inertial mass is low and does not affect the electron's velocity significantly. If
the energy of the examining photon is high compared to the mass equivalent energy of the electron,
its size is small compared to the electron's and it will observe the electron's position accurately.
However, the inertial mass of such a photon is large compared to that of the electron and the
interaction changes the electron's velocity considerably. The Heisenberg Uncertainty occurs
because, in accordance with Quantum Theory, there can be no particle available to the
experimenter which has both negligible mass and negligible size. Other than the fact that Quantum
Mechanics predicts the relationship between the physical size and the inertial mass of particles,
there does not seem to be a connection between the Heisenberg Uncertainty and either the
Schroedinger Wave Equation or other quantum effects.


14.13- The Schroedinger Wave Equations were derived to deal with the observed impossibility of
determining the location of electrons in their orbits as one would expect if they were distinct
objects. Their locations were found to be fuzzy and it was necessary to describe their locations in
terms of probability, as defined by the Schroedinger Wave Equations, rather than in terms of
Newtonian Mechanics. Once it is recognized that the particles under observation, and the particles
which are used to examine them, are themselves composed of waves, it is not unreasonable to
expect imprecision in the observation of position and velocity. The observation of one wave with
another is an imprecise process. While the probability waves described by the Schroedinger Wave
Equations include this effect, they also result from a more subtle effect. Earlier, the storage of
kinetic energy in a particle was shown to occur as a change in the energy of the particle itself and in
the stressing of a disk like region of space around it. The storage of that energy requires time, and
for periods of time which are shorter than the time required for that storage, the velocity restrictions
imposed by Velocity Relativity do not apply. The particle is free to bounce around within a small
region of space at velocities which are greater than the velocity of light. To an external observer
whose ability to observe is limited to the velocity of light, however, the particle appears to exist
simultaneously at more than one point within that region. As a result, the location of the particle can
only described by the Schroedinger Wave Equations in terms of its probable position within a fuzzy
volume of space.


Chapter 15 - Changing the Paradigms


15.1- The Chimera of a Unified Field Theory:- The last decades of Dr. Einstein's career are reported
as having been spent in an attempt to develop a Unified Field Theory which would reduce all of
physics to a single set of equations. While he was not successful himself, continuation of his
efforts was at least successful in encompassing all forces but gravity into such a set of equations.
The need for such a theory resulted from the fact that both General Relativity and the Quantum
theory were accepted as correct and yet were incompatible with each other. That incompatibility
reveals the weakness of limiting one's understanding to mathematical approaches. With such a
methodology, a single unrecognized error can destroy the validity of enormous amounts of
subsequent work. In this case, the unrecognized mathematical error in the derivation of General
Relativity was the culprit. While the descriptions of curved space, Black Holes, Singularities, Worm
Holes, etc. should have provided ample warning of that error, theoretical physicists trained to
ignore common sense doubts relied on their mathematics and did not find it. (One is reminded of
the medieval theologians who allegedly engaged in debate over the number of angels who could
dance on the head of a pin.)


15.2- Eventually, the Standard Model and its proposed successor, the Superstring Theory and its


permutations evolved. In that approach, it was found that both a 10 dimensional and a 26
dimensional matrix of equations were capable of defining the observed gravitational,
electromagnetic, the strong and weak nuclear forces, and the characteristics of quarks and leptons.
When those matrix sizes were employed, all of the troublesome cross-products which occurred with
other matrix sizes canceled and tractable solutions were obtained. (The arrangement of the ten
dimensional set of equations is provided in Figure 15.1). In their writings on the subject, authors
have raised the question as to what special properties 10 dimensional and 26 dimensional matrices
have which allows them to work when other matrix sizes fail. The answer to that question should be
apparent to anyone who is old enough to have operated a television set which had a horizontal hold
control. If the horizontal hold control was not properly set, the horizontal scan lines would not line
up vertically and an unviewable picture would result. Similarly, if an unsuitable number of columns
is used in the matrix, the data in subsequent rows will not align properly in columns, cross
products will result, and the equations will be unsolvable. In order to accommodate those ten or
twenty six dimensions in the four dimensional space of General Relativity, however, theoreticians
found it necessary to consider dimensions beyond the fourth to be curled into tiny circles having a
diameter more than twenty orders of magnitude smaller than the nucleon. (Somehow, accepting
such entities as dimensions strains the author's credulity. Even though they can be intermixed with
the conventional dimensions in the solution of mathematical equations, they should be thought of
differently and be given a different designation.) It would appear that these dimensions were
necessary for the mathematical solution but it was necessary to consider them to be in that peculiar
form and of that size in order to prevent them from being experimentally observable as new
particles.


ae of Equation Matrix
3 4 5 6 7 82 9 10


Rows of S| Light |
Equation
Matrix Nuclear
Forces
Zeroes
Quarks
Leptons


Figure 15.1 - 10 Dimensional Supergravity Matrix


15.3- Examination of the matrix illustrated in Figure 15.1 reveals that all of the terms referring to
each item of interest (gravity, electromagnetics, strong and weak forces, quarks and leptons) are
grouped in such a manner as to be independent of each other. None of the groups contain
cross-products which tie them to the other groups. The matrix is not a single set of equations
defining everything. It is a grouping of four independent sets of equations which describe unrelated
effects occurring in the same volume of space. As such, they hardly represent a unification of
physical theory. Descriptions of the mathematical efforts involved in the development of such
unified theories assert that difficulties experienced by the theoretician are reduced as dimensions


are added. This is to be expected, the addition of superfluous degrees of freedom reduces the
constraints on the theoretician's work. What separates the men from the boys is the capability of
dealing with physical problems while retaining the number of degrees of freedom actually required
by Nature.


15.4- The concept that matter consists of loops of radiation yields a simpler matrix of equations, as
shown by Figure 15.2. Gravity is described by a 3x3 matrix of equations. Added to that matrix are a
single row and column representing photonic effects and another row and column representing
neutrinic effects. The strong and weak forces of the Standard Model vanish and electrons and
quarks revert to permutations of electromagnetic and neutrinic radiation.


15.5- The Role of Paradox:-The recognition of a paradox always raises a flag. It tells us that two or
more concepts which have been accepted as true are in conflict and it reveals, as did the Right
Angle Lever Paradox described earlier, that an error exists in one or more of the concepts and it is
necessary to rethink the ideas involved. In the case of the Right Angle Lever Paradox, the rethinking
process resulted in a revision of the Lorentz Transformation for Transverse Force. Surprisingly, the
community of physical scientists does not seem to make a significant use of the opportunities that
paradoxes present. For illustration, two well known paradoxes, the Paradox of Zeno and
Schroedinger's Cat Paradox are described.


Columns of Equation Matrix
2 3 4


Rows of
Equation 3


Photonic


Matrix


Zeroes


Figure 15.2 - Matrix of Radiation Loop Theory


15.6- The Paradox of Zeno is 2000 years old and its apparent ability to prove that all motion is
impossible was not resolved until the mathematical techniques of Calculus became available, even
though that technique is not required. One form of the paradox describes the flight of an arrow
which has been shot at a target. The arrow is shot at a constant velocity, V, to a target at a distance,
L, and the time of flight is divided into intervals. In the first interval, the arrow covers half of the
distance to the target and, in each succeeding interval of time, it covers half of the remaining
distance. Under the line of reasoning presented, the arrow never reaches the target because, after
each successive interval of time, one half of the distance to the target that existed at the beginning
of the interval remains. The author finds it incredible that this paradox has been taken seriously by
intelligent men for over two millennia and has not been recognized as a form of trickery. If one
accepts that in each successive interval of time the arrow traveled half of the remaining distance to
the target, he must also accept that each of those successive intervals of time is half of the duration
of the interval which preceded it. As a result, under the Paradox of Zeno, not only does the arrow
never reach the target, the elapsed time of its flight never reaches the time, T, when the arrow would
reach the target. There is no paradox in the Paradox of the Zeno. As long as one allows a cheap
trick to fool him into considering only those events which occur prior to the arrival of the arrow at
the target, he most certainly will believe that the arrow never reaches the target. The reality is that
the passage of time does not slow as the arrow approaches the target and the arrow reaches the
target on schedule.


15.7- The Schroedinger Cat Paradox is more esoteric. In one form of this paradox, a closed box
contains a source of cyanide gas, a means of releasing that gas when a signal from a radiation
detector senses an alpha particle (helium nucleus), and a radioactive element which releases alpha
particles at a rate determined by its half life. A cat is placed in the box for a period of time equal to
the probable time of the next release of an alpha particle. If the alpha particle is emitted before the
cat is removed from the box, the cyanide is released and the cat dies. If the alpha particle is emitted
after the cat is removed, it lives. According to quantum mechanics, the decay of the atom which
results in the emission of the alpha particle is determined entirely by chance and, under the
interpretations of quantum physics, the atom simultaneously exists in the both the decayed and
undecayed states and only reverts to one of those states when it is observed. Schroedinger's Cat
Paradox asserts that since there is no way to observe whether the cat is dead or alive while the
chamber remains closed, quantum mechanics requires that the cat simultaneously exists in two
states, both alive and dead, until its state is actually observed when the box is opened.


15.8- To the layman, Schroedinger's Cat Paradox seems absurd. How could it be possible for the cat
to be both alive and dead at the same time? The layman is correct, the cat does not exist in both
states simultaneously and quantum mechanics does not require that it do so. The significant
observation is not the observation made by the experimenter when he opens the box, the
observation which counts is the decay of the radioactive atom. Even the detection of its decay by
the radiation detector is not a quantum mechanical consideration. Asserting that the cat exists ina
dual alive-dead state until it is observed by the experimenter is about as sensible as asserting that
the verdict in the O.J. Simpson trial was simultaneously ‘guilty’ and ‘not guilty’ as it lay overnight in
a sealed envelope prior to being read. The significant observation in Quantum Mechanics is one
which affects a physical particle. Whether an intelligent observer is aware of that observation isn't
significant. The Schroedinger Cat Paradox is not a paradox as normally stated. It is an absurdity
similar to the absurdity of the question as to whether a tree makes a sound when it falls in a forest
with no one present to hear its fall. In the physical sciences, sound is a physical phenomena, not a
psychological phenomena. It does not require the presence of an intelligent observer to exist.


15.9- The error flag presented by Schroedinger's Cat Paradox does reveal that our thought
processes about quantum physics are inadequate. They are based upon the rigid acceptance of the
idea that no entity can travel faster than light. Recognition of the fact that time is required for the
kinetic energy level of a particle to change demonstrates that the idea that the velocity of light
represents an absolute speed limit is not quite true. That time delay involved in acquiring(losing)
kinetic energy allows a particle to travel a small distances at a velocity greater than that of light. To
an observer, such a particle will falsely appear to be in two places simultaneously. When one adds
the fact that stress in the quantum field propagates at a quasi-infinite velocity, the paradoxical
effects attributed to the Schroedinger Wave Equations will probably vanish. There can be no
paradoxes in Nature.


15.10- Can the Second Law of Thermodynamics be circumvented?- The validity of the First and
Second Laws of Thermodynamics seems to be beyond question. Under the first law, the total


energy content of a closed system must remain constant. Under the second law, the availability of
energy for useful purposes must always decrease or remain constant within that closed system. In
effect, the First Law of Thermodynamics states that you can't win and the Second Law states that,
furthermore, you can't break even. The First Law of Thermodynamics is unquestionably true, energy
can neither be created or destroyed, General Relativity not withstanding. The Second Law of
Thermodynamics stands on less firm ground because it is a law based upon statistics. As such, it is
in the same category as an actuarial table. An insurance company can predict quite accurately how
many people will die in a given year. They cannot predict who those people will be. Statistical laws
are valid for large numbers of events, they become less significant as the number of events is
reduced. As an example, if one patronizes a casino, he might initially win a large sum of money
playing a slot machine, but if he continues to play he not only will give all his winnings back to the
casino, he will sustain a significant loss. The question then arises as to whether it is possible to
by-pass the Second Law of Thermodynamics though the use of nanomachines. (A nanomachine is


a mechanism whose significant dimensions are measured in nanometers, the size scale of atoms.)


15.11- One who observes Brownian motion in a microscope might reasonably conclude that, in
principle at least, a nanomachine could be built which would bypass the Second Law of
Thermodynamics. When a liquid containing microscopic particles is observed, the particles are
seen to be in continuous (Brownian) motion. That motion is caused by random thermal impacts
between the molecules of the liquid and the particles. If the thermal motion of water molecules can
produce a visibly observable motion in particles which are at least 1015 times as massive, it
certainly not unreasonable to believe that suitable nanomachines could organize the effect to
produce a useful mechanical output. The postulated nanomachines would then be able to export
energy to the outside environment which it obtained by reducing the temperature of the liquid. The
exported energy would be converted to heat and raise the temperature of the external environment
as the output performed useful work. The resultant temperature difference between the environment
and the liquid will then cause the energy which had done useful work to flow back into the liquid to
return it to its original temperature and allows the process to continue indefinitely.


15.12- James Clark Maxwell proposed a hypothetical perpetual motion machine, known as
Maxwell's Demon, which was not proven to be theoretically unworkable for 75 years. In that
machine, Maxwell imagined that a demon controlled a microscopic gate between two gas filled
chambers. Making use of the fact that, in a gas, the velocity of the molecules is random and that the
temperature of the gas is determined by the mean velocity of those molecules, Maxwell proposed
the concept that, if an appropriate demon existed, he could sense the speed of molecules
approaching the gate and open the gate only when a fast molecule approached it from one side or
when a slow molecule approached it from the other side. By operating the gate in this manner, the
demon would sort the molecules so that one chamber contained fast molecules and the other
chamber contained slow molecules. Since the temperature of a gas is determined by the mean
velocity of its molecules, such a process will maintain a temperature difference between the
chambers which can be exploited to produce useful work in a direct violation of the Second Law of
Thermodynamics. It took 75 years before a rigorous proof was found which was able to show that
the energy required for Maxwell's Demon to identify the fast and slow molecules and allow the gate
to operate was at least as great as the energy which could be released and Maxwell's Demon was
shown to be an unworkable concept.


15.13- There is a modification to the concept of Maxwell's Demon for which there is, at least as yet,
no valid theoretical objection. Suppose that the two chambers of the Maxwell's Demon example no
longer rely on a demon but are separated by a diffusion membrane having a permeability from side
A to side B which is higher than the permeability from side B to side A, as shown in Figure 15.3. The
energy required to allow the membrane to make the decisions it needs to make in order for it to
function in this manner is available in the kinetic energy of the gas molecules passing through it. In
diffusing through the membrane, molecules can provide the energy needed by being slowed from
their average room temperature velocity of about 1300 feet per second to a much lower exit velocity.
The lower velocity of the gas leaving the membrane means that side B is colder than the ambient
temperature. The loss of kinetic energy by the molecules as they pass though membrane provides
the energy required to operate the differential diffusion mechanism in the membrane pores, and the
membrane becomes warmer than the ambient temperature. If the surface areas are sufficiently
large, the temperature of the gas on both sides of the membrane and of the membrane itself must
remain close to the temperature of the environment. As a result, the pressure in chamber B will be
higher than the pressure in chamber A. That difference in pressure can be used to operate a turbine
and provide useful output power. As the output power is produced by the gas flowing through the
turbine, the chambers are cooled below the ambient temperature and energy flows from the
environment to the chambers to replace the energy delivered by the turbine. The arrangement
would extract useful energy from its environment in direct contradiction to the Second Law of
Thermodynamics.


Chamber A


Mechanical
Output


Heat Input
From
Environment


Membrane
Heat Goes
Back to
Chamber B Environment


Wralls Have Very High Heat Transfer Coefficients,
Diffusion Probability Through Membrane is Higher
From Side A to Side B Than It Is From Side B toSide A


Figure 15.3 - Perpetual Motion Machine of the Second Kind


15.14- Conceptually, the membrane might be constructed with pores which were covered by spring
loaded trapdoors, as shown in Figure 15.4. In this illustration, a molecule represented by a ball
would approach the right side of the membrane at a velocity which was appropriate to its
temperature, knock the trapdoor open, and pass through it. A similar molecule approaching the
trapdoor from the left side would bounce back and not pass through to the right side. When the
molecule on the right passed through the trapdoor, it would lose most of its kinetic energy to the
trapdoor and exit at a low velocity. As a result, the trapdoor and the membrane would be heated and
the molecule which passed though it would be cooled. The process would generate a local
temperature difference which would quickly be equalized by any reasonable level of heat transfer.


spring Closed With Good Heat Transfer, Average
Hinged Velocity of Particles Approaching
Trapdoor Trapdoor Is The Same On Both Sides


—P| |] ae


Ball Approaching From Ball Approaching From This Side
This Side Cannot Pass av Passes Through Trapdoor Easily.
Through Trapdoor Membrane Its Kinetic Energy Does The Work


Figure 15.4 - Conceptual Version of Pores in Differentially Permeable Membrane


15.15- The first theoretical objection to this type of perpetual motion machine that the author has
found in literature is that it cannot work because it violates the Second Law of Thermodynamics.


This is hardly a valid objection since the arrangement is specifically designed to bypass the
limitations of that law. The Second Law of Thermodynamics is a statistical law and it is not binding
on nanomachinery since such mechanisms deal with molecules on an individual basis and the
pores of the diffusion membrane certainly qualify as a nanomechanism. The only other theoretical
objection that the author has found was provided in another book by Dr. Feynmann in which he
described a nanomechanism consisting of a riverboat type of paddle wheel mounted on a shaft
inside a cylinder containing a fluid. The paddle wheel was bombarded by the random motion of the
molecules of the fluid and caused the shaft undergo a random rotary oscillation. To convert this
motion to a useful output, an external one-way ratchet was attached to the shaft. Dr. Feynmann then
demonstrated that the device would not work because the notion of the ratchet pawl would generate
enough heat so that the resultant molecular motion would make the pawl bounce sufficiently to
render the one way mechanism inoperative.


15.16- From the description provided, it is obvious that, while Dr. Feynmann is an excellent
theoretical physicist, he is not as effective as a design engineer. Relocating the ratchet mechanism
to the interior of the fluid chamber cools it and dampens its bounce, causing Dr. Feynmann's
objections to vanish. When the model is modified, Dr. Feynmann probably would be forced to agree,
that unless he could devise another objection, the concept should represent a physically realizable
device which would by-pass the Second Law of Thermodynamics. A theoretical demonstration that
the mechanism suggested by the author cannot work requires a proof that the permeability of all
possible diffusion membranes must be the same in both directions. Deriving such a proof may be
particularly difficult because the pores of the required membrane are able to extract energy from the
molecules which pass though them. Considerable effort is justified in developing such a proof
because, if that proof cannot be found, the possibility of building a perpetual motion machine of the
second kind is not foolish and an all out effort is justified to demonstrate it. If it can be built, society
would have an inexhaustible and pollution free source of energy which probably could be sized for
use in the smallest homes and the largest factories.


15.17- The Uniqueness of the Earth:- There is considerable interest in the possibility that there may
be a large number of planets in our galaxy which are suitable for life. In the hope that there may be
intelligent life on planets lying within a reasonable distance, a project named SETI (Search for
Extraterrestrial Intelligence) has been set up to search for evidence of that life. The idea behind the
project is that intelligent life may be generating signals which can be received on Earth that are
either a by-product of their civilization (such as our own radio broadcasts) or a deliberate attempt to
communicate. Unfortunately, the probability of success of those programs is far lower than
currently believed. If an Earth sized planet existed 93,000,000 miles from a star which was virtually
identical to the Sun, it is extremely unlikely that it would be capable of supporting life. To see why
this should be so, an examination of our own Solar System is order.


15.18- With the exception of Mercury, the Earth, Mars, and Pluto, all of the planets have enormous
atmospheres (relative to the Earth). One can draw no conclusions about the the original conditions
on Mercury or Pluto. Mercury is too small and too close to the Sun to have prevented its
atmosphere, regardless of its original quantity, from boiling away to space. (There may be a
remnant of an atmosphere frozen at the poles.) At the other extreme, due to its distance from the
Sun, any atmosphere that Pluto may have had at its beginning and which has not been lost by
evaporation to space is frozen solid and is therefore unobservable. Observations have shown that
Mars once had a significant atmosphere which supported running water (and, by implication,
oceans) but has lost both. Apparently, its low gravitational mass has made it too easy for the Sun's
radiation to cause Mar's atmosphere to evaporate to space. Of all the planets, it is Earth that is the
anomaly.


15.19- Due to its location, Venus receives about twice the heat input from the Sun as does the Earth.
Its gravitational mass is slightly less than that of the Earth and yet it has an atmosphere about 70
times as dense as the Earth. It seems reasonable to conclude that the early history of the Solar
System probably went through the following stages:


e The planets were formed by the collision of smaller objects circling the Sun in eccentric orbits.
The collision process continued until the Solar System was virtually cleared of objects in
non-circular orbits.


o During the planetary formation stage, the planets could not acquire atmospheres
because the bombardment which was forming them made their surfaces extremely hot.
Any atmospheric gases which impacted the planet from interplanetary space would boil
away immediately.


e Once the rate of bombardment forming the planets reduced to the point where the planets
could cool sufficiently, they proceeded to collect atmospheres from the gases which remained
in the Solar System.


o For Venus to have its present atmospheric density, all of the planets, including the Earth,
must have acquired enormous (by Earth standards) atmospheres.


m A planet gains atmosphere by sweeping up gases from interplanetary space. It
losses atmosphere through evaporation of those gases to that same space from its
uppermost layer.


e In order for a molecule of gas to be lost to the planet, it must acquire a thermal velocity greater
than the planet's escape velocity. This must occur at an altitude at which the atmosphere is
sufficiently thin so that it does not strike other molecules while escaping.


o The rate at which atmospheric gases are lost to space is determined almost entirely by
the rate of energy input from the Sun and by the escape velocity of the planet at the top
of its atmosphere The rate of atmosphere loss is virtually independent of the amount of
atmosphere the planet owns.


15.20- The Earth-Moon system has two characteristics which are anomalous compared to the other
planets. The first is that it has far too much angular momentum (orbital angular momentum,
rotational angular momentum of the Earth and the Moon, and orbital angular momentum of the
Moon around the Earth). As pointed out in a text by Dr. Urey, an exponential plot of angular
momentum vs total mass for all of the other planets yields a straight line. The total angular
momentum of the Earth-Moon system lies far above that line. The second anomaly is that it
contains far too little atmosphere and, unlike Mars, the density of that atmosphere has remained
almost unchanged. A satisfactory explanation for both of these anomalies seems to have been
provided about a decade ago by a computer simulation of a glancing impact on the Earth by an
object having a mass about one sixth of its mass. The simulation predicted the formation of a
binary system with a Moon sized object orbiting the Earth an altitude of about 12,000 miles, with the
Earth having a 4 hour day, and with the Earth having captured the iron cores of both objects. Since
the length of the Earth's day was, is, and will remain less than the Moon's orbital period until the
Sun enters its red giant stage, tidal effects on the Earth will perpetually transfer angular momentum
from the Earth to the Moon. This transfer has lengthened the Earth's day to 24 hours and has
caused the Moon's orbit to increase to 238,000 miles. More important, such an impact would have
blasted away most if not all of the Earth's atmosphere and, if the collision occurred late enough in
the formation period of the Solar System, most of the interplanetary gases would have been
absorbed by the other planets and/or lost to interstellar space. This scenario could easily allow the
Earth to have the comparatively puny but stable atmosphere required to support the evolution of
intelligent life.


15.21- In order for a planet to support life, not only must it be in the "life zone" about a suitable star,


it must possess an atmosphere of a suitable density for a sufficient period of time for life to evolve.
On the Earth, life does not seem to prosper above an altitude where the density is half an
atmosphere. At the other end of the scale, the atmosphere must not be too thick or the wavelengths
of radiation needed for photosynthesis not only will not reach the atmosphere-water interface where
life begins, that interface is likely to be too hot. Making the optimistic assumption that four and a
half atmospheres is the highest suitable atmospheric pressure requires that a life supporting planet
not lose more than four atmospheres of density in the period required for intelligent life to evolve.
For a planet starting with the atmospheric density of Venus to lose 60 PSI of surface atmospheric
pressure in 3 billion years (the time required for intelligent life to have evolved on Earth), the
existence of such life would require an age of 50 billion years for the planetary system. Such a
conclusion presents problems. A star similar to our Sun will become a red giant about 10 billion
years after its formation and the apparent age of the Universe is only 15 billion years. On the other
hand, if a planet such as Mars lost its atmosphere at a sufficient rate to reach compatibility with the
requirements of life before its star became a red giant, it would pass though the "life range" so
quickly that intelligent life would probably not have had time to evolve. It is the author's belief that,
without the addition of the 'wild card’ implicit in the postulated Earth-Moon collision, a planet
capable of supporting life cannot exist. (It is hoped that this question would be examined further.) It
is the author's belief that intelligent life is much rarer in the Universe than Dr. Sagan suggested.


15.22- A Comment on Meteorites and the Asteroid Belt:- The asteroid belt exists as a ring of stony
and iron rocks in orbit about the Sun between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. The radius of that orbit
coincides with the anticipated location of a planet 's orbit under the conventional theory of
planetary formation. If one examines the objects in the asteroid belt, the moons of Mars, and the
meteorites which strike the Earth, one finds that, unlike comets, they are densely composed of
stone or of iron. Unlike the flimsy comets, such objects cannot form by accretion, they can only be
formed within a planet sized object. One must conclude, therefore, that initially a planet did form at
the radius of the asteroid belt and was later shattered by a collision. Such a collision would drive
away most of the planetary material and leave a residue of rocks from the planets upper layers and
iron objects from the planet's core. It seems probable that the object which impacted the early Earth
to form the Earth-Moon system, the meteorites which strike the Earth, and the moons of Mars
resulted from that collision.


Chapter 16 - What Can We Conclude?


16.1- Prior to the early years of the 20th Century, the assertion (which the author's memory
suggests originated with Lord Raleigh) that there was no phenomena in Nature for which a model
could not be built was an accepted philosophy. The building of such conceptual models was
considered to be a goal of the physical sciences. Obviously, since we exist, Nature has already built
that model and it is our task to understand it. The task of the physical scientist was deemed to be
one of postulating mechanisms by which nature might function in the observed manner,
mathematically analyzing the behavior of those mechanisms, and finally devising and performing
experiments to determine the validity of the envisioned mechanization. It was expected, of course,
that such a process would be iterative. One could never hope to get it right the first time, but each
iteration would hopefully be closer to representing reality until any discrepancy which remained
was sufficiently small as to be unobservable. With this philosophy, our methodology in
understanding Nature was akin to a three legged stool with one leg representing the conceptual
model, the second leg representing the mathematical analysis of that model, and the third leg
representing the experimental verification of the validity of the first two legs. Just as a stool with
less that three legs is at best unreliable, one would expect that a science missing one of these legs
to also be unreliable and, as we have seen, this is the case.


e Without a conceptual model we cannot know to whether our mathematical analyses are
relevant and what information our experiments have provided. (As an example, consider the
experimental measurement of the velocity of light, as discussed in Chapter 6. The experiment
measures something but it most certainly does not measure the velocity of light.)


e Without a valid mathematical analysis of the model, it cannot be known whether the model will
function in the anticipated manner and what experimental results are required to validate the
model and its mathematical analysis.


e Without experimental verification, one cannot be sure that the model and its mathematical
analysis represents reality or delusion.


Unless all three legs of the stool are used in the acquisition of knowledge understanding is likely to
be faulty and, as this text shows, is likely to produce weird and untenable conclusions when used
as the basis for further work.


16.2- Mathematics is an extremely powerful tool, and properly applied it yields perfect results. Like
all powerful tools, it is dangerous. Mathematics relies upon a sequence of logical steps and, since
the steps are in sequence, the probability of an error having been made increases in proportion to
the number of steps involved. In addition, the mathematical model provides no assurance that it is
consistent with the reality it is attempting to describe. On the other hand, the building of a
conceptual model involves the generation of a pattern whose agreement with reality is readily
determinable. (It is impossible to complete a jigsaw puzzle incorrectly.) The probability of an error in
a conceptual model decreases as the number of its components increase regardless of the level of
the individual errors, but the model does not have the rigor of the mathematical approach. (The
error reducing capability of the conceptual model approach is analogous to the error reducing
capability of the process, known as Kalman Filtering, used in advanced navigational systems.
Kalman Filtering combines the weighted "best guess" accuracy estimates of many lower accuracy
inputs to produce a conclusion of higher accuracy.)


16.3- The conceptual model has an advantage over the mathematical approach in solving physical
problems. It makes use of the most powerful capability of the mind, its pattern recognizing ability.
The power of the mind's pattern recognizing capability was dramatically brought home to the author
at the start of the missile era when he had the responsibility for the development of a star tracker
capable of operating in full daylight using a television camera tube. When an image of a simulated
star and sky was viewed on a television screen, the image of the star abruptly became recognizable
to the eye when the peak star signal to RMS noise ratio of the display exceeded 1:1. The peak star
signal to RMS noise ratio required for recognition by logic circuitry (analogous to a mathematical
approach of solving problems) was, and still is, 6:1. A reasonable man might well conclude that the
brain's inherent pattern recognizing capability is much more powerful than its capability of
performing logical reasoning.


16.4- Relying upon the pattern recognizing capability of the brain to solve physical problems is
difficult for an organized structure of knowledge. Its successful use depends upon the inborn talent
of the individual involved, the proper training of that talent, and the protection provided to that
talent from the strongly motivated efforts of untalented teachers to force him to conform to their
own limitations. The untalented majority will invariably complain that talented individuals are
intellectual mavericks whose reasoning is impossible to understand even though it seems to lead to
valid results. Their complaints are understandable, but the problem lies in the fact that the majority
is attempting to engage in activities for which it does not have the required aptitude.


16.5- Science and technology are the only areas in human endeavor where the requirement for
talent is not considered to be primary. The need for talent in sports or the arts is unquestionable.
No one would attempt to assemble a major league ball team by training a highly motivated group of
randomly selected individuals. If those individuals were not innately talented, they could not be


trained to a level which would permit success and the team would be a dismal failure. Talent cannot
be taught. Michael Jordan could not teach untalented individuals to reliably sink a basket from
midcourt nor could Hank Aaron teach them to swing a bat so as to drive a baseball into the
centerfield stands. When the occasion arises, talented individuals don't consciously think about
how they are going to perform their task, they just do it.


16.6- Up until the 20th century, innate talent was necessary for leadership in the physical sciences
but, with the introduction of Dr. Einstein's work, it became possible for the untalented majority to
gain ascendancy. The same intellectual takeover occurred after World War Il in Engineering and the
costs and failure rates of sophisticated projects greatly increased. (It is fortunate for the USA that
this effect did not take place earlier or the war is likely to have been lost.) Admittedly, engineering
has accomplished a great deal since that time but at an excessive cost in money and time. It is no
accident that, when a project such as the development of the U-2 aircraft is required, the work is
performed in a skunk works, it is not performed in a mainstream organization. (The one statement
that the author can quote verbatim from a college instructor after almost 50 years is that "an idiot
can do anything that an engineer can, the difference is that it will take three time as long and cost
five times as much".) In the basic sciences the situation is much worse. While anyone can tell
whether an airplane flies, they cannot tell whether there is a wormhole in space or whether the Law
of Conservation of Energy is consistent with the gravitational field. The end result is that the rules
of a religion have been imposed on the physical sciences and those sciences have been degraded
to a level analogous to that of a medieval theology which, as mentioned, debated the number of
angels who could dance on the head of a pin. It is no accident that the PC industry was started by
two men working in a garage rather than by a huge corporation.


16.7- The selection and training of talented individuals is a difficult process. They can only be
identified by their ability to arrive at valid results by unanticipated, and perhaps incomprehensible
routes. The conventional educational approach in the sciences and the technologies is to attempt
break those individuals away from their unorthodox thought processes and force them to conform
to accepted practices and ideas rather than to recognize their talent and assist them in its
development. Talent in both the physical sciences and in technology operates by making use of the
pattern recognition capability of the mind and, because it operates in the background, the individual
possessing the talent is normally unaware of the thought processes involved and ascribes their
results to intuition. Depending upon the lifelong personality of the individual, the innate level of that
talent and the discipline that he has exerted in training it, the reliability of an individual's intuition
varies from zero to perfection. As is the case with a computer, GIGO applies. In order for the pattern
recognizing capability of his brain to be effective in the solution of physical problems it is
necessary for an individual to have accepted a certain set of learning rules for himself. These rules
are:


e Everything he accepts as true must agree with everything else that he accepts as true.


o In the event of contradiction, the validity of the relevant information, both old and new,
must be considered to be tentative.


o If the information is more than trivially important, the necessary effort must be made to
resolve any inconsistencies by correcting the new and/or the old information.


o The more items of information processed in this manner, the closer one's store of
knowledge will approach absolute validity. (It will never be perfect, no one lives that
long.)


e One must never assume that his source of information, no matter how revered, is correct.


o Where necessary in an academic or business situation, one must keep two sets of
books. One set of books must contain the information expected by the individuals
possessing power over your future and the other set must contain the information you
have determined to be true.


e One must never allow himself to be brainwashed or bullied into not following the preceding
rules.


If an individual follows these rules from an early age, he will find that his intuition, also known as
common sense, will be extremely reliable and will provide him with information long before he
understands it consciously. As a bonus, the information will be correctly labeled as to its reliability.
Intuition only yields faulty results if an individual has failed to adequately follow the rules described
above.


16.8- Is the information presented in this book more nearly correct than presently accepted
concepts? The author believes that it is for the simple reason that he can find no contradiction
between the various items of information involved. On the other hand, the presently accepted
concepts are severely inconsistent. They are as full of holes as lacy swiss cheese. Will the material
that the author has provided require improvement and correction? Certainly it will, no one can
cover this much material without error. As to where our understanding of reality will lead, only time
will tell. Unfortunately the author's age insures that he will not be around to see the results.


16.9- Common Sense is another name for intelligence. While mathematics and experimentation
require intelligence for their development, their usage does not directly involve intelligence. In their
application, they are merely tools which must be used as an adjunct to intelligence.


To Other Links:-


To "Gravity" * * To "Corrections to Special Relativity" * * To The Website
