A “NEW CHURCH” DEDICATED
TO St. PADRE PIO

— MASONIC TEMPLE? —

by Doctor Eng. Franco Adessa


The distribution of this Special Edition of “Chiesa viva” N°381,
started on February 20, 2006.


The “new church” dedicated to Saint Padre Pio, in San Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia) - Italy.


The essence of this detailed, meticulous and complete study
on the “new church” dedicated to Saint Padre Pio,
in San Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia) Italy,
is the following:


THIS “NEW CHURCH * 5 IS NOT A CATHOLIC CHURCH

BUT A “MASONIC TEMPLE 55 ,

OR BETTER, A “SATANIC TEMPLE 55
WHICH GLORIFIES MASONRY AND ITS “GOD 55 , LUCIFER.


and where the Masonic symbology
celebrates the following horrible empieties:


- THE REPLACEMENT OF THE HOLIEST TRINITY
WITH THE BLASPHEMOUS, SATANIC,
MASONIC “TRIPLE TRINITY 55 ;


2


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


- THE REPLACEMENT OF JESUS CHRIST BY LUCIFER

AS “MAN’S REDEEMER”;

- THE REPLACEMENT OF JESUS CHRIST BY LUCIFER

AS “KING OF THE UNIVERSE”;

- THE REPLACEMENT OF THE “CULT OF GOD”
WITH THE “CULT OF LUCIFER”;


... and where the Masonic symbology
celebrates

the deadly weapon to destroy the Catholic Church:


THE “MASONIC ECUMENISM” OF THE REUNION
OF ALL THE RELIGIONS.


Despite the fact that the Vatican has not been able so far
to refute the conclusions
of this meticulous, detailed and complete study,

THEY STILL CELEBRATE THE HOLY MASS
IN THIS “SATANIC TEMPLE”!


Therefore “Chiesa viva” asks to prohibit the religious use
of this “Satanic Temple”
and tells the catholic Hierarchy:

THESE ARE SACRILEGIOUS MASSES!

THIS IS A HORRIBLE INSULT TO JESUS CHRIST!

- THIS IS A CHALLENGE TO THE HOLIEST TRINITY!

and asks them:

UNTIL WHEN YOU WILL ALLOW MASONRY

TO INSULT

OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST
AND THE HOLIEST TRINITY?


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


3


D octor E ng. Franco A dessa


The

CROSS


THATS


T he shedding of the Blood of Our
Lord, with His death on the
Cross, constitutes the praise-
worthy cause of our eternal salvation.
It is from the Cross, that every spiritual
benefit, every grace and the efficacy
of the Sacraments come to us. For this
reason, the Church has always
wanted to exalt the Crucifix, offering
it continuously to the contemplation
of her faithful. Hence, the entire
Catholic spirituality is based upon
the Cross!

But not only is Jesus Christ crucified
the praiseworthy cause of our Re-
demption; He is also the exemplary
cause of our life. He is, of necessity,
a model for each and every soul wish-
ing to save and sanctify itself.

To take the Crucifix away from our
eyes it is to lose the sense of sorrow; it
is to lose the meaning of life.

And that is why the Crucifix, symbolic
form of our Religion, has lent its imprint
to the “floor-plan” of the church, en-


Floor-plan

of Vatican Basilica - Baroque Period.


closing in it a symbolic universe that has
conferred upon its edifice the character of

“sacred place”.

Reads the “Dictionary of Architecture”:
«The ancient Basilica of St. Peter, in

Rome, started around 320 AD and conse-
crated by Pope Sylvester I in 326, con-
stituted one of the earliest examples of
Christian architecture. It had the typical
Latin-Cross basilical floor-plan, with
the aula divided into five longitudinal
naves and crossed perpendicularly by a
transept" 1 .

And further on: «Between the VIII and XI
century it became prevalent, in Western
ecclesiastical construction, the Cross-
shaped floor-plan (“Latin” cross, that
is, with axis of different length), which
took up the symbolic form par-excel-
lence of the Christian Religion. The
short arm of the cross (transept) clearly
distinguishes the presbytery from the
central nave» 2 .

The Viollet-Le-Duc’s “Dictionary” goes
on to read: «ln most of the “floor-plans”
of Medieval churches, from the XI to the
XIV century, it is observed that the axis
of the nave and that of the Chorus form a
line broken at the transept. It is a poi-
gnant symbolism; it is an act of sublime
faith to the eye of a Christian architect!


HURCH


But what did the architects of those
times of Faith wish to attain? To raise
Basilicas, and Temples, in which to be
able to aptly renew the “Sacrifice” of
the Mass, living memorial of the Sa-
crifice of Christ on the Calvary.
Hence, they wished to recall the Victim
of the Golgotha, attached to the Cross.
And here is the Cross, lone, im-
mense, the nave and the transept
representing the body and the open
arms.

The central altar represents the august
head of the sacrificed God, and the
chapels, with a sunburst pattern about
the apse, form the glorious crown
wreathing the forehead of the Savior of
the world.

Mindful, then, that the Evangelist wrote
that Jesus “inclinato capite, tradidit
spiritum” (bowed His head, and ren-
dered His Spirit), the builders of cathe-
drals have voluntarily bowed the cho-
rus onto the arms of the transept and
the head toward the shoulders» 3 .


Floor-plan
of Duomo of Milan.


4


‘Chiesa viva


March 2006


THE CHURCH: A “SACRED” PLACE

Why is the church, as an edifice, also a

“sacred” place?

«Our modern culture has lost sight of the
concept of sacred for the reason that it
has lost sight of the reality of God and
of the sense of human life, caught in
the whirlwind of erroneous theological
premises which defined the reality of
Faith so aseptically as to make it appear
that truth had no relation with man. In
this sense, the sacred per se, utterly
removed from the faithful, has no sense
whatsoever. It is sheer hallucination to
affirm, therefore, that a created reality is
holy in and of itself when conceived
devoid of its real relation with the world.
Based on this premise, one would come
to two contradictory conclusions:
everything is sacred; nothing is sacred.
As objectivity, to be eloquent, must be
perceived by the subject, and, therefore,
must be subjectivized, so the sacred has
its own sense when it is placed in rela-
tion with the person; when, that is, it
interacts with the believer.

To conceive the sacred space of the
church as something aesthetic (a com-
mon occurrence nowadays) it is to have
no understanding!

The church is not important or “sacred”
because it is beautiful, comfortable, and
functional. What difference would there
be, then, between the religious building
and a multifunctional arena? None what-
soever! In fact, it is no coincidence that
many churches, nowadays, resemble
multifunctional arenas. At the origin of
these constructions there exists, there-
fore, a hazy concept of Christianity and,
perhaps, a Christianity that has lost the
sense of its own Tradition.

To Tradition, each and every reality of
the Church is linked to the faithful and
it is in the service of his spiritual pro-
gress. The edifice of the church has, there-
fore, a “sacred” value because it con-
tains inside of it a symbolic universe.
The believer who steps into an ancient
Basilica finds himself before a prospec-
tive, before a path with a destination: the
apse and the sanctuary.

The initial part of the church (Narthex)
symbolizes the existential stage of he
who approaches Christianity for the first
time. Those waiting to be baptized
paused in the area adjacent to the en-
trance door. All the internal area (Nave),
instead, symbolizes the course of Faith
in the believer. The Sanctuary, the place
where the altar is located and where the
Eucharist is celebrated, represents the
place of the vision, the place in which
the light of God reaches men to en-
lighten them. Therefore, it is no wonder
that the majority of the ancient churches
be oriented with the apse to the east,
the place where the sun rises. (...).

The cosmic elements combine with the
symbolic ones and both connect to the
personal situation of the believer. Hence,
in the ecclesiastical edifice the believer
finds himself again before God.

The holiness of the church is, then, in-
dication and reference of the holiness
of the human person, for God reveals


Himself in the hearts of men, and it is here
that they must learn to discover Him» 4 .
The holiness of the church, besides the
reference of the holiness of the person,
also refers to a way of conceiving
God. St. Simeon of Thessalonica (XV
century) paused to describe the symbolic
world enclosed in the Christian temple. In
one of his writings, one observes what
has been outlined above: the “sacred”
edifice is the mirror of the inferiority of
man and of the mystery of God: «The
temple, while made up of stones, wood
and other materials, contains a superna-
tural grace. Once it has been consecra-
ted by a Bishop, through mystical prayers
and anointed with the holy chrism, it truly
becomes the abode of God. As such, it is
not totally accessible to everyone. The
temple has a twin nature, as it features a
place for the altar and a place external to
it. In this manner, it represents Christ,
who is God-man, who has a visible na-


ture and another nature that is invisible.

Also, the temple represents man com-
posed of soul and body. In addition, it
represents above all the excellent mys-
tery of the Holiest Trinity, inaccessible
in her essence, but known in her provi-
dence and in her powers, revealing, simi-
larly, the world of the visible things and of
the invisible ones» 5 .

Here then stands the Cross, floor-plan of
the holy place, lone, immense, with her
nave, her transept and her Sanctuary,
conferring upon the holy edifice the entire
Catholic spirituality based upon the
Cross: the essence of God, the es-
sence of the Sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross, the essence of the course of
Faith in the believer for his own salva-
tion.

This “immense cross” of the sacred
place, therefore, is an act of faith and, at
the same time, manifesting the excellen-
ce and sovereignty of God, as well as our
dependence on Him, is also a grandiose
and external act of cult.


A “NEW CHURCH”

WANTED BY PADRE PIO?

In all the degeneration of the new spiri-
tuality of our times, which would like to
hide the “negative” parts of Christianity
focusing only upon that which stirs to joy,
merrymaking, exhibition, and which af-
firms to be including the “best part” of
the world, there emerges the figure of
St. Padre Pio, the only stigmatized
priest in the history of the Church,
who, through his example, reminds all of
mankind that he that wishes to be disci-
ple of Our Lord must follow Him with
the Cross, whose mystery he (St. Pa-
dre Pio) manifested for fifty years,
bearing, inflicted into his body, the fi-
ve bleeding wounds of the Crucifix!
How could one express a more heartfelt
recognition for all his extraordinary spiri-
tual work if not erecting and dedicating to
St. Padre Pio a “new church” with a
“Cross-shaped floor-plan,” symbol of
the mystery of the Holiest Trinity, sym-
bol of the Sacrifice of Christ Redeemer,
symbol of the path of Faith of every belie-
ver who looks forward to his own salva-
tion, and symbol of those stigmata of Pa-
dre Pio which were the true cause of his
power of intercession with God, in order
to dispense all kind of grace to those turn-
ing to him?

Why, then, to this Saint Minister of God,
to this Living Crucifix has not been dedi-
cated a “Cross-shaped” church, but
they wanted, instead, to attribute to
him the will of longing for a spiral-sha-
ped new church”?


1 Cfr. “Architettura”, Architecture, § 5.1 Pa-
leochristian Architecture.

2 Cfr. “Architettura”, Architecture, § 5.3 Ro-
manic Architecture.

3 Cfr. Viollet-Le-Duc’s “Dictionary”: text re-
ported at the word “axe” (axis).

4 Cfr. “The Sacred Architecture” dictionary,
p. 3-4.

= Idem, p. 5.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


5


The "NEW CHURCH"
dedicated to St. Padre Pio


A front view of the "new church" dedicated to Saint Padre Pio, in San Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia) - Italy.


Mons. Crispino Valenziano, member of the
Pontifical Commission for the Cultural
Estate and direct supervisor of architect Ren-
zo Piano, gave him the liturgical and theolo-
gical bonds for the construction of the “new
church", in order to have “the project gaining
in expressiveness”.

Mons. Valenziano, in the Pontifical Commis-
sion, was under the direction of card. Virgilio
Noe and then of card. Francesco Marchisa-
no, both having their names in the “Lista of
Pecorelli”, a list of 121 Prelate of Roman
Catholic Church belonging to Masonry.


S marted on 19 January 1996, the
j'new church” dedicated to St.
Padre Pio has been designed by
the Genoese architect Renzo Piano, 62,
foremost among the Italians and honored
with the Pritzker Prize (the Nobel of ar-
chitecture), in 1998.

Mons. Crispino Valenziano, member of
the Pontificia Commissione per i Beni
Culturali, Pontifical Commission for the
Cultural Estate, on the other hand, has
followed this impressive work from the li-
turgical and theological perspective,
and speaks enthusiastically of this ex-
perience that, in his view, offers the oc-
casion «to share, as Church, in the
context of modern art, and yet retain
that thematic rigor characteristic of other
epochs. Epochs in which the symbiosis


between art and religious world was prac-
tically total and all-encompassing, as in
the Middle Ages».

«Although at first - goes on Mons. Valen-
ziano - Piano’s inspiration looked back
at the classical form of the Greek amphi-
theater, the project has, in time, been
gaining in expressiveness” 1 .

«While a proud man - goes on to explain
Valenziano - Piano has been heedful,
like few others, of the functional indica-
tions linked with the place of cult. And, in
that, he has shown a great humbleness».
In corroboration of this humbleness, to a
reporter who asked him if, having to de-
sign a church with all the liturgical and
theological bonds that come with it, he
would feel any less free in his creativity,
Renzo Piano replied: «Free? But for an


1 Cfr. “Luoghi dell’infinito”, Places of the Infinite, illustrated insert of Avvenire, Sept. 1998, p. 23.


6


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


Architect Renzo Piano


architect freedom is not such a great
boon. I thank God when I’m given
clear-cut indications: they are like the
squares on the great white sheet that is
the project» 2 .

In the same article, Mons. Valenziano
assures us that «with the sole exception
of the seventeenth century Franciscan
style Crucifix, which will be installed in
the Chapel of Penance, all the other
works will reflect the sincere religio-
sity of many contemporary artists who
have devoted themselves to the sa-
cred” 3 .

Furthermore, he informs us: «l believed
it essential that no typology be im-
posed upon churches. It is one thing to
have a taste for beauty or tradition (chur-


1“


The great wall and corridor of the “new church” bell structure.


ches built according to certain general
canons), quite another to believe that
churches be a static data, bound to a
precise standard for all times» 4 .

In another article, however, Mons. Cri-
spino Valenziano is introduced to us as
the liturgical consultant «whose indica-
tions drove the architect Piano to revisit
his initial project, in order to make it “a


model for all the churches that will be
designed in the next five decades» 5 .
Now we ask ourselves: if Mons. Valen-
ziano believes that churches must not be
a “static data”, why is he so eager to
impose this model of church for the
next fifty years?

If we may speak our mind, we should
say: what a mix-up! But the subject is too


2 Idem, pp. 24-25.

3 Idem, p. 25.

4 Cfr. Crispino Valenziano, “Architetti di


chiese”, Architects of Churches , the epos,
quoted in the article of: “II Giornale” (daily),
25 June 1999, p. 19.


5 Cfr. “Famiglia Cristiana” magazine n° 10,
2002, p. 33.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


7


On June 1 1, 2005 at 11 o’clock , this bronze Bell , dedi-
cated to Saint Michael Archangel and to Padre Pio,
broke free an fell braking in thousand pieces. The bell
weighed 18 hundred kilos (18 = 6 + 6 + 6 = 666, which
represents the Mark of the Beast and the number of
the Antichrist).


serious, and so we wanted to
gather information and we felt edi-
fied in reading the words of the fa-
mous historian of religious archi-
tecture, Erwin Panoftsky, whom,
in a famous work of his, wrote:
«There exists an intimate bond
between the way of building a
church and the way of thinking
and living of men. To live outside
of Christianity, or in a corrupted
or secularized form of Christia-
nity, produces more or less the
same results. It must be stated
that when it (the church) is born
of non-Chris-tian artists and ar-
chitects it (church) might even
turn out very interesting, but IT
WILL NEVER BE AN EXPRES-
SION OF CHRISTIANITY» 6 .

We did, however, plunge back into
doubt when we read, on a recent
magazine, the verdict of another
famous historian of architecture,
the Swiss Kurt W. Forster, who
taught in the United States for over
25 years at Yale, Stanford, and at
the MIT. In an article titled “Great
Architects Can Do Away With
Faith,” when asked: «Professor
Forster, a secular rationalist su-
ch as Renzo Piano, is confron-
ted with the Catholicism of the
miracles; what will the outcome
be?», he replies: «The conflict is only ap-
parent. (...). An artist does not have to
connect. Great architects have succes-
sfully tackled these themes (...). To
Piano, it is just another challenge. A man
of profound secular experience can gi-
ve truth to phenomena for which we


have no rational understanding. The
Big Bang replaces the story of Gene-
sis: it is our world)) 7 .

At this point, we asked ourselves: the
project of the Catholic church that, after
St. Peter, is the largest in the world, is


entrusted not to a Christian archi-
tect, but to “secular rationalist”,
to a “man of profound secular
experience” whom, “without
faith” and “without connecting”,
is able to “give truth to phenome-
na for which we have no rational
understanding”.

But... that man was the same who
humbly followed the “precise indi-
cations” that were given him, and

who was even happy to relinqui-
sh his freedom of creative ex-
pression when he was devoted to
a project. But then, we ask our-
selves: whose creative expres-
sion and “truths” are those that
have been imprinted into his
work?

To us it looks like utter confusion.
One important thing, however,
seems quite clear to us: “the story
of Genesis has been replaced by
the Big Bang”; a doctrine, the lat-
ter, which has the subtle claim of
eliminating God Creator from
that which Forster calls “our
world!”.

To deny creation from nothin-
gness there is only one other
“world”: that which makes of the
war to the supernatural its one
and only “dogma”: the Jewish-
Masonic world!

Thank you, doctor K.W. Forster!


6 Cfr. Diction. “L’Architettura sacra”, Sacred
Architecture, p. 2.

7 Cfr. “L’Espresso” magazine, 24 October
2002, p. 171.


A rear view of the "new church" dedicated to Saint Padre Pio, in San Giovanni Rotondo (Foggia) - Italy.


8


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


Why a "SPIRAL-SHAPED"


Church?


W hat meaning does the “spiral”
have in Christian symbology?
None whatsoever! Why, then,
it was blatantly chosen to give “form” to
the structural architecture of the “new
church” dedicated to St. Padre Pio?

They told us that this “spiral-shaped”
church, “is a spider”, is an “Open Church”,
is a “High Technology Jewel”, is a
“Seashell for Padre Pio” and that the
Saint shall be like the pearl inside of it.
They also told us that this new church
has been freshly baptized “Cathedral of
Two-Thousand”, “New Assisi”, “Divine
Project!”... But, they have not said to us
that the “Masonic Dictionary”, at the
voice “spiral”, reads: «Very ancient sign
symbolizing the existence of man and his
return to the origin... (the spiral) sym-
bolizes also the dynamic force of the
universe, the Creative Principle, the
G.A.O.T.U. (...)» 1 .

The same Dictionary, at the voice

G.A.O.T.U., explains: «Masonic abbre-
viation to indicate God, Great Archi-
tect Of The Universe» 2 .

And who is this “God”, called G.A.O.T.U.?


It is the God of Freemasonry. In fact, al-
ready in the General Statutes of 1820, it
was said: «(Freemasonry) has for its

principle the existence of a God whom
it adores and respects under the com-
monly accepted title of Great Architect
of the Universe» 3 .

But the G.A.O.T.U. is proclaimed by
Freemasonry also as “Creative Princi-
ple” (in the meaning, however, of “prin-
ciple of generation” and not of “crea-
tion from nothingness”!). In the Great
Alliance Treaty, signed at Lausanne
(Switzerland) in 1875, among the Supre-
me Councils of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite, it was in fact affirmed:
«Freemasonry proclaims what it has
proclaimed ever since its inception:
the existence of a Creative Principle,
under the name of Great Architect of
the Universe» 4 .

To define the G.A.O.T.U. as “dynamic
force of the universe” is, instead, the
founder of the Theosophic Society, Hele-
na P. Blavatsky, freemason of the 33 de-
gree who, with all her authority, wrote:
«Satan represents the active Energy


of the Universe (...). He is the Fire, the
Light, the Life, the Fight, the Struggle,
Thought, Conscience, Progress, Civi-
lization, Freedom, Independences
and again: «Satan is the God, the only
God of our Planet» 5 .

The yet more authoritative seal as to who
the true God of Freemasonry is, comes to
us from the Supreme Pontiff of Universal
Freemasonry, general Albert Pike
whom, as Freemasonry’s Supreme Chief,
in a speech held in France in 1889 to the
high degrees of Freemasonry, stated:
«We worship a God, but it is the God
one worships without superstition (...).
We initiated of the high degrees,
should maintain the Masonic Religion
in the pureness of the Luciferian doc-
trine. (...). Yes, Lucifer is God (...) the
true and pure philosophic religion is
the faith in Lucifer (...) but Lucifer God
of Light and God of Good is struggling
for humanity against Adonai (the One
and Trine God - author’s note) god of
darkness and demon» 6 .

Hence, the “spiral” symbolizes the
G.A.O.T.U., namely Lucifer-Satan,
whom, as we well know already, has en-
gaged against the God One and Trine
a fight to the death for the perdition of
man.

The “spiral”, however, not only symbol-
izes the way Freemasonry conceives
God, but also symbolizes its way of con-
ceiving the “path of faith” or, better, the
“initiatic course” man is expected to fol-
low in order to fulfill the “divine design”.
In a highly documented book on Freema-
sonry, we read, in fact: «The Spiral is a
sign of evolution-involution in the symbol-
ic background of high-ranking initiates.
The continuous Spiral that, in the form
of a path, climbs along the flanks of the
mountain is the “Pilgrim Path”, that is,
the initiatic path. The peak of the moun-
tain fades into a vertical line toward the
spiritual infinite: it is the axis of the
world, “universal Axis” of the sole
truth professed by High Freemasonry,
the passage between earth and heaven
configured by Gnosis: the divinization
of Man» 7 .

Giuseppe Mazzini, Head of Political Ac-
tion of Universal Freemasonry and co-
founder, with Albert Pike, in 1870, of


1 Cfr. Luigi Troisi, “Dizionario massonico”,

Masonic Dictionary - Bastogi Editrice Italiana,
p. 377.

2 Idem, p. 173.

3 “Statuti Generali”, General Statutes, of
1820, Ed. Civelli Rome 1908, V.

4 Salvatore Farina, “II Libro dei Rituali del


Rito Scozzese Antico e Accettato”, The

Book of the Rituals of the Ancient and Accep-
ted Scottish Rite, Rome, Piccinelli 1946, p.
304.

5 H. P. Blavatsky, “La Dottrina segreta”, The

Secret Doctrine, Ed. Bocca, Milan 1953, p.
400 and 383.


6 An excerpt of this speech was reported by
the British magazine “The Freemason” in its
issue of 19 January 1935.

7 Cfr. Epiphanius, “Massoneria e sette se-
grete: la faccia occulta della storia” Free-
masonry and Secret Sects: The Occult Face
of History, p. 193.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


9


Radius of the circular
base of the cone and of
the starting point of the
spiral.


Radius of the spiral at
the point of rotation of
180° from the starting
point of the spiral.


“The New and Reformed
Palladian Rite”, supreme
vertex of Masonic Obedi-
ences worldwide, besides
the existence of God (the
G.A.O.T.U. = Satan) it rec-
ognized the principle of the
“Law of Progress” « whose
continuity appears evident
not to the life of each peo-
ple separately, but to that of
Humanity for which peoples
are individual and, only
then, one will discover
the immense indefinite
spiral, designed by the
finger of God between
the Universe and the
Ideal that must gradually
be reached » 8 .

Setting aside the high-sounding language,
used for the naive and the unaware, let
us see, now, what this “immense indefi-
nite spiral, designed by the finger of
God” consists in, and the “Ideal one is
to reach”, better described in some
personal letters Mazzini and Freema-
sonry’s Supreme Chief, Albert Pike, ex-
changed in the years 1 870-1 871 .

In his letter of 22 January 1870, Mazzini
exposed his plan of three World Wars
for the Twentieth century with the pur-
pose of creating a Communist State in
Russia (first War), and cause it to ex-
pand to include half of Europe (second
War), and render it politically and milita-
rily powerful in anticipation of the third
War, which would burst out between
political Zionism (including the State of
Israel) and Islam, toward their mutual
destruction, together with all the other
Nations, dragged into the conflict in or-
der to fight one another until their com-
plete physical, moral, spiritual, and eco-
nomical collapse.

Albert Pike, in complete agreement with
this infernal plan, better detailed the
objectives of the Third World War in a let-
ter of 1871: «We will unleash the nihilists
and the atheists and will provoke a formi-
dable social cataclysm which will clearly
show all nations, in all its horror, the ef-
fect of absolute atheism, origin of bar-
barism and of bloody subversion.
Then, everywhere, the citizens,
compelled to defend themselves
against a worldwide minority of re-
volutionaries (...) will receive the
true light through the universal ma-
nifestation of the pure doctrine of
Lucifer, revealed at last to the pub-
lic eye; manifestation that shall be
followed by the destruction of Chris-
tianity and of atheism, conquered and
crushed at the same time!» 9 .

To the echelon of Freemasonry, there-
fore, the “Path of faith in Progress”,
represented by the immense and in-
definite “spiral”, is non other than the
destruction of the Catholic Church
and of the Christian Civilization, to
be enacted through the universal
manifestation of the pure doctrine of
Lucifer, revealed at last to the public
eye! “The Ideal that must be gra-
dually attained” is, therefore, the
“Cult of Lucifer” in full daylight!


8 Cfr. Luigi Troisi, “Dizionario massoni-
co”, Masonic Dictionary, cited work, p. 261 .

9 Jean Lombard informs us that this corre-
spondence between Pike and Mazzini lies
in the archives of Temple House, Washing-
ton headquarters of the Freemasonry of
the Scottish Rite, but unavailable!

10 Cfr. Jules Boucher, “La simbologia
massonica”, Masonic Symbology , Atanor,
Paris 1948, p. 285.

“Chiesa viva” *** March 2006


Angle
at vertex


Ground floor plan


The manner of generating a spiral is very
simple if observed geometrically: taking a
cone, with a prefixed radius of the base
circle and an angle at the vertex, tracing
a line, with a constant gradient, on its ex-
ternal conical surface, observing its
projection onto the base of the cone one
observes a geometrical form: the spiral.
Varying the radius of the base circle and
the angle at the vertex, one also varies
the manner in which the spiral contracts
toward the central axis as it spins.
Choosing a radius of the base circle of
the cone of 72 m (= OA, deduced from
the ground floor-plan of the Church), an
angle at the vertex of 33° and a gradient
of 33° of the line traced on its surface, the
radius of the spiral, after a rotation of
180°, is reduced to 48.77 m (see figure 1)
while the measures of all the other radi-
uses of this spiral, at 20° from one
another, are reported in figure 2.
Choosing, now, the base radiuses of 36
m (= OB, distance from center of internal
extremity of arc BA), and of 50 m (= OC,
radius of longest of 15 internal arcs, and
of span = 50 m), repeating the same pro-
cedure, after a 180° rotation one obtains,
respectively, the radiuses of 24.38 m and
33.87 m, while the measures of all the
others are reported in figure 2.

Now then, the 11 external arcs and
the 15 internal ones, thus obtained,
coincide exactly with the 26 arcs of
the “new church” dedicated to St.
Padre Pio! Hence, the “generating
principle” of the three spirals, which
determine the measures of all the arcs
of the “new church”, are the angle at
the vertex of 33° and the angle of 33°
of the line with constant gradient,
traced upon the external surface of the
cone to generate the spiral.


Figure 1


The spiral, however, ac-
cording to the experts of
Masonic symbology, can
take on features much
more familiar to us. In the
work of Jules Boucher,
“Masonic Symbology”,
we read: «The number 9
represents, in its graphi-
sm, a descending ger-
mination, hence material;
whereas the numeral 6
represents, on the con-
trary, an ascending ger-
mination, hence spiritual.
These two numbers are
the beginning of a spi-
ral » 10 .


Ground floor plan of the “new church” composed of
15 internal arcs and 1 1 external ones.


Connecting the external points of
the 15 internal arcs, highlighted in
red, a spiral is obtained which, en-
closed with an arc of circle in its
narrowest point, is non other than
a reversed 6 (see figure on the
left).

If the spiral is turned upside down
(as if observed from under the
ground) there appears clearly the
numeral 6 (see figure on the right).
Now, if all the there series of extre-
mities of the internal and external
arcs are connected, three spirals
are obtained (see figure below)
which, enclosed with arcs of circle
in their narrowest point, portray
three 6 as seen upside down.


THE “MARK OF THE BEAST” 666

The connection between spiral and the
numerals 6 and 9 is better illustrated to
us by R. K. Spenser, whom, speaking of
the mural fresco of the Meditation Room
at the UN, writes:

«The spiral-shaped figure that winds
around the diagonal line of the fresco,
symbolizes the Caduceo of Mercury,
which, mythologically, is represented by
two snakes coiled around Mercury’s
magic wand. The intersection of the
spiral with the diagonal forms 9 arcs; the
9 th Hebrew letter “Teth”, which has the
value of 9, means “Snake”. The Number
of the Beast in (the Book of) Revelation
is 666, which kabalistically is repre-
sented by the number 9, the number of
Generation* 11 .

The justice Carlo Alberto Agnoli, a

Freemasonry scholar, wrote in one of his
works: «The Masonic pyramid, which
subordinates everything to the vertex,
has the profoundest message when its
is turned downward, in compliance with
the teaching contained in the Masonic
word VITRIOL, which is presented to the
neophyte already in the “Chamber of
Reflection” when he joins Freemasonry,
and which consists of the initials of the
motto: “Visita Interiorem Terrae, Recti-
ficando Invenies Occultum Lapidem”,
namely, “visit the depth of the earth;
rectifying, you shall find the hidden
stone”, namely, the “Philosopher’s
Stone” of the Great Sectarian Work.

The Masonic hierarchy, like its own doc-
trine, does not shine up high, in the clear-
ness of sunshine, but it is plunged into
the obscurity of the abyss. That it is a
realm of the abyss it is also expressed in
these famous verses by the famed Ma-
son Olindo Guerrini:

But from the abyss a canticle
Up to the Lord’s spaces soars
Blessed be Satan

Who handed Eve the apple of sin /» 12 .


Turning these three spirals upside down,
always as if observed from under the
ground, there appears, in all clearness
(see figure below), an enormous 666,
the “Mark of the Beast” and the sym-
bol of the Anti-Christ”!


It is in fact from this abyss, turned toward
the “spaces of the Lord”, that the three
spiral sections, generated by the resting
points of the 26 arcs of the “new church”,
enclosing them by a circle in the narrow-
est point, appear as an immense 666,
Mark of the Beast and symbol of the
Antichrist. Is it, perhaps, a challenge
launched from hell toward heaven?


The number 33, which expresses the an-
gle at the vertex and the constant gra-
dient of the line on the surface of the
cone that generates the 3 spirals of the
26 arcs of the “new church”, coincides
with the number 33 of the degrees of the
Freemasonry of the Ancient and Ac-
cepted Scottish Rite! Moreover, the
number 666, formed of the three
spirals, which represents the Antichrist
and the Mark of the Beast, is, graphical-
ly, represented by the “five-pointed
Star”, which is the symbol par-excel-
lence of Freemasonry.

The “spiral-shaped” form of the new
church, besides expressing the idea of
god Satan-Lucifer and the “Pilgrim
Path”, namely, the initiatic path and the
objective which the “Course of faith
in Progress” of Freemasonry tends to,
namely, the “Cult of Lucifer in full day-
light”, conceals, perhaps, also the breed-
ing ground and the promoting center of
these impieties, and that is, the “Ma-
sonic Temple” constituted by the 33
degrees of the Freemasonry of the
Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite!


11 R.K. Spenser, “The Cult of the All-Seeing
Eye”, Omni Publications, pp. 17-18.

Carlo Alberto Agnoli, “La Rivoluzione
francese nell’opera della Massoneria”,

The French Revolution in the Work of Free-
masonry, Ed. Civilta - Brescia 1994, p. 134.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


11


THE

MASONIC TEMPLE


Fig. 1 09. L'Bsagmmms
cot pun lul la.

The hexagram with the pentalpha.


T he freemason Jules
Boucher, in his book, “Maso-
nic Symbology”, provides a
singular representation of the Maso-
nic Temple, composed of the 33 de-
grees of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite: a “five-pointed star”
inscribed into a “six-pointed star”,
and the whole he calls: “the hexa-
gram with the pentalpha” or “Pen-
talphic-Hexagram”. Boucher ex-
plains this symbology thus:

«Ragon poses this question: “What
does become of the individual after
death?” And he replies: “From effect
that he was, he in turn becomes
cause (...) since (...) his soul, which
was not a particle of the universal
soul, returns to this immense source
of life, the ‘Middle Chamber’, the
image of the great laboratory in
which these infinite transformations
are performed”. (...).

“The Middle Chamber”, writes Ma-
rius Lepage, is the loss of the illusions
(...), it is the hermetically sealed athanor
in which the glorious transmutation of the


Fig. 107. Quadra, £'om puSSO
SleEJa h'banm cspiiui tu.

(Square, Compass and Blazing Star)

“Masters’ Lodge”: represented by the area
comprised between the Square and the Com-
pass, wherein the “five-pointed Star” is in-
scribed.


“The hexagram with the pentalpha”, in Ma-
sonic symbology represents the “Masonic
Temple” of the 33 degrees of the Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite and its bond, through
the number 1 1, with the Hebrew Kabbalah.

The Masters’ Lodge, or “Middle Chamber”,
wherein the Mason dies and then resuscitates
as “Master” or “Disciple”, is represented by
the hexagon, which we highlighted in yellow,
and which inscribes the “five-pointed Star”.


“Masters’ Lodge”: represented by the area
of intersection of the two arms of the Latin-
shaped Cross.


centers of knowledge that pass from
the brain to the heart, is fulfilled. The
knowledge of the heart is the di-
rect communication without a more
or less opaque go-between, with the
source of any life. It is the intellec-
tual enlightening, before which all is
shrunk to its appropriate dimension,
it is erased and disappears; it is a re-
flection of the True Light, an echo of
the lost word. (...).

Rene Guenon points out: “They say
a Mason Master always stands
between the Square and the Com-
pass, that is, in the very “place” in
which the Blazing Star is inscribed
(five-pointed Star), and which is ap-
propriately the “Invariable Middle”.
Hence (...) the Masters’ Lodge is
called “Middle Chamber”.

With that, the Master is assimi-
lated to the “true man”, placed
between Earth and Heaven and
exercising the function of “me-
diator”. (...) In all traditions, the
“Middle” is the ideal center. To enter the
“Middle Chamber” is to come to the
center of the “Wheel”, to the immobile


i-'ig, 7|J. - La IVtr-3 nibJca a
punta. e L CJualtro F-kmenLi,

(The pointed cubic Stone and the Four Elements)

“Masters’ Lodge”: represented by the sum-
mit of the pyramid that dominates a cube, whi-
ch form the “pointed cubic stone”.


12


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


axis (...)■ This image of the “Wheel”
shows us the profane placed upon
the circumference and the “Initi-
ated” advancing on top of the
beams, toward the Center where
the velocity is nil.

The “Middle Chamber” is also the
“Quintessence” of the alchemists,
the point of intersection of the
two arms of the cross, the sum-
mit of the “pointed cubic Stone”.

One comes to it by way of 15 steps
divided into three groups: three,
five, seven. These numbers are
those of the (Entered) Apprentice,
Fellow (Craft) and Master (Mason).
Three is the Triangle; five, the
Blazing Star; seven, the Seal of
Solomon whose central point is
man come to realize the perfect
balance between Matter and Spirit.

This “Seal of Solomon” is the hiero-
glyphic of the “Philosopher’s
Stone”, whereas the Blazing Star
(that is, the “five-pointed Star”) is
that of the “Primal Matter ”. The
“Triangle”, or “Luminous Delta”,
is the “Fire”, spiritual fire, intense, hidden
with its action on the “Pentagram” or
“Blazing Star” or “Primal Matter”, which
leads to the “Hexagram” or “Seal of
Solomon”, or “Philosopher’s Stone”.

G. Persigout, associating the “Seal of
Solomon” and the “Blazing Star”, forms
the figure he defines as the “Pentalphic
Hexagram”. It is the union of the Micro-
cosm with the Macrocosm.


The Seal of Solomon with the “center”.


Kig. 108, - 11 Sigillo di
Salomons col "centro”.


and will lose, by degrees, all their
roughness. At last, the Master, in
the fullness of his Masonic rights
and of his duties, truly “identified”,
will be an element, a perfect Stone
in the Lodge, indispensable to the
existence of the Lodge itself »L


***


This lengthy and dense citation of
Jules Boucher provides us all we
need to analyze and decipher the
structure of the “new church”, and
to discover the occult meanings hid-
ing behind the symbology of the
construction choices.

To sum up what Boucher stated, the
representation of the Temple of the
Freemasonry of the Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite, in which
the Mason fulfils his path as an Ap-
prentice, Fellow and Master, has
the following features:


7 is the number of the “Master”, it is the Seal
of Solomon with the central point; it is the
“true man”, the “perfect Stone”, indispensa-
ble to the existence of the Masonic Lodge.


It is interesting to note that the sum of

5 (pentagram) and 6 (hexagram) gives a
total of 11. (...). Eleven is ten plus one,
that is, the ten Sefirot plus En-Sof. And
the 33 degrees of the Scottish rite can be
divided into three series of eleven. (...).
The “Middle Chamber” can be com-
pared to the hexagon enclosed within
the hexagram. In this Chamber, Man,
the Initiated, becomes Disciple.

The 6 triangles of the hexagram feature
18 sides; the 5 triangles of the penta-
gram have 15 sides. Adding up 18 and
15, we again come to the number 33.

The 15 th degree of Freemasonry is the
first degree of the “Chapters” and the
18 th is the degree of “Rose-Cross”. This
degree is but the amplification of the 3 rd
degree. It is 3 multiplied 6 (namely, 666 -
author’s note).

The Master’s Lodge is called “Middle
Chamber”, and must have two rooms for
the initiations. (...). Until recently, the
Temple used to be divided into two parts
by a curtain. The first part was the Hikal,
the second the Debhir. The Hikal is the
room wherein Hiram dies, the Debhir
that in which he resuscitates. (...).
Hiram resuscitated! Such is the aim
of the initiation to the degree of Master:
the initiated becomes Disciple; he is
beaming with Light.

(...).

Hiram resuscitated is the Master, he is
the “True Man”. The Apprentice (raw
Stone), following a phase during which
he is “rough-hewn”, “acquires uniform
faces” and becomes Fellow. These
“faces” (cubic Stone) will be polished


Fig, 9. 11 PviuagratTiina-

The Pentagram.


5 is the number of the “Fellow”, it is the Pen-
tagram, or “five-pointed Star”, it is the “Pri-
mal Matter”, in order to arrive to the Seal of
Solomon, to the Master, to the Philosopher’s
Stone.


3 is the number of the “Apprentice”, it is the
Triangle, or “Luminous Delta”, it is the
“Fire”, the spiritual fire, intense, hidden that,
with its action on the Pentagram, leads it to
the Hexagram, that is, to the Master.


- the number 11 , which represents the

mystic number of the Hebrew Kab-
balah from which depend all the
secrets and the symbology of Free-
masonry;

- the number 18, again as “Mark of the
Beast” 666 and as symbol of the “6-

pointed Star”;

- being it a “church” of a Religion, the-
re will have to appear a number ex-
pressing the Masonic ecumenism
that aspires to reunite all the religions
of the world, under the High Direction
of Freemasonry;

- the presence of the number 6, as indi-
cation of the presence of a “6-pointed
Star”;

- the presence of the number 5, as indi-
cation of the presence of a “5-pointed
Star”;

- the number 15 again as a symbol of
the “5-pointed Star” and as the 15
steps divided into three groups: 3, 5,
7, of the Apprentice, of the Fellow
and of the Master;

- the geometrical conditions for their
representation of the Masonic Temple
described by Boucher;

- the number 33 also as sum of 15 and
18, when these represent the 5 and
the 6-pointed Stars;

- the number 7, the number of the Mas-
ter, as derivation of the “6-pointed
Star” with the central point;

- that which, however, Boucher does
not say, but which is key for the signa-
ture Freemasonry impresses to its
works and enterprises, in addition to
its known “5-pointed Star”, which is
its symbol par-excellence, is that it
usually conceals its special “Mark”: 3
times 666, as expression of its sole
“dogma”: to declare and move war
on God!


1 Cfr. Jules Boucher, “La simbologia masso-
nica”, Masonic Symbology , Atanor, Paris
1948, pp. 280-286.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


13


Is this "NEW CHURCH” a

MASONIC TEMPLE?


T he “New Chur-
ch” has been pre-
sented with these
words: «There exists
an inspirational line in
the design of this
church that acts as
backdrop for the
entire project of ar-
chitect Renzo Pia-
no: respect of the
land and mate-
rials selection.

The church will
not “scar” the
mountain with
daring spires and
perforations in the
rock; the seashell-
shaped structure
seems to lie down
on the ground, fol-
lowing the grave rol-
ling of the hills of the
Gargano region».

«The floor-plan, in fact,
opens out fan-like or,
rather, like the profile of a
seashell segmented into
three portions that could con-
tain up to 7,200 faithful».

Says Renzo Piano, as the works
are nearing completion: «l’m happy
more than I’m satisfied. I’m not sure I’ll be
taking on other similar projects; this has
been such an emotionally intense ex-
perience that I’m not sure I wish to re-
peat it, as I fear the next would not be as
nearly intense. And, besides, it’s not
really important for an architect, once a
church has been made, to make many
more... It is more fulfilling to discover
these things». That is exactly what we
intend to do, too!


Let us represent the floor-plan of the 26
arcs of the church structure, orienting it
Eastward, as demand our churches that
see in the rising sun, the Light, the sym-
bol of Our Lord Jesus Christ, but also
as require the Masonic temples: «The
three windows are thus positioned: the
first, facing Eastward; the second,


1 Cfr. Jules Boucher, “La simbologia mas-
sonica”, Masonic Symbology, Atanor, Paris


1948, pp. 157-158.


Entrance of
Liturgical Aula


Southward; the third, Westward. (...). The
Mason builders have always oriented
their temples with the entrance to the
West” 1 .

-The arcs that form the outermost spiral
number 11 .

-The arcs, both external and internal,
have an angular distance of 20°, and
that is, a round angle divided into 18
parts. The number 18 represents all the
segments of the “6-pointed Star” and,
what is more, being the sum of three 6,
it represents the “Mark of the Beast”
666 of the Apocalypse.

-The radius of the circle, which circum-
scribes the church’s structure, and which
coincides with the outermost point of
the first arc measures 72 meters. Ren-


zo Piano told us that the
church could accommodate
up to 7,200 faithful. What does
this number mean? The number

72 indicates, ever since antiquity,
all of the 72 names of the Name of
the Deity. The number 72, therefore,
is the number of Masonic ecume-
nism, which wishes to merge all reli-
gions, including the Catholic Reli-
gion, into the secular, philosophical,
scientific, Universal Religion of
Gnosticism, under the direction of the
echelon of Freemasonry. It must be no-
ted that 72 is the sum of 66 plus 6, hen-
ce it derives from the “Mark of the
Beast” 666.

Maurizio Oddo, in “La chiesa di Pa-
dre Pio a S. Giovanni Rotondo”, St.

Padre Pio’s Church at St. Giovanni Ro-
tondo (p. 53), warns us: «Although ded-
icated to the holy, the complex (the
“new church”) is suitable to host inter-
religious gatherings...”.

-The Entrance to the Liturgical Hall di-
vides the 11 outer arcs into two groups:
the first is made up of 6 arcs.


2 R.K. Spenser, “The Cult of the All-Seeing
Eye”, Omni Publications, pp. 32-34.


14


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


-The second group numbers 5 arcs. The
numbers 6 and 5, indicating the two
Stars with 6 and 5 points, are present in
many places and details of the “new
church”: the arcs with sectors of 6 and
5 blocks from the outside to the inside,
in the details of the tiles, in other works,
etc.

-The group of inner arcs is 15, as the to-
tal number of segments of the “5-point-
ed Star” and as the number of steps
to climb to the “Middle Chamber” or
“Masters’ Lodge”.

-We obtained the number 33 from the
two 3° angles of the cone that gene-
rates all the arcs of the structure of the
“new church”. In addition 33 is the sum
of the numbers 15 and 18 already iden-
tified.

-At this point, let us trace a circle with a
radius of 72 meters; let us subdivide it
into 18 equal parts and, starting from
point A, let us trace the lines of the “6-
pointed Star”. The “5-pointed Star”,
with the point facing upward, must be
traced only after giving a thickness to
the “6-pointed Star” in order to keep
with the symbology illustrated by Bou-
cher. Such a thickness is given, geo-
metrically, by the inner extremities of
the 2 nd , 3 rd and 4 th arc of the outer se-
ries and, after measuring it, it turns out
to be of 42 decimetres. It must be noted


Center of “6-pointed Star”


that 42 is: 6 x 6 + 6, hence it derives
from the “Mark of the Beast” 666. In
addition, “one of the 72 Divine Names
has 42 letters”.

The number 42, besides, has to do with
the number 9 and with Hell, as “The
Egyptian Pantheon had 9 Sun Deities,
whose head was Osiris. He was the
great Deity of Hell, and it was univer-
sally believed that, right after death, the
soul were judged by Osiris, in the
presence of 42 Demons, the “Lords
of Truth” and the “Judges of the
dead» 2 .


Let us now trace the second “6-pointed
Star” inner to the previous one with a dis-
tance of 42 decimeters and, with much
accuracy, let us inscribe into the inner
hexagon, the Masonic “Middle Cham-
ber” or “Masters’ Lodge”, the “5-point-
ed Star” with the point facing upward.
Because the two lower vertexes do not
coincide with the two lower vertexes of
the hexagon, there results that the cen-
ter of the “5-pointed Star” does not
coincide with that of the “6-pointed
Star”.

The distance between the two centers
generates the radius of the cylinder-
shaped central pillar supporting the
central extremities of the 1 5 inner arcs.


42 dm /

/ )

! / /


I I

\ \ / /


-At this point, let us trace the circle of the
central pillar and, in so doing, there
appears the number 7, as sum of the
6 sides of the “6-pointed Star” plus
the unity represented by the center:
and here you have the number of the
“Master”, of the “perfect Stone”, of
the “perfect man” indispensable to the
existence of the “Masonic Lodge”.
-The numbers 3 and 5, corresponding to
the (Entered) “Apprentice” (triangle)
and to the “Fellow” (Craft) (5-point-
ed Star), are already contained in the
constructed geometry.

What is still missing, and it is the most im-
portant thing, is the special “Mark” of
Freemasonry: 3 times 666, as expres-
sion of its sole “dogma”: declaration of
war on God!

- The first “Mark of the Beast” 666, we

have seen already with the three enor-
mous spirals, traced on the extreme
points of all the arcs of the structure,
and observed from the “depth of the
abyss”.

- The second “Mark of the Beast” 666,

we obtain from the “6-pointed Star”
which, having a total number of 18 seg-
ments, represents the number 18 that,
being the sum of three 6, forms the
number 666.

-The third “Mark of the Beast” 666,
we obtain from the “5-pointed Star”
which, in its meaning of triple inter-
twined triangle (see p. 59), to each of
which corresponds the triple series of
11 (man God, Pontiff and King of
himself), gives as total sum: (11 +11 +
11 = 33 = 6) which, repeated three
times, provides the third “Mark of
the Beast” 666.


Universal axis:

in this geometry, the axis is that

of the “6-pointed Star”:

The truth communicated to man by
Lucifer is the “divinization of crea-
tion”.

The destruction of Catholic Virtue.

It is the “Cult of the Phallus”.

It is the temptation of Christ in the
desert: “the pleasure”.

It is “the Godless man”.

It is the scope of the 1 st series of
the 11 degrees of the Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite.


Center of “5-pointed Star”


“Chiesa viva”


March 2006


Entrance of Liturgical Aula


15


“Triple Masonic Trinity”

- secret of this “New Church”? -


I n the description of the ritual of the
31 st degree of the Ancient and Ac-
cepted Scottish Rite, Mons. Leone
Meurin comes across the oath of the Ma-
son aspiring to that degree, whom vows
obedience to the “Holiest and Indivisi-
ble Trinity” about which the Mason,
however, receives no explanation.

A celebrated expert and scholar of the
doctrine of Freemasonry, doctor Eckert,
in his work “The Temple of Solomon”
(p. 64), speaks at length of such Triple
Trinity: «The matter of the world has exist-
ed throughout eternity, and shall exist for
all eternity in HOLY TRINITY, that is, in
the unity of three elementary matters: the
masculine element of Fire, the feminine
element of Water, and the neutral ele-
ment of Earth. Prior to the formation of
the universe, these elements mixed to-
gether formed the Chaos.

The three primary elements, with the divi-
sion of the sexes into two, give the
number five, origin of every formation of
the Body of the world, whose symbol is


Image of the God-Serpent of the
Gnostics: «We worship the serpent

for God has placed him at the origin
of Gnosis for humanity; he himself
(the serpent) taught man and woman
the complete knowledge of the lofty
mysteries».

(Epiphanius, cited work, p. 22).


«The center of the circle coincides
with God itself. This point embedded
into the Pentalpha, emblem of the ini-
tiated man, establishes the identity
between man as he is being gnosti-
cally divinized and the god poten-
tially dwelling inside of him. The
triangle includes, in turn, man as he
is being regenerated, to signify the
Masonic domain in which it (the divi-
nization) takes place».

(Epiphanius, cited work, p. 475).


«The eye represented the mystical
symbol of the so called Egyptian Tri-
nity. ..».

(R.K. Spenser "The cult..”, p. 32).


the Sphinx, with the head and the breast
of a woman, the body of a lion and the
wings of an eagle. Developed by the
force of the Fire, the elements produce,
through the air, the Soul of the world,
and through the Light, the Holy Spirit,
whose symbol is the Phoenix, the Flying
Dragon that rises from the fire, Body,
Soul, and Spirit of the world form another
HOLY TRINITY which embodies itself
into the Man-God.

He, the Architect of the Universe with
the Patriarch of the World, or Director of
the spiritual Power, and with the Emper-
or of the World, or Director of the tem-
poral Power, here you have the HOLY
TRINITY inscribed on the supreme Cube
of the Temple of Solomon.

The UPTURNED TRIANGLE, Lucifer,
with the two crowned heads of the eagle,
namely, the Great Patriarch and the
Great Emperor or Sovereign, make up
the “HOLIEST AND INDIVISIBLE TRIN-
ITY” which the Mason candidate to the
31 st degree takes his oath of blind obe-
dience to».


«The sunburst patterned Triangle,
or Triangle of Solomon, is the sym-
bol of the “Great Architect of the
Universe”... soaring above the
loathed and ignorant “profane way».

(C.A. Agnoli, “La rivoluzione france- se
nell’opera della Massoneria”, The Fren-
ch Revolution in the Masonic Work , Ed. Ci-
vilta, Brescia, p. 81).


16


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


Lucifer


“HOLIEST AND
INDIVISIBLE TRINITY”

3 rd “Blasphemous Trinity”
of Freemasonry


From the structure formed
by the 26 arcs of the “new
church”, extracting the up-
turned Triangle of the “5-
pointed Star” with the cen-
tral Point, and completing
the 15 arcs, which depart
from the center, on the en-
tire circumference, one ob-
tains the figure to the side:
the representation of the
Masonic “Holiest and Indi-
visible Trinity”.


«This “HOLIEST AND INDIVI-
SIBLE TRINITY” is represented
by the UPTURNED TRIANGLE
with the central point: Lucifer,
with the Patriarch of the
World, or Director of the spiri-
tual Power, and with the Em-
peror of the World, or Director
of the temporal Power».

The 18 beams, which corre-
spond to the arcs of the church,
completed upon the entire cir-
cumference, represent, with
their number 18, the “celestial
Perfection”.


Patriarch of the World Emperor of the World


“HOLY TRINITY”

2 nd “Blasphemous Trinity”
of Freemasonry


From the structure formed
by the 26 arcs of the “new
church”, extracting the “5-

pointed Star”, the “6-poin-
ted Star” and the central
Point, one obtains the figure
to the side: the representa-
tion of the 2 nd Masonic
“Holy Trinity”.


“HOLY TRINITY”

1st “Blasphemous Trinity”
of Freemasonry


The Triangle, symbol of this
“Trinity”, is formed by the
two lower tips of the “5-point-
ed Star” with its center. It is
the “Primal Matter”, the
“rough stone”: it is the pro-
fane faithful that must be en-
lightened and molded into the
Masonic “perfect stone”.


«Here is how the 2" d “HOLY
TRINITY” is formed: the three
primary elements, with the divi-
sion of the sexes into two, give
the number five, origin of every
formation of the Body of the
world. Developed by the force
of the Fire, the elements produ-
ce, through the air, the Soul of
the world and, through the
Light, the Holy Spirit, whose
symbol is the Phoenix, the
Flying Dragon that rises from
the fire. Body, Soul, and Spirit
of the world form another
“Holy Trinity” that embodies it-
self into the Man-God».


«This “HOLY TRINITY” is rep-
resented by a triangle facing
upward: it is the Matter of the
world that exists and will exist
for all eternity, in the unity of
three elementary matters: the
masculine element of Fire, the
feminine element of Water, and
the neutral element of Earth.
Prior to the formation of the uni-
verse, these elements mixed to-
gether formed the Chaos».


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


17


BRC

- ENTRANCE


T he Liturgical Entrance and the
Baptistery feature two bronze
doors, work of the artist Mim-
mo Paladino: the right “large door” of
the Liturgical entrance, and the left
“small door” of the Baptistery. These
two doors are the entrance to the Tem-
ple.

The official presentation of the sym-
bology, carved on the two doors, is vague,
fragmentary, and superficial.

The entrance to the “Temple of Solo-
mon”, namely, to the Temple of Free-
masonry, takes place at the 1 st of the 33
degrees of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite, and its ritual corresponds to
the “Masonic Baptism”.

Reads the ritual:

«The Kingdom which the chosen Man,

the future Mason wishes to exit and a-
bove which he must elevate himself, is
the profane world, the non-initiated hu-
manity, sitting in the darkness of igno-
rance and subject to the tyranny of the
Kings and of the Priests.

With the “Masonic Baptism” there is
born a “Son of Lucifer”; as in the “Ca-
tholic Baptism” is born a “Son of God”.
The Temple has 3 steps and 2 columns:
on the left, Boaz, the passive principle,
material, feminine, evil; on the right,
Jachin, the active principle, spiritual,
masculine, and good.

The Sacred Motto, namely, the word that
sums up the essence of the degree, is
“Boaz”, which means stability, immo-
bility.

The Candidate, nearly always a Christian
(symbolized by a sheep of Christ) enters
as “Apprentice” the 1 st degree, which is
dominated by the n. 3 and by the n. 2 of
the 2 sexes expressing fertility and the
“Cult of the Phallus”:

-3 as the points of the luminous Trian-
gle, 2 as the Sun and the Moon;

- 3 as the 3 stars of the Lodge and as the
2 stars of Lucifer and of the Candidate;
- 3 as the 3 windows of the Lodge;

- 3 as the 3 salutations of the Master;

- 3 as the 3 journeys of purification of the
Air, Water and Fire and of the shed-
ding of the blood;

-3 as the 3 steps, the 3 knocks, the 3
kisses: the triple kiss, the apron with

the raised lapel and the gloves “des-
tined to the woman whom he will love
the most”.


The fagade of the Liturgical Entrance and of the Baptistery, with the two bronze Doors.


-the string with 12 knots, or strings of
love, on the column, called “bubbola
dentellata”, (toothed rattle) which
ends above the two columns of the
Lodge, and which symbolizes the bond
of the 12 tribes of Israel; the 2 thick
ribbons symbolize the vitality of the 2
tribes that are still intact.

- the Candidate is asked the alms for the
“Widow and her children” (Freema-
sonry and its Masons);

- the Candidate takes the oath of obe-
dience to the chiefs, in all they will
command him (the swords of the
brothers are pointed to his breast,
which thus resembles the sun, a com-
plete imitation of the self-styled “Infi-
nite Sun” of Lucifer. The tacit renewal
of the oath is done by raising the right
arm on the shoulder, with the hand
hanging down.

The Candidate is now enlisted into the


great armada of the “Apprentice Broth-
ers” that constitutes the Primal Matter,
the “rough Stone”: the “Body of the
World”, formed of the 3 elements of the
1 st Masonic Trinity, with the 2 sexes,
is symbolized by the “5-pointed Star”,
which the “Spirit” must work upon.

The “rough Stone” from which the
“pointed cubic Stone” that is necessary
for the construction of the Masonic Tem-
ple is formed, constitutes the material ori-
gin, the corporal element of man to
which must be associated a Soul (4 th
degree) and the “Spirit” (15 th degree)
the Mason will acquire by transforming
himself into “Master”, or “perfect
Stone”, or “divinized Man”.


1 Leone Meurin s.j., Archbishop of Port Louis,
“Frammassoneria, sinagoga di Satana”,

Freemasonry, Synagogue of Satan , Siena
1895, pp. 269-278.


18


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


The square and the compass.

The hammer, the chisel

and the tracing table.

The love knots that depart from a
column cross the square and the
compass and reach the other column.


The Sun and the Moon with the 7 stars
of the constellation of the Ursa.


Heraldic emblem of the 1 st degree
of the Freemasonry of the
Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.


The 2 columns J and B (Juda and
Benjamin) of the Masonic Lodge.

The Temple of Solomon, or Masonic
Temple with the 3 steps symbolizing
the n. 3 of the Apprentice who
dominates in the ritual of this degree.


The “Bubbola dentellata”

formed by 12 teeth “ending
above the 2 columns of
the Lodge”.

The 3 stars that form
the luminous Triangle

of the Lodge.

The Candidate,

generally a Christian, at the 1 st
degree of “Apprentice”.


The 12 love knots
(highlighted): symbolize the
bond of the 12 Tribes of Israel.


The n. 1 , 2 , 3, 4 symbolize:
the 3 steps, the 3 knocks, the
age of 30, and the Triple kiss.

The numbers 1, 2, 3 the 3 parts
in which the 2 columns have been
divided, indicate the 3 steps
of the Temple of the Apprentice.

The Sacred Motto “Boaz”
written in the Masonic alphabet.

The constellation of the Ursa
with the 7 stars.


The n. 1 1 of the 1 st series
of the 33 degrees.

The star of the Candidate,

pale reflection of that of Lucifer.

Symbol of the raised Lapel
of the Candidate.

The luminous 8-pointed Star:
the Sun of Lucifer.

The Sun of Lucifer is the Sun

of the Lodge (the Moon
appears in the Baptistery).

The cup of the “proof of the
shedding of the blood”.

The shoe symbolizes
the 3 journeys of the purifica-
tion trials of the Candidate.


The 1 st of the 12 tribes of
Israel; the tribe of Ruben.

The “Master” of the Lodge
directing the ritual of the
1 st degree.

The tribes of Simon and Levi.


The 3 fingers indicate, in this
number, the essence of the
1 st degree.

Bow with 12 leaves, on each
side, indicating the “thick rib-
bons symbolizing the vitality
of the 2 tribes that have re-
mained intact”.

The 2 tribes remained intact:
Juda and Benjamin: provide
the initials of the two columns of
the Masonic Temple, J and B.

The 2 columns of the Tem-
ple, J and B.

The tracing table.

The compass, the square,
the hammer and the chisel.

The tribe of Ephraim
and Manasseh.

The sheep represents the Can-
didate, generally a Christian.

The 3 purifications of the Candi-
date with the trials of the air, of
the water and of the fire, with
captions in the Masonic alphabet.

12 “5-pointed

Stars”, formed
of 12 pentago-
nal base pyra-
mids: the flower
(glove) to be
“offered to the

most beloved woman”, sym-
bolizing the Trinity that, with
its 2 sexes, forms the “Body
of the World”.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


19


The Baptismal Fount

The Baptismal pool, of the shape of an
octagonal shell, is one of the symbols

of the Moon.

The octagonal shape of the Baptismal
pool, with its 3 steps and the raised
area, formed by 2 squares of 342 cm
side, underscores, with its dimensions,
the theme of the “magical Square”,
or “Tetragrammaton”, which, attrib-
uting 72 Names to the Name of the
Kabbalistic God (Lucifer), symbol-
izes Masonic ecumenism, namely,
the Masonic strategy of reuniting all re-
ligions under the direction of the High
Initiates, in order to suppress Reli-
gion and the Catholic Church, the
sole religion founded by God.


The 8-pointed Star

«At the top of the ladder, the “8-

pointed Star” which - as Oswald
Wirth, 33d degree of the Scottish
Rite and recognized master of
exoterism, teaches - represents
“Lucifer Carrier of Light”, also
called Venus in its appearance of
morning star... that, in the morn-
ing, wakes the sleepers, stirs
the spirits from their torpor and
incites to the Luciferian revolt
against the existing dogmas».

(Epiphanius, cited work, p. 197).


The Fish


«The fish lives in water and al-
ludes symbolically to Baptism».
«The fish is symbol of fecun-
dity as well as phallic symbol».
«ln astrology, the Fishes, twelfth
sign of the Zodiac, represent psy-
che, the inner world, gloomy,
through which one communica-
tes with the devil».


jt£Kv


Noach’s Arc

«The sacred knowledge, con-
fined in the Temple, could not
get out. It is contained in the arc

in order that is retain an eso-
teric sense and must not be
communicated to all indis-
tinctive^.

«The arc measures... Hence its
shape of pyramid, of fire, of flame.

It contains the phallic energy».

(Dictionary of Symbols, pp. 88-90).


The Seashell


«With the Aztec, the seashell is
the symbol of the Moon god, and
it represents the feminine root and
means birth and generation. ..».
«The seashell... shares in the
symbolism of fecundity... ».

(Dictionary of Symbols, pp. 309-310).


(Dictionary of Symbols, pp. 204-206).


The Masonic Arc of Alliance


The Masonic Baptism of the 1 st degree presupposes a pact
of Alliance the Candidate must underwrite with his oath of
obedience. The Masonic symbology of the figure reported
above, clarifies the contents of this Alliance: the 15 steps of
the ladder that rises skyward, lead to the “Master”, followed
by 18 more (sum of the 15 plus the three that are made out)
which gives 33, to complete the course of the spiral and ar-
rive to the “8-pointed Star” (Lucifer). The Arc unveils the
numbers 3, 5, 7, of the “Master” (3 windows, 5 columns, 7
beams), and the n. 8 of the reinforcements of the planking of
the Arc. The “Tower of Babel”, on the background, indicates


the “Temple of Solomon” (the Masonic Temple) that must be
edified with the “perfect stones” of the “Master”. The impiety
of the “Tower of Babel” is indicated by the 6 visible ways of
the spiral that winds around its own axis, which is the “Truth”
transmitted to man by Lucifer, symbolized with the Star, with
the Spiral, with the numbers: 6 (ways of the Tower), 6 (15+18
= 33 = 3+3), 8 (8-pointed Star), 15 (8+7), 18 (666). The King-
dom in which the candidates to be initiated to Freemasonry
must be “fished”, and above which the “Master” must raise,
is represented by the fish of the sea. The fish represent the
Christian faithful.


20


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


Symbol of the Noah’s Arc: the “Pact of Alliance” with Lucifer. Hebraism and Freemasonry consider the Talmudic
theory of the 7 Laws of Noah as a link between Judaism and Christianity: the objective is to give the Christian
the same “God” worshipped by the Jews, who refused the Messiah. The duplicity of these 7 Laws of Noah
(which should become the base of a Code of Law for World Government), is that every Christian on earth could
be executed as guilty of violating the 1 st Law (against idolatry) and the 2 nd Law (against blasphemy to God), for he
believes in Jesus-God-Incarnated: which is idolatry and blasphemy to the Jews! The 7 Laws of Noah, “angular
stone of a truly civil international legal order” would constitute the Religion of Humanity of the “faithful”, where-
as the Jews would be the “priests”, subject only, however, to the Law of Moses (Mosaism of Israel)!


The bronze
door of the
Baptistery


Dimensions
of the Arc:

69 x 90.


Bowl for the Candidate’s alms.


Noah symbolizes the “Master” of the Lodge
presiding over the rituals of the 1 st degree.


Fish with the central cross that recalls
the “glorious cross” with its 3 “cults”
(3 crossed sections at top);
the numbers 3 (blue), 5 (red), 7 (green)
indicate the “Master”.


The n. 17 = 9 + 8, which
gives, by the product of 9
and 8, the number 72.


The fish with the arrow
points to the one at
the bottom with the

Sacred Motto “Boaz”.

“Master” fish,
“perfect cubic Stone”

symbolized by the
numbers 3, 5, 7 and 666.


16 teeth (notches) (right
hand leaf to the observer);
4 fish (right hand leaf);

8 fish (left hand leaf);

17 teeth (notches) on
left hand leaf;

All these numbers indi-
cate the “Magic Square”
or “Tetragrammaton”,
that is, they symbolize
Masonic ecumenism.


The fish carries the Sacred
Motto “Boaz” in the
Masonic alphabet, which
indicates the 1 st degree.


Fish with numbers (central sections)

3, 5 (4 + eye), 7 (3 + 4) of the “Master”,
6x3 (red and pink) = 18 = 666
9 (left sections) x 2 (2 lines at the end of
the 9 sections) = 18 = 666.


Fish with the numbers


Symbol of the “death to
the profane world” of the
Candidate, in order to enter

the Masonic world.


The n. 13 of the
holes of the 2
poles symbol-
izes Lucifer.


Thickness
of poles
[shafts/rods...]:

\5 Inter-axis of
\ poles: 60.


Fish with the face of the “Master” of the Lod-
ge, with the numbers 6 and 5 = “5 and 6-point-
ed Stars” = Freemasonry, with the numbers 3,
4, 8, 9 of the “Magic Square”, which is the
symbol of Masonic Ecumenism.


Fish with the numbers 5 (horizontal sections
on the right hand side),

6 (horizontal sections on the left hand side),
Point (red on left side) which represent the
“5-pointed Star” inscribed into the “6-point-
ed Star” with the central Point: the 2 nd Ma-
sonic Holy Trinity (cross), which embeds it-
self into the “Master”.


Fish with the cross, but with
the numbers 6 and 9 of the

Spiral = G.A.O.T.U. and 6 +
9 = 15 = Degrees of the
“Master” = 5-pointed Star =
Freemasonry.


3, 5, 7 of the “Master”,
13 of Lucifer,

6 (“x” top) x 3 (“x”
bottom) = 18 = 666
9 (“x” top and bottom)
x 2 (orange kines) = 18

= 666 .


Fish with the numbers 3, 5, 7 (6 + eye
of the fish) of the “Master”,

(6 + 6 + 6) = 666 of the Mark of the
Beast and of the Antichrist.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


21


THE ALTAR


View of the altar, located atop two stairways each of 3 and 6 steps,
under an enormous spiral unwinding over the 9 arcs of the structure of the Liturgical Hall.


yy I he altar is wedged, for a

ft I certain length, into the be-

.A. ma; the bema is ripped
open, as at the moment of the resur-
rection, in its whole of bronze at the base
and from this breach it (altar) soars».
«lt is the altar that rips open the bronze
and causes to emerge, as stone, the
Easter mystery ».

«That which, in the original idea, was the
glorious cross on the altar, was becom-
ing, as the work progressed, a sort of
ciborium looming over the altar itself, and:

the altar could but be one sole work
with “that” cross.

These are the words with which the Ca-
puchin Friars introduce to us the altar
and the “glorious cross” above it, in the
work “Pietre di bellezza e di santita”,

Stones of Beauty and of Sanctity.

The two stairways, which climb toward


the altar, feature 3 and 6 steps respec-
tively. The number 3 times 6 gives 666,
which is the “Mark of the Beast” and the
Antichrist.

Raising our gaze, above the center of the
vault of the 9 arcs of the structure of the
Liturgical Hall, an enormous blue spiral
is observed. The spiral is the symbol of

the G.A.O.T.U., the Great Architect Of
The Universe, the God of Freema-
sonry, better known with the name of Sa-
tan or Lucifer.

Turning our gaze around, one observes
that all the arcs are formed by sectors of
6 and 5 blocks that, indicating the two “5
and 6-pointed Stars”, in their whole (15
+ 18), represent the 33 degrees of the
Freemasonry of the Ancient and Accept-
ed Scottish Rite.

The altar, with its rectangular base re-
versed pyramidal shape, is divided by


two bronze bands placed upon the axis
of the base, and it is stuck into the “be-
ma”, represented by a bronze rectangle
placed on the floor and measuring 248 x
196 (cm).

In the whole of the numbers of all the di-
mensions characterizing it, the altar sym-
bolizes the “Magic Square” or “Tetra-
grammaton”, which attributes 72 Names
to the Kabbalistic Name of the God-
Lucifer!

As illustrated in the next page, the “Magic
Square” is composed of 9 digits (from
1 thru 9), located on the 9 characteristic
points of the square, which invariably
give the sum of 15, in 3 digits, in the 8
directions.

The altar, divided by the two bronze
bands, forms, with edges and intersec-
tions, the 9 characteristic positions of the
“Magic Square” whereas the longer side


22


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


Mural fresco that covers the frontal
wall of the Meditation Room of the
UN; room where everyone goes to
worship his own God.

In a study on the occult meanings on
this place of prayer, with regard to
the fresco, we read: «ln its whole the
fresco contains an asymmetric dispo-
sition that, in its occult meaning,
leads to the “Magic Square” also
called “Tetragrammaton”, com-
posed of 9 cells, on 3 lines and 3 col-
umns, containing the nine digits from
1 to 9, where the sum of the three
dgits in the three horizontal lines, in
the three vertical and in the two dia-
gonal ones, always gives 15... these
9 figures are considered sacred as
the number 15 represents the nu-
meric value of the Hebrew word of
God, JAH, which is one of the
forms of the Tetragrammaton...


15 15 15


15

15

15

15

15


The “Magic Square” or “Tetragram-
maton” is the sacred number 15 rep-
resenting the Hebrew name of the
God “JAH”, one of the 72 Names
of the Kabalistic God.


24a


9 . 6 = 15 = 6


Altar top I eve


Drawing of the altar of the “new church".


Verte* of pyramid


The rectangle - which we highlighted
in red - represents the altars.

The “Magic Square” symbol of Ma-
sonic ecumenism, which wishes to
merge all deities and religions, is char-
acterized by 8 numbers 15 obtained as
the sum of 3 numbers.

The altar, divided by two bronze bands,
forms, with edges and intersections,
the 9 characteristic positions of the
“Magic Square” and the n. 248, with
the numerals 2, 4, 8, “suggests” that
there are 2 ways to obtain it. In fact,
the heights of the drawing of the altar,
give the digits from 1 to 9 of the “Ma-
gic Square”.

In addition, the side of the altar 240
contains 16 times 15; the 4 heights, of


120 cm, in which its axis is divided,
contain 8 times 15; the sum of all the
numbers of the 2 heights 117.6 give as
sum 15; finally, the sum of the two
numbers 4.8, thickness of the two
bands crossing at the central point of
the altar, give: 4.8 + 4.8 = 9.6 = 9 + 6 =
15. The sum of the 15 obtained, is 8.
What is the meaning of a similar altar?

It is an altar dedicated not to the God
One and Trine, and to His Son Jesus
Christ, Our Redeemer, but it is dedi-
cated to a “God” who has 72 names
and who is hiding under the symbols of
all of these Names because his real
name is Lucifer!


1 Cfr. R. Keith Spenser, cited work, p. 15.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


23


of the “bema”, measuring 248 cm, which
represents the maximum height of all the
dimensions of the altar, with the numerals
2, 4, 8, “suggests” that there are 2 ways
to obtain the square (4) with its 8 direc-
tions. In fact, representing all the heights
of the altar, one observes that are pres-
ent all the digits from 1 to 9 of the “Magic
Square”.

In addition, the major side of the altar,
measuring 240 cm, contains 16 times 15;
the 4 heights, of 120 cm, in which it is
divided by its own axis on the two long
sides, contain 8 times 15; the sum of the
numbers of the 2 heights of 117.6, is 15;
finally, the sum of the two numbers of 4.8,
thickness of the two bands that cross in
the central point of the altar gives: 4.8 +
4.8 = 9.6 = 9 + 6 = 15. The sum of the
numbers 15 obtained, is 8.

What is the meaning of this altar? It is an
altar dedicated not to the God One and
Trine, and to Our Lord Jesus Christ,
but one that looks up to a “God” that has
72 names and that hides himself under
the symbols of all these Names for he
cannot yet show himself with his real
Name, and must remain hidden in the
darkness of the “Mysteries” of the
high degrees of Freemasonry, waiting
for his cult to be manifested to the public.


The direction that leads us to this “God”
is that of the axis of the altar. Setting out
from its vertex “stuck” into the “bema”,
one discovers the number 5 (140 = 14 =
1+4 = 5); the point in which the altar
emerges from the “bema” lies at a 92
cm distance from the base of the pyra-
mid: 9 + 2 = 11; the central point of the
altar, where the axis of the pyramid inter-
sects the plane of the “Table” of the
altar, where the two bands cross, has
the numbers 4.8 + 4.8 = 9.6 = 15.

Now, the n. 5 symbolizes the “5-pointed
Star”, symbol par-excellence of Freema-
sonry; the n. 11 is the mystic number of
the Hebrew Kabbalah, (Jewish Freema-
sonry), source of all the symbols and of
the mysteries of Freemasonry; the num-
bers 9, 6, 15, as already seen, symbolize
Lucifer.

One needs to ask oneself: what does all
this have to do with the Priest celebrating
the Mass on this altar?

To answer, one must not limit oneself to
the contents of the “manifested” sym-
bology, that is, to that visible to the eyes
of the non-initiated, but especially to that
“non-manifested”, which “unveils” the
entities of the “real power” and their
“Mysteries”.


i

The manifested Unity (1)

i ‘Ltnltn 1 1 1 rn.i’irirfl^rnlri


The Zero (0) non-manifested.


LA S4RAMIDL DE.I 14 CUBl

The pyramid of the 14 cubes.

The pyramid of the 14 cubes placed on 3
levels: 9, 4, 1 . The cube at the vertex is the
manifested Unity (1), whereas the dark
central one is the non-manifested Zero (0)
(occult but more important) that is precisely
opposite to the manifested one.


24


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


The freemason and expert of Masonic
symbology Joules Boucher, writes:
«The altar of the Egyptian temples was
formed by a pyramid with “three cubes
placed on top of one another.

The altar, the pyramid and the cube, in
Masonic symbology, lead to the symbol-
ogy of the “pyramid of the 14 cubes”,
formed by 3 levels of 9, 4 and 1 , cube at
the vertex, where the only cube that is
not visible (the “non-manifested”) is
that central to the 9 of the first level, and
opposite to the cube located at the vertex
of the pyramid.

In other words, the cube at the “vertex”
of the pyramid, the “visible” or “mani-
fested” one, is much less important of
the hidden one, namely, the “non-mani-
fested” one.

Hence the pyramid of the altar tells the
initiate he must make use of the “inver-
sion game” of the pyramid, of the 14
cubes.

Now, let us start from the manifested
“vertex”, that is visible to our eyes, when
looking at the altar: the Priest celebrat-
ing the Mass. He stands at the vertex of
a pyramid, identical to that of the altar,
but with the base resting on the floor. The
upper part of the pyramid is a triangle that
encloses the thoracic part of the Priest.
This represents the so called “Moral
Triad” of the divinized Man of the Kab-
balah, namely, the “Masonic priestly”
activity of promoting and inculcating the
“Cult of Man” into the profane world (us
poor Christian).

Inverting this pyramid, that is, passing to
that of the altar, the vertex hidden and
stuck into the “bema” is the “non-mani-
fested” entity: this “Triangle” represents
the High Degree of Freemasonry.
Observing the altar and the “glorious
cross” above it, from a certain distance
in front of the altar, one discovers that the
sharp point of the highest “nail” of the
cross forms a pyramid with the farthest
points of the first step of the altar: a
perfect equilateral Triangle.

Inverting this triangle, reversing it with the
base on the line that almost touches the
horizontal arms of the “glorious cross”,
one obtains another equilateral triangle,
with the tip turned downward, which
(tip) contains the triangle “stuck into the
bema”, which represents the High degree
of Freemasonry.

The “non-manifested” entity obtained
reversing this vertex, is contained within
the vertex triangle that identifies the lat-
eral arms, the central zone and the upper
arm of the “glorious cross”.

The pyramid, with vertex at bottom, repre-
sents another “Altar” on which the High
Initiated pay religious respect to their
“God”. The upper arm of the cross, as
we will analyze in the following pages,
symbolizes the God of Freemasonry:
Lucifer.

The two crossed equilateral triangles,
however, form a “6-pointed Star”. Join-
ing, now, the characteristic points A, B
and C, created by the intersections of the
axis of the altar and of the two inclined
sides of the pyramid with base on the
floor, with the hexagon internal to the “6-


The

universal axis:


this


the


that


geometry,
of the “5-pointed Star” with the center
in the head of the priest celebrating the
Mass:

the truth communicated to man by Lucifer

is the “divinization of man”.

The destruction of Catholic Morals.

It is the “Cult of man”.

It is the 2 nd temptation of Christ
in the desert: “pride”.

It is “man who makes himself God”.

It is the aim of the 2 nd series of the 1 1 de-
grees of the A.A.S.R.


pointed Star”, one obtains the charac-
teristic Triangle ABC with base and ver-
tex angles of 72° and 36° respectively,
which define, in an univocal manner, a
“5-pointed Star”, whose center is repre-
sented by the head of the Priest, which is
also the central point of the Triangle
DEF, but NOT of the “6-pointed Star”.
The Axis of the World, or Axis of the
Spiral, or Universal Axis, of this geome-
try, represents the “Truth” which Lucifer
communicates to his disciples: The DIVI-
NIZATION OF MAN, namely, man whom,
having completed his “course of faith”


of the spiral, from one degree to the
next, up to the 15 ° of the 2 nd series of 11
degrees of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite, becomes “Master”, “per-
fect Stone”, “Mason Priest”, “divinized
man”. That is to say, having relinquished
all bonds with the supernatural, and hav-
ing assimilated the “Cult of Man”, he
spreads this very cult among the ignorant
Christian profane.


1 Cfr. Jules Boucher, “Masonic Symbology”,
Atanor, Paris 1948, pp. 164-165.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


25


THE

“ GLORIOUS CROSS”


A rnaldo Pomo-
doro, one of
the greatest
contemporary artists, had
been asked a bronze
cross, attached to the altar,
which would represent the
five wounds, but the artist
was in quest of an idea
that would be in harmony
with his modus operandi
. . . » .

The Capuchin Friars, in
their work “Stones of
Beauty and Sanctity”
inform us that the «Work
was contracted to Arnaldo
Pomodoro, whom, before
commencing his work, had
to study the general pro-
ject of the church.

In concurrence with the ar-
chitect Renzo Piano, with the Capuchin
Friars and with Monsignor Valenziano,
the master set out to work supplying var-
ious drawings».

One of these drawings of the cross was
published by “Luoghi dell’infinito”, Plac-
es of the Infinite , magazine of September
1998, at page 22, in which Arnaldo Po-
modoro’s style is so defined: «a style
that is primordial, mythical, essential,
ancestral. A style that refers to the sense
of the holy as “tremendum”, myste-
rious attraction of the hidden ener-
gies of the earth». The article goes on to
quote Pomodoro’s own words: «The
cross is a beautiful symbol... it’s the
quintessence of abstraction and, there-
fore, of spirituality».

Then, again, it reports the reflection of
this lay man: «Some, when in difficulty,
turn to praying; as for me, if I’m assailed
by anguish, I rush to my study and
plunge myself into work».


The “Glorious Cross” above the altar.


As it was impossible to analyze this “glo-
rious cross” in its actual construction, I
limited my analysis to the drawing exe-
cuted by Arnaldo Pomodoro and pub-
lished on the cited magazine, “Luoghi
dell’infinito”, Places of the Infinite.

As the drawing is only bi-dimensional, it
has the advantage of highlighting all the
symbols the artist had etched on this
cross. Such symbols, however, are not to
be taken as separate entities with respect
to one another, but, as in a mosaic, what
is essential is the unitary idea these
symbols are able to convey in the whole-
ness of the work of art.

It is precisely this unitary idea to appear,
in all its evidence, in this cross.

The cross dominates the altar, the place


wherein it is paid the reli-
gious respect to God: the
act of cult.

The absence of the Crucifix
on this cross and its form
with nearly equal arms in-
duces to think not as much
to the Mystery of the Incar-
nation and of the Passion
of Jesus Christ, as to an-
other kind of “Mystery”.
After an accurate study on
the symbols that appear
on the 5 parts in which
the cross is divided - the 4
arms and the area of their
intersection, which we
have seen already to repre-
sent the “Masters’ Lodge”
- the “Mystery” becomes
clear and the “Cult” paid to
the Deity appears in all its
lucid formulation in the three different
cults:


- The “Cult of the Phallus”;

- The “Cult of Man”;

- The “Cult of Lucifer”.


The “Cult of the Phallus”, animating the
1 st series of 11 degrees of the A.A.S.R.
and leading to the “Godless Man” and to
the elimination of Catholic Virtue.

The “Cult of Man”, animating the 2 nd se-
ries of 11 degrees of the A.A.S.R. and
leading to the “Man who makes himself
God” and to the elimination of Catholic
Morals.

The “Cult of Lucifer”, animating the 3 rd
series of 11 degrees of the A.A.S.R. and
leading to the “Man who fights God”
and to the elimination of Catholic Author-
ity.

Hereafter, are detailed the symbolic con-
tents of this drawing of the cross.


26


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


The symbology
of Freemasonry


The Baphomet


The “Cult of Lucifer”


22 nd degree


The “Cult of the Phallus”


This is the “Cult” of the “Divinized Crea-
tion” of Freemasonry. This leads to the sa-
cralization of the sexual act (in general of
“pleasure”), which is regarded as a mani-
festation of the divine activity of “creation”
(intended as “generation”).

The “Cult of the Phallus” has been symbol-
ized by the Apron of the “Master” (carrying
the letter M and B) for the vile sexual signifi-
cance such apron represents to the “Appren-
tices”, to the “Fellows”, and to the “Masters”.
The “Cult of the Phallus”, “inspiring prin-
ciple” of the 1 st series of 11 degrees of the
A.A.S.R., leads the Mason to fight Catholic
Virtue, in order to replace it with the Masonic
Virtue, until it makes of him a “Man without
God”.

In the drawing of this cross, have been repre-
sented the operative symbols that appear on
the apron of the “Master”.


The “Cult of Man”


It is the “Cult” of the “Divinized Man” of
Freemasonry. This leads to the sacraliza-
tion of Man (and of his “pride”), regarded
as the most independent being of the uni-
verse, and as carrying the “divine spark”,
hence, as being divine himself.

The “Cult of Man” has been symbolized
by the 3 degrees: 11 th , 22 nd , and 33 rd for
the meaning these 3 degrees have: man
is “God” (1 1 ,h ), “Pontiff” ( 22 nd) and
“King” (33 rd ) to himself.

The “Cult of Man”, the “inspiring princi-
ple” of the 2 nd series of 1 1 degrees of the
A.A.S.R., leads the Freemason to fight
the Catholic Morals in order to replace it
with the Masonic Morals, until it makes of
him a “Man who makes himself God”.

In the three arms of the drawing of the
cross: lower, right and left (looking at the
cross) have been represented the symbols
represented in the heraldic emblems of
the three degrees: 1 1 th , 22 nd , 33 rd .


In order to conceal its “truths”, Freema-
sonry makes use of different types of
symbology: operative, geometrical, nu-
merical, chromatic, astronomical, min-
eral, vegetable, animal, alphabetic, bibli-
cal, heraldic, alchemic, cultural, mytholo-
gical.

To represent the “message” of the three
“Cults”, conveyed by the drawing of
the cross, were used:

1 . the “Apron” of the “Master”;

2. the heraldic Emblem of the 1 1 th degree;

3. the heraldic Emblem of the 22 nd degree;

4. the heraldic Emblem of the 33 rd degree;

5. the representations of Lucifer.

Are these the “5 wounds” stricken upon

Jesus Crucified on the Cross, which
Pomodoro was supposed to represent?


33 rd degree


This is the “Cult” of the “Divinization of Lucifer”, the
God of Freemasonry. This leads to the replacement of
the Holiest Trinity with the blasphemous Masonic “Tri-
ple Trinity” and to the replacement of Christ on the
Cross, in Whose place it is placed Lucifer, who offers
his own “Redemption” to the entire “Divinized Hu-
manity”.

The “Cult of Lucifer” has been imprinted into the
drawing of the cross, making use of numeric, geometric,
alphabetic etc. symbology, to represent Lucifer.

The “Cult of Lucifer”, the “inspiring principle” of the
3 rd series of 11 degrees of the A.A.S.R., leads the Ma-
son to fight the Catholic Authority, in order to replace
it with the Masonic Authority, until it makes of him a
“Man who fights God”.

In the upper arm of this cross, are represented various
symbols representing All the Names of the Kabalistic
Name of God: Lucifer.


11 th degree


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


27


33 rd degree


11 th degree


The 11 th degree is symbolized with the number 11
of the hammers of the lower arm of the cross.

In the Heraldic emblem of the 11 th degree, there
appear:

- a magic Delta: the bottom right triangle (yellow)
linked to the n. 3 (blue wedges) through a chisel
(used to carve out the Delta);

- a straight sword with 9 drops of blood (4 on
each side and one at the center): the sword
(purple) in axis with the lower arm, with 4 wedges
above, one at the center and 4 further down.

- an inclined sword with 8 blazing hearts (3 of
which on one side and 5 on the other): the
sword (green) at bottom, with 5 wedges (green)
on one wall and the other 3 on the other.


The 33 rd degree is symbol-
ized with the numbers:

- 33 wedges (red), above;

- 6 and 5 wedges, indicating
the two “5 and 6-pointed
Stars” (15 + 18 = 33);

-3 + 3 wedges = 33, joined
by the yellow sword.


The All-seeing Eye of Lucifer,
inside the triangle.


The word G.A.O.T.U. (Great Architects Of The Universe) (in italian G.A.D.U.),

written in the Masonic alphabet, representing all 4 letters.


Left: the letters D.M.I. of
the Motto of the 33 rd de-
gree: “Deus meumque
Jus”.

- The letter D (red);

- the letter M (blue);

- the letter I (yellow).


The Baphomet


In the heraldic Emblem of the 33 rd degree, appear:

- a 2-headed eagle with a sword in the talons: at the

center (magenta) one observes a shape that seems to
have two wings, one head with a beak and two con-
nected wedges indicating 2 heads. The sword (red)
crosses it;

- a sword crossed with a rod of justice: the long
sword (red) with the tip of the rod (green) flanked by
the 4 +1 wedges symbolizing the 5 fingers;

- a 9-pointed Star of 3 intertwined triangles: toward
the left, there appears a triangle (yellow) almost divid-
ed into three (point, lower left side area, and the rest)
with 3 series of 3 interconnected wedges (yellow).


28


“Chiesa viva” *


March 2006


The triple set of three of
6 wedges gives 666: the
“Mark of the Beast”
and of the Antichrist.


Sickle and Hammer, are

the symbol of Lucifer
whose signature is the
triangle (yellow).


The Greek symbol of Christ,
but with the equilateral triangle
(yellow) indicating Lucifer.


22 nd degree


The 22 nd degree is symbolized by the
number of the 22 cuneiform objects
of the right hand arm of the cross.


t'AlldbcIfi ■O.iv-'-mli ■


L.'Allubchn rnttflCtniui- u mjId pi.-il^li-: ;irr- Ijunlc-
- ■Iippcspama ridirluqui. Hiiuond Li diun


ab

cd

•r


n

mn

op

s r

St


I'l JL itUi-4rFilhhH>l


U li i S“d | r '.i iiii lr rrJLlc'Ilk:


JjJUULL-ZJZJOEC

■ fa f d + j j h \ \ m

Ei‘ 7 innrr>v<A

N - L ■■■ncln mmmn4r"


Li le ilura k. k u rtir nunum*. ijjtio
iWl itLblEL 1 Jj r, I, Li


The masonic alphabet. The masonic alphabet
has been published so many times that we can
reproduce it here.

Fig. 33 shows the key of the alphabet.

Fig. 34 shows the correspondence with every
single letter. The missing letters: k, j, w, are re-
placed by the letters: c, i, u.


In the heraldic Emblem of the 22 nd degree appear:

- a table: under all of the objects and highlighted in green;

- a compass: on the left, highlighted in red;

- a square: on the right, highlighted in red;

- a parchment: under the square, highlighted in yellow;

- a goniometer: triangle on the parchment (light green);

- a ruler: above the square, and highlighted in blue;

- a human eye, on top of all: this appears in the upper arm
of the cross inscribed into an equilateral triangle.


The Apron...
of the “Master”.


The letter “G” of
“Generation” in the
Masonic alphabet.


The symbols of the Masonic

Square and Compass.


The letters “M” and “B”
in the Masonic alphabet.


The Eye of Lucifer

in the Triangle.


The n. 5 indicating the “5-pointed Star”.


The letters “M” and “B”
(written in the Masonic
alphabet) of the Apron of
the “Master” and the
three numbers 3, 5, 7, rep-
resenting the “Master”.


“Chiesa viva” *** March 2006


29


The Chapel

of Worship


T he Chapel of Wor-
ship is located to one
side of the Sacristy
and of the Liturgical Hall,
whence one normally enters it.
The floor-plan shape of the
Chapel is an isosceles tra-
pezium that, completed in the
intersections of the diagonal
sides, forms an isosceles Trian-
gle of the height of 33 meters,
subdivided into the two distanc-
es of 18 and 15 m, identifying:
the first, the distance of the
center of the Tabernacle from
the base; the second, from the
center of the Tabernacle to
the vertex of the triangle. The
center of the Tabernacle,
therefore, is associated to the
n. 18, which symbolizes the
“Mark of the Beast” 666.

The straight lines connecting
the points A and B with O
(center of the Tabernacle),
form an isosceles triangle with
base angles of 72°: this is the
triangle that identifies in an uni-


vocal manner a “5-pointed
Star”, which is thus perfectly
identified. Drawing the center
of the Star, one observes that
this is located between the 7 th
and 8 th row of pews, with 7 + 8
= 15, which is the numerical
value of one of the Kabalistic
Names of God-Lucifer.

The Chapel of Worship, there-
fore, in the dimensions of its
aula and in the position of the
Tabernacle has imprinted the
symbols of the Freemasonry
of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite in the number
33, as the sum of the numbers
18 + 15, and with the presence
of the “5-pointed Star”, which
is the symbol par excellence of
Freemasonry. There also ap-
pear the numbers 72 and 15,
symbolizing Masonic ecume-
nisms.

Moreover: why in the Chapel
of Worship is there a stele of
“black Stone” that has the fla-
vor of paganism?


The Number 72


Speaking of the mural fresco in the Meditation Room at the
UN, R. K. Spenser writes: «in the fresco, there are 72 geomet-
rical figures and shadows... The number 72 indicates, ever
since antiquity, all of the 72 Names of the Name of the
Deity. This number derives from the permutation of the values
assigned to the four letters of the Tetragrammaton (JHVH:
Jehovah - the Kabalistic Name of God-Lucifer - author’s
note). This multitude of names is obtained from verses 19, 20,
and 21 of Exodus, each consisting of 72 Hebrew letters. Now,
if these three verses are written in full, one over the other: the
first, from left to right; the second, from right to left; the third
from left to right, they give 72 columns of three letters each.
Each column, therefore, gives one of the 72 names (each of
three letters) that, together, provide the 72 names of the
Deity alluded to in the text” 1 .


The number 72, therefore, is the number of Masonic ecu-
menism that wishes to reunite all the religions of the globe, in-
cluding the Catholic Religion, into the secular, philosophi-
cal, scientific Universal Religion of Gnosticism.

In this regard, let us recall the words of the “Patriarch of Uni-
versal Freemasonry”, Albert Pike: «AII true dogmatic reli-
gions have come out of the Kabala and return to it: all that
is great and scientific in religious ideals... comes from the
Kabala; all the Masonic associations owe their secrets and
their symbols to the Kabala» 2 .


1 R. K. Spenser, cited work, pp. 17-18.

2 A. Pike, “Morals and Dogma”, Ed. L.H. Jenkins, p. 153.


30


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


“Triple Masonic Trinity”

- secret of this “New Church”? -


I n the description of the ritual of the
31 st degree of the Ancient and Ac-
cepted Scottish Rite, Mons. Leone
Meurin comes across the oath of the Ma-
son aspiring to that degree, whom vows
obedience to the “Holiest and Indivisi-
ble Trinity” about which the Mason,
however, receives no explanation.

A celebrated expert and scholar of the
doctrine of Freemasonry, doctor Eckert,
in his work “The Temple of Solomon”
(p. 64), speaks at length of such Triple
Trinity: «The matter of the world has exist-
ed throughout eternity, and shall exist for
all eternity in HOLY TRINITY, that is, in
the unity of three elementary matters: the
masculine element of Fire, the feminine
element of Water, and the neutral ele-
ment of Earth. Prior to the formation of
the universe, these elements mixed to-
gether formed the Chaos.

The three primary elements, with the divi-
sion of the sexes into two, give the
number five, origin of every formation of
the Body of the world, whose symbol is


Image of the God-Serpent of the
Gnostics: «We worship the serpent

for God has placed him at the origin
of Gnosis for humanity; he himself
(the serpent) taught man and woman
the complete knowledge of the lofty
mysteries».

(Epiphanius, cited work, p. 22).


«The center of the circle coincides
with God itself. This point embedded
into the Pentalpha, emblem of the ini-
tiated man, establishes the identity
between man as he is being gnosti-
cally divinized and the god poten-
tially dwelling inside of him. The
triangle includes, in turn, man as he
is being regenerated, to signify the
Masonic domain in which it (the divi-
nization) takes place».

(Epiphanius, cited work, p. 475).


«The eye represented the mystical
symbol of the so called Egyptian Tri-
nity. ..».

(R.K. Spenser "The cult..”, p. 32).


the Sphinx, with the head and the breast
of a woman, the body of a lion and the
wings of an eagle. Developed by the
force of the Fire, the elements produce,
through the air, the Soul of the world,
and through the Light, the Holy Spirit,
whose symbol is the Phoenix, the Flying
Dragon that rises from the fire, Body,
Soul, and Spirit of the world form another
HOLY TRINITY which embodies itself
into the Man-God.

He, the Architect of the Universe with
the Patriarch of the World, or Director of
the spiritual Power, and with the Emper-
or of the World, or Director of the tem-
poral Power, here you have the HOLY
TRINITY inscribed on the supreme Cube
of the Temple of Solomon.

The UPTURNED TRIANGLE, Lucifer,
with the two crowned heads of the eagle,
namely, the Great Patriarch and the
Great Emperor or Sovereign, make up
the “HOLIEST AND INDIVISIBLE TRIN-
ITY” which the Mason candidate to the
31 st degree takes his oath of blind obe-
dience to».


«The sunburst patterned Triangle,
or Triangle of Solomon, is the sym-
bol of the “Great Architect of the
Universe”... soaring above the
loathed and ignorant “profane way».

(C.A. Agnoli, “La rivoluzione france- se
nell’opera della Massoneria”, The Fren-
ch Revolution in the Masonic Work , Ed. Ci-
vilta, Brescia, p. 81).


16


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


the TABERNACLE

of what God?


T he Tabernacle is the
abode of God. The

symbols that adorn this
holy home should not only be per-
meated with a spirit of sacred re-
spect, of veneration and adora-
tion, but, above all, they should
express the true essence of the
concept of the God who inhabits
the Tabernacle.

We have already seen that the
center of the Tabernacle, at 18
m. from the base, associated it to
the “Mark of the Beast” 666.

The area surrounding the Taber-
nacle, besides, symbolizes the
Tetragrammaton with its n. 15
and its claim to represent All of
the 72 Names of the Kabalistic
Name of God-Lucifer!

The “black Stone” stele of the
Tabernacle, moreover, is, ever


since antiquity, a pagan expres-
sion of the deity; paganism of
which Freemasonry is permeated
and of which the echelon of the
UN seem to be the confident as-
sertors and eager propagators,
even if, nowadays, merely making
use of a symbology that hides the
real contents of their doctrine from
the profane world.

From the “Schethya”, the “point-
ed cubic stone” “at the origin of
the World” (Lucifer), the Altar
and the Tabernacle of idolatry
have been called: “cubic stone”,
“angle stone”, “black stone”,
“column Stone”, down to the
“talisman” of the “Lucifer Trust”.
But the UN informs us that this
“black Stone” is a symbol that
says how the Light of the Spirit
gives life to the matter»!


When the Tabernacle is opened,
the 13 th tile disappears, making
appear this 2-door silver closure,
adorned with two fish facing one
another.

The fish are notoriously “mute”,
and such they remain to the pro-
fane, whereas to the initiates,
their eloquence takes the form of

symbols:


- 33 scales = Freemasonry;

- 5 vertexes of the fins = “5-point-
ed Star” = 15 = Freemasonry;

-5 + 1 vertexes of the fins = “6-
pointed Star” and of the n. 18;

- the eye forms a 9 and a 6 = 15;

- the numbers 3, 5, 7 (on the gills
and on the tail) of the “Master”.


32


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


“BLACK STONE”
ALTARS AND TABERNACLES


Speaking of the occult meanings of the

Meditation Room of the UN, Spenser
writes: «The altar is a block of crystal
mineral of a dark gray color weighing
6.5 tons».

And he continues: «At a higher esoteric
level, the altar of mineral stone recalls
the ancient Foundation Stone once
placed in the foundation of the Temple
of Solomon and, later on, during the
construction of the second Temple,
transported into the “Saint of Saints”. It
was of a perfectly cubic shape and
had, inscribed on its upper face inside a
Triangle or Delta, the holy Tetragram-
maton, or Ineffable name of God».
Spenser reports the following citation of
the work of A.E. Waite, “The Secret
Doctrine of Israel”: «A mysterious stone,
called Schethya, that was thrown by
Jehovah into the abyss, so as to form
the base of the world in order to give it
life. One could think that it were like an
altar of cubic stone, for its extremity
was hidden in the deep, whereas its sur-
face emerged above the chaos. It was
the central point of the immensity of
the world: the angle stone».

It this about Christ-angle stone? - Spen-
ser asks himself. No! Says he - «be-
cause this has been discarded by the
builders»!

And he continues: «lt is sufficient to walk
into the Meditation Room at the UN to
perceive the absence of God in the
UN. The mineral “stone” of the altar,
in its dismal and crude construction is,
in itself, a symbol of idolatry.

The worship of stones is an ancient
practice; Eusebius quotes Porphyry who
said that the ancient represented the
Deity with a black stone, on account of
its obscure and inscrutable nature. The
reader, at this juncture, may recall the
black stone, Hajar el Aswad, located in
the Southwest corner of the Kaaba, at
Mecca, which the Arabs worshipped in
antiquity...

The Druids, it is known, had no other
image of their Gods than stones in the
shape of a cube or column... which
gave the idea of stability and strength - a
symbol or idol of the same Deity... the
god Hermes (Mercury) was represented
without hands and feet, being a cubic
stone, since the figure of the cube de-
noted stability and solidity ».

«The description of the altar as “natural
talisman” of the World Goodwill (the
Group of the “Lucifer Trust”, then re-
named “Lucis Trust”, the most power-
ful satanic sect of the world that rules
the UN - author’s note), tells us that “tal-
isman” is a term that means “stone”...
The altars, amongst the ancient, were
made of stone... generally of a cubic
shape. The altars were erected ahead of
the Temples* 1 .


1 R. K. Spenser, cited work, pp. 8-15.


The Tabernacle is a pyramidal stele of lavic black stone of Mount Etna, 3.5 meters
high, with a square base of 9 decimeters in side ending at the top with a regular oc-
tagon, and resting upon an octagonal base marble base.

The “Dictionary of Symbols”, at the call “seven”, among others, reads: «So, the
infernal Beast of the Apocalypse has 7 heads. But the seer of Patmos (St. John
Evangelist) often reserves to the evil powers the half of 7, which is 3.5, thus high-
lighting the failure of the enterprises of Evil» 1 .

If the two lines connecting the two vertexes of the 9 dm base with those of the frontal
side of the octagon are continued, at the top of the stele, one comes to the height of
an isosceles triangle of 6 m. The number 6, in the Bible, is the number of the im-
pious. This number, however, re-proposes the theme of the numbers 6 and 9 as be-
ginning of the spiral, symbol of the G.A.O.T.U., namely, of Satan, Lucifer. In addi-
tion, the sum 6 + 9 gives 15, numerical value of the word of the Jewish God JAH,
one of the forms of the Tetragrammaton.

Finally, 6 and 9 identify the Triangle of the 1 st “Holy Trinity” of Freemasonry!


1 J. Chevalier, A. Gheerbrandt, “Dictionary of Symbols”, Bur Ed. Rizzoli, 1997, vol. II, p. 377.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


33


The straight lines AC and BD connect in O, vertex of the isosceles triangle,
at the height of 6 meters.


The insults to God One and Trine, on the Tabernacle

The blasphemous Masonic Triple Trinity in place of the Holiest Trinity;

the “5-pointed Star” on the Chapel of Worship = 666;

the distance of the central axis of the stele from the base = 18 = 666;

the Width of the stele = 9 = 666;

the Depth of the stele = 9 = 666;

the “5-pointed Star” on the Tabernacle = 666;

the “6-pointed Star” on the Tabernacle = 18 = 666;

on the 2 fish of the Tabernacle = 33, 5, 6, 18, 9, 6, 11;

6 tiles on the left + 6 degrees of the 1 3 th tile + 6 tiles on the right = 666;

the dimensions of the niche: 30 x 32 x 70 = 3, 5, 7 = “Master” Mason;

the numbers imprinted on the 2 fish of the Tabernacle = 33, 5, 6, 18, 9, 6, 11;

the Height of the pyramid of the stele = 6 (n. of the impious);

the 13 th tile of the Pelican = 13 (diabolical number);

the Height of the niche of the Tabernacle: 13 (diabolical number);

the Height of the stele = 3.5 (number of the evil powers).


The dimensions 30 x 32 x 70 of the
niche inside the Tabernacle re-
present the numbers 3, 5, 7 of the
“Master” Mason become “perfect
stone” or, better, “divinized man”.
Would that be the substitution of the
“Master” Jesus with the “divinized
Man” or, better, with the “Satanized
Man” of Freemasonry?


Creating a triangle with the base of the
stele = 9 dm with a point at a height of
6 dm (taking the meaningful number 6
of the height of the vertex of the pyra-
mid of the stele), one obtains the Trian-
gle ABL, which is the Triangle of the
1 st Masonic “Holy Trinity”.

The “black stone” stele, therefore,
with its dimensions 9 and 6, represents
the “Matter” in the condition of “pri-
mordial chaos”.


Facing the open Tabernacle, with the 3
tiles on the right and 3 on the left, one
has, immediately, the vision of a geome-
try made up of 4 horizontal parallel lines
and 4 vertical ones, defined by the edges
of the stele and by the outer and separa-
tion lines of the 6 tiles.

Traced the vertical axis of the stele, with
the experiences already made, it all
comes automatically: one traces the “5-
pointed Star”, from the 2 lower central
points, then the “6-pointed Star” whose
horizontal axis intersects with the vertical
one of the stele, identifying the “central
point”, which is the center of the “up-
turned Triangle” of the “5-pointed Star”.
As we have previously seen, in the struc-
ture of the “new church”, the whole of the
“5-pointed Star”, of the “6-pointed
Star” and of the “central Point”, form
the 2 nd Masonic “Holy Trinity”, the “di-
vinized Man”, whereas the “upturned
Triangle” with the “central Point” form
the Masonic “Holiest and Indivisible
Trinity”, the 3 rd “Holy Trinity”, namely,
Lucifer together with the Patriarch of
the World and the Emperor of the
World.

And where, instead, is the 1 st Masonic
“Holy Trinity” hiding? This is represent-
ed by the Triangle, traced in a white line
in the photograph in the next page, and,
physically, is constituted by the “black
Stone Stele” representing the Matter
(Fire, Earth, Water) “at the primordial
state of chaos”.

Now, “this Matter with the two sexes
forms the Body that, with the Soul, gener-
ated by the Fire with the Air” forms that
which the UN secretary calls “The earth
on which we live”, which needs the
“Holy Spirit”, “generated by the Fire
with the Light”, in order to give “life”.

In other words: since the “perfection” of
the “Master”, or of the “perfect stone”,
is always intended not in “material”, but
in “spiritual” terms, the speech of the
former UN Secretary, Dag Hammar-
skjold, means: the profane world (we
poor Christians), who form the “Body of
the World”, first need a Soul, and then
the “Light” of Freemasonry, which, with
the “Fire” of the rebellion against God,
produces the “Holy Spirit” of Lucifer,
who gives us “Life”, that is, causes us to
become “Masters”, “Men-god”, “per-
fect stones”! These are the “stones”
Freemasonry uses to edify its Temple!
What does all this means to a poor
Catholic faithful who enters this “new
church”? According to the High Initiates,
it means that he must climb the 15
Masonic steps, in order to acquire the
“Holy Spirit”, to “divinize himself” and
become a “Master”, or, better, a “per-
fectly Satanized man”!

And what does this mean, instead, to the
Catholic Clergy administering the sacra-
ments?

For them, the High Initiates have another
program, which is the real content of the

13 tiles of the Tabernacle!


34


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


On the Tabernacle


le sarame
Triple Tipnitvl


The universal axis:
in this geometry, the axis
is that of the “5-pointed
Star”, of the “6-pointed
Star”, of the “central Point”
Lucifer of the Masonic
“Holiest and Indivisible Tri-
nity”, which coincides with the
“Point” of the “Fire” of the 1 st
Masonic “Holy Trinity” and with
the “point” of the “Holy Spirit”
of the 2 nd Masonic “Holy Tri-
nity”:

The truth that Lucifer com-
municates to man is the

Unity of the Triple Tri-
nity, and the Diviniza-
tion of the Matter, of
Man and of Lucifer.


The geometrical shapes, composed of the width and height of the
black stone stele of the Tabernacle, with those of 6 tiles at its
sides, provide the lines and the points to trace a “5-pointed
Star” inscribed into a “6-pointed Star” with a central Point. The
Triangle, highlighted in white, represents the 1 st Masonic “Holy


Trinity”; the two 5 and 6-pointed Stars, with the central Point
represent the 2 nd Masonic “Holy Trinity”; the central upturned
Triangle with the central Point, represents the Masonic “Holi-
est and Indivisible Trinity”, or, better, the 3 rd Masonic “Holy
Trinity”.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


35


The 13 Silver Tiles:

- T ransformation of the "Catholic Clergy"

into "Political Class"?-


Disposition of the 13 Silver Tiles
on the Tabernacle.


T he 13 tiles of chiseled silver,
work of the sculptor Floriano
Bodini, with respect to the niche
of the Tabernacle, are located: 6 on the
left hand side (3 of the Old Testament
and 3 of the New Testament); 6 on the ri-
ght hand side (3 of the O.T. and 3 of the
N.T.); the 13 th covers the niche of the
closed Tabernacle.

The meaning of the symbolic contents of
the 13 tiles is the program which the High
Initiates wish to actuate with the Catho-
lic Clergy: its transformation, from
“Priests of Christ”, into “political
Class” at the service of the World Go-
vernment of the Antichrist”.

The Supernatural must disappear,
“Western Churches must be secular-
ized” and the “Universal Religion”,
which must embrace all the religions of
the globe, must constitute the “very es-
sence, the double, triple, fourth, fifth
essence, at it were, of the policy” of
the World Government.

The themes developed by the 13 tiles are
drawn from the rituals of the first 5 de-
grees of the 3 rd series of 11 degrees of
the A.A.S.R.: 23' d , 24‘h, 25**, 26«\ 27«\
developed in 6 + 6 tiles of the O.T. and
N.T., with the 13 th tile of the “Pelican”
covering the last 6 degrees.

The 3 rd series of 1 1 degrees of the
A.A.S.R. has, in fact, the scope of trans-
forming the Masonic “Priest” of the 22 nd


degree (who has already fought Catholic
Virtue and Morals, with the “Cult of the
Phallus” and with the “Cult of Man”) in-
to a “Political Man” at the service of Lu-
cifer, in order to fight Catholic Autho-
rity, with the “Cult of Lucifer”.

The deepest “Mystery” of these degrees
is the declaration of war on the “Reli-
gion of Christ”, as affirm the Hidden
Chiefs, in one of their secret instructions:
«it is Religion that must be the con-
stant thought of your assaults, for a
people has never survived his Reli-
gion, and because, by killing Religion,
we shall have in our hands Law and
Property; because by establishing,
over the cadavers of these assassins
(the Priests faithful to Christ - author’s
note), the Masonic Religion, the Ma-
sonic Law, the Masonic Property, we
shall have regenerated Society».

This, however, must be done with cun-
ning, as “Religion must be eradicated
with shrewdness”!


■ ^ , *
TBs i


1

if 7


A bel offers the Lamb: the M ason


Abraham offers his own son to God: the Mason
Candidate performs the "act of submission".


Resurrection: the M ason Candidate performs the "act of faith".


Melchisedech offers God bread and wine: the Mason Candidate recruits
a soldier for the armada of theTemple, namely, the armada of Lucifer!

Introduction of Jesus to the Temple: the Mason Candidate is introduced to the Temple of the third series of 11
degrees. The Candidates burns incense to Lucifer and vows to recruit soldiers for the armada of the Masonic Temple.


36


‘Chiesa viva


March 2006


12


11


10


V.


•ii .*


2? h degree


, . r'


The Jewish Easter: the Mason
joins the "Court of Lucifer".


Emmaus: the Mason learns the password: "Gomel"
(peoples of Lucifer), the only two peoples with which
he can communicate, outsidethe Lodge.

M ultiplication of the loaves: to the Mason is revealed the 3 rd Scottish Trin-
itary Mystery: the "heaven of Reason": the material N eeds of humanity.


Elias is fed with bread in the desert: to the Mason Candidate is revealed the 2 nd Scot-
tish T ri nitary M ystery: the "heaven of Conscience": the social N eeds of humanity.


The rain of the manna in the desert: to the Mason is re-
vealed the 1 st Scottish Trinitary Mystery: the "heaven of
Intelligence": the political Needs of humanity.

Last supper: the Mason becomes a Spirit and, with two wings, flies

out in the three heavens of Intelligence, Conscience and Reason.


26 th degree

The Mason, after flying out in the
there "heavens" of Intelligence,
Conscience and Reason, knows

the 3 "T ri nitary M ysteries".


o


Crucifixion: the Candidate is initiated to the "cult of the
Serpent", namely, Satan replacing Jesus Christ on theCross.


25 th degree


The Mason performs the act of cult to the
Serpent-Satan who replaces C hrist on the C ross.


Candidate performs the "act of worship" to Lucifer.


24 th degree


The M ason performs the "act of faith", the "act of
submission" and the "act of worship" to Lucifer.


23 rd degree

The Mason is received in the Temple, burns
scented incense to Lucifer and vows to recruit
soldiers for the Armada of the Temple.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


37


Introduction

of J esus to the Temple

(The Mason is received in theTemple
and bums scented incense to Lucifer)


References to the ritual


- The Candidate, in the place of Jesus, plays the part of the Son of Hiram (Lucifer);

- the floor, made of white and black tiles (indicating the Masonic Lodge), totals 23
tiles (1 1 .5 x 2) = 23 rd degree.

- the panels of the vault of the Temple are 3 times 6 = 666;

- in the middle of the Temple, stands the 7-arm chandelier;

- on the right hand side of the dove, the n. 49 of the lights of the Lodge is observed;

- the President (1), the 3 Priests (2, 3) and the 3 Assistants (4, 5, 6) welcome him;

- the Sacred Motto is Uriel (God-Fire), it is written on the left hand and on the stole of
the President, in the Masonic alphabet;

- the Candidate enters the 3 rd sphere of the 11 degrees: the sphere next to Jesus
shows 3 zigzag segments and the n. 11, with other 2 n. 11 close by (green and blue);

- to the left of Jesus, it is symbolized the “jewel”: the incensory that makes the in-
cense soar toward the Dove-Lucifer;

- the Good Beginning, Angel of Light, Great Architect of the Universe” is symbol-
ized by the Dove showing the numbers 18 = 666 (red lines); 3 times 6 = 666 (light

blue lines); and the n. 13 (green lines).


The Ritual

23 rd degree of Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite

The Chief of the Tabernacle


«The President of this degree is the “Sovereign Grand
Sacrificer” of “Solomon” who, accompanied by 2 Priests
and 3 Assistants, receives the Mason candidate to give him

his political education.

The Candidate still belongs to the “nave” of the Masonic
Temple (namely, the “5-pointed Star”), and only in the fol-
lowing degree will he enter the “Sanctuary” (the “6-pointed
Star”), which is called “Hierarchy”.

As a fresh “political man”, the Candidate plays the part of
the son of Hiram (the “Master” of the Temple of Solomon
symbolizing Lucifer, slain by the Three Persons of the Ho-
liest Trinity), and learns that the three assassins, the
priests, the kings and the landlords, designated with the
epithets of hypocrites, traitors and depraved, are maneu-
vered and directed by Adonai, the God of the Christians.

The passage from the “priestly” to the “political” condition
is illustrated with these words: “Superstition (that is, Reli-
gion) must be eradicated with shrewdness and, conse-
quently, it is incumbent upon the leading classes to de-
clare war on Superstition (that is, to Religion)”.

The Password is “Uriel” (= God-Fire) who admits the Candi-
date into the sphere of the 3d series of 1 1 degrees of the
Masonic degrees, into the Tabernacle of the revealed
truths, not however (revealed) by Adonai, the God of the An-
cient Jews and of the Christians, but by Lucifer, whom here
is called “Good Beginning, Angel of Light, Great Architect
of the Universe” to whom the Priests offer incense and, in
his honor, carry, as Jewel, an “Incensory”.

The Lodge has 2 apartments: the first is called the Vestibule;
the second is the Lodge, which must be perfectly round. Its
decor is changed 3 times on the occasion of the reception. In
the middle, stands a burning 7-arm chandelier. In all, there
are 49 lights. The Lodge is called “Hierarchy”».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 344-345).


38


‘Chiesa viva


March 2006


M elchisedech offers G od
bread and wine

(The Mason vows to recruit soldiers
for the A rmada of the T empl e)


References to the ritual


- Melchisedec, King and Pontiff of Salem (Jerusalem), symbolizes the Presi-
dent of the Lodge;

- Abraham, represents the Candidate who has recruited a person;

- above: 9 points = 666 + 13 signs coming out of the 9 points, the triangle with a
4 th inner section, Melchisedec’s miter with the 3 circles and 4 segments, iden-
tify Lucifer and the sacred Delta (3) with the 4 letter of the ineffable Name;

- the theme symbolized is the war on the Holiest Trinity, symbolized by the
Cross, which is always represented with a further sign that disfigures it;

- the recurring n. 5, obtained with rectilinear or curved sections, indicates the “5-
pointed Star” and, therefore, Freemasonry and its armada of the Temple;

- the whole of the n. 5 and of the n. 6, obtained also by adding one unit to the
previous 5, indicates the mystic number 11 of the Hebrew Kabbalah, and
again Freemasonry in the whole of the “5-pointed Star” and of the “6-point-
ed Star”.


The Ritual

23 rd degree of A. A. Scottish Rite

The Chief of the Tabernacle


«The welcoming session of the Mason-
ic Candidate, chaired by the “Sover-
eign Grand Sacrificer”, ends with a
ceremony in honor of the “Good Be-
ginning”, Great Architect of the Uni-
verse”.

The Candidate learns that Hiram (sym-
bolizing Lucifer) has been slain by the
three assassins (symbolizing the
Three Persons of the Holiest Trin-
ity): the priests, the kings, and the
landlords, designated with the epithets
of hypocrites, traitors and depraved,
who are maneuvered and directed by
Adonai, the God of the Christians.
Since Lucifer fights Adonai, the God of
the Christians, since time immemorial,
as a fresh “political man” engaged in
this war, the Candidate must commit
himself to “recruiting soldiers for
the armada of Lucifer, the Savior of
men». The Mason Candidate, there-
fore, vows to recruit other masons.

It must be noted that the “Sovereign
Grand Sacrificer” is a Mason of the
33d degree, therefore, according to the
Kabalistic doctrine of the 33 degrees
of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish
Rite, other than being his own God, he
is also his own Pontiff and King».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 344-345).


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


39


Resurrection

(The M ason performes the “act of faith")


The “Mark” of Great
Architect Of The Uni-
verse, (which in italian
is G.A.D.U.) is im-
printed in the Masonic
alphabet upon the res-
urrected Christ.


References to the ritual


- Lucifer, with the n. 6 (double triangle), with the 7-rays Sun, and with the num-
bers 6, 9, 13, with 5 spirals, 3 times 6, holds in his hands the small globe of Ch-
rist;

- the 3 times 6 (blue, green, nad brown lines), and the 2 times 9 (red zigzag line and
curved lines, to the right) are the Candidate’s reply as to his work at the Temple;

- the Act of faith, is represented by the 3 people, at bottom: one covers his eyes;
the other two, instead, indicate, on the chest, the 3 points of Kabalistic Triad;


The Ritual

24 th degree of A. A. Scottish Rite

The Prince of the Tabernacle


«ln this degree, the Candidate enters

the Temple called “Hierarchy” of the
Spirits. He is asked how many days has
he worked in the Temple of Solomon.

He replies: 2185 days, that is, 3 times
6 years or 2 times 9 years; he ha still to
cover the 3 triangles of the third series.
Here is the essence of this degree: “Sol-
omon, for changing his cult, has lost
communication with Adonai. He, how-
ever, has acquired an extraordinary
knowledge of the Kabbalah and has
been able to come in touch with the
Spirits of the Fire!” Here is the “reco-
vered Word”: the word of Lucifer to
man! 3 acts are required of the Candi-
date: “Act of faith”, “Act of submis-
sion”, “Act of worship”.

Act of faith: “the right hand is brought
onto the eyes, as if to avoid a strong light;
keeping the left hand on the chest, the
right hand is brought toward the left
shoulder and, from this, diagonally, on
the right flank", to indicate the points of
the Physical Triad (24 th , 25 th , and 26 th
degrees).

The Jewel is “a small golden globe, sur-
mounted by a double triangle surround-
ed by rays and at the center the word
Jehovah, evidently, Lucifer.

The Christians place into the hand of
Baby Jesus a small globe surmounted
by a Cross. Here, we see Lucifer con-
tend to Christ the power on earth».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 345-348).


40


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


The Ritual

24 th degree of A. A. Scottish Rite

The Prince of the Tabernacle


«ln this degree the Candidate enters

the Temple called “Hierarchy” of the
Spirits and has before him the 3
triangles representing the Physical,
Moral and Intellectual Triad of this
3d series of 1 1 degrees of the Free-
masonry of the A.A.S.R.

Here is the essence of this degree:
“Solomon, for changing his cult, has
lost communication with Adonai.
He, however, has acquired an extraor-
dinary knowledge of the Kabbalah and
has been able to come in touch with
the Spirits of the Fire!”

Here is the “recovered Word”: the
word of Lucifer to man!

3 acts are required of the Candidate:

- “Act of faith” (already seen);

- “Act of submission”;

- “Act of worship” (theme addressed
in the next tile).

Act of submission: “the two open
hands are brought on the head, joining
the two index fingers so as to form a
triangle”. The Candidate, in this man-
ner, expresses the submission of his
intelligence (the triangle of the Kaba-
listic intellectual Triad) to the God-
Fire (Lucifer or Angel of Light)».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 345-346).


A braham offers
his own son to God

(The M ason performes the "act of submission")


References to the ritual


- Abraham symbolizes the Candidate who must perform the “Act of submis-
sion” to Lucifer;

- the Angel, who lay his hand (a man that seems to represent two) is Lucifer,
Angel of Light, on account of the numbers 5, 9, 13 marking him;

- the double 24 circles at the base indicate that we are at the 24 th degree;

- the 6 remaining circles, divided into 3 + 3, indicate 3 times 6 years, of the
work the Candidate has already carried out at the Temple of Solomon;

- the 3 triangles placed on the altar, indicate the 3 Kabalistic Triads the Can-
didate must still cover in this 3d series of 1 1 degrees;

- the 3 triangles placed on the body of Abraham (the Candidate) indicate the
submission to Lucifer of the 3d Triad, the Kabalistic intellectual Triad.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


41


A bel offers the Lamb

(The M ason performes the "act of Worshi p"
to Lucifer)


References to the ritual


- Abel represents the Candidate of the 24 th degree whom is required the Act

of Worship to the God-Fire, Lucifer.

- the 24 small circles, at the foot of Abel to the right, indicate the 24 th degree;

- the days worked at the Temple are: 3 times 6 (yellow), and 2 times 9 (green);

- the Candidate “bows his head forward”, while the person at bottom

“covers his eyes with his left hand”;

- the “Seal of Solomon” (two intertwined triangles of the “great World”

and of the “small World”, one with the tip facing downward; the other facing
upward, is represented by the divine Man Adam Kadmon (the whole of the
10 Sephirot of the Kabbalah: 1 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 1 =the World and the 3 trian-
gles) united by the Ensoph: the Elder of Elders (in the triangle) of the Kab-
balah; and by the Candidate, the super-human being who, by ascending in
degree: 1 +3 + 3 + 3, completes the 10 Sephirot, united by the letter “G”
expressing Creation, intended as “Generation”.


The Ritual

24 th degree of A.A.S.R.

The Prince of the Tabernacle


«ln this degree, the Candidate enters

the Temple called “Hierarchy” of the
Spirits.

Here is the essence of this degree:
“Solomon, for changing his cult, has

lost communication with Adonai. He,

however, has acquired an extraordinary
knowledge of the Kabbalah and has

been able to come in touch with the
Spirits of the Fire!”

Here is the “recovered Word”: the
word of Lucifer to man!

3 acts are required of the Candidate:

- “Act of faith” (already seen);

- “Act of submission” (already seen);

- “Act of worship”.

- Act of worship: “The head is bowed
forward and, with the left hand, the
eyes are covered. Cordial Act of Wor-
ship of the dazzling God-Fire”.

In this degree, the system of the two
origins of the deity, represented by the
“Seal of Solomon”, is explained: the
double triangle intertwined with the two
Elders, representing the white Jeho-
vah and the black Jehovah. The rep-
resentation of the two elders, how-
ever, is not exact: the Kabbalah calls
“Elder” the Great face, but there are
not two Elders, but only one: the En-
soph: The “Elder of Elders”».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 345-346).


42


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


Crucifixion

(The M ason performs the "act of cult to the
Serpent-Satan" who replaces Christ on the
Cross.


The egyptian “Ankh”


«The shape of the Ankh is that of a cross, and we
do know that the latter was the ancient symbol of
eternity. It is the symbol of eternal life.

But the gulf in the upper part seems to be the sign
of a string knot that means: to tie, to untie...
Hand-held by the deities (or pictured beside
them), it is the symbol of sacred occultism.
Hence, the knot represented, above all, the oc-
cultism protector of the mysteries of Religions


Hfi L'Aft&h ircii'riKu

PoiEnjmniaiia

The Ankh inscribed into


The Ritual

25 th degree of Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite

The Knight of the Brazen Serpent


«ln the 25 th degree are found the Ophites: the worshipper of the
Serpent. The essence of this degree is the “Cult of the God-Ser-
pent”, classic symbol of Satan.

Above the altar of the room stands a transparent representing the JA,
JE, Jl, the Masonic Jehovah, in the middle or a burning briar.

The Lord appeared to Moses in a burning briar that would not be con-
sumed... hence, Lucifer would not be consumed in the eternal Fire
of which he is the immortal inhabitant, either.

A truncated-cone shaped small heap, in the middle of the room,
carries a bronze serpent crouched down on a trestle.

The Lord said unto Moses: “Make thee a bronze serpent and set it
(upon a pole) as a sign; everyone that is bitten, when he looketh upon
it, shall live”.

Our Lord, for that reason, said: “Just as Moses lifted the Serpent in
the desert, so must the Son of Man be lifted up (on the Cross) so
that he that believes in him shall have eternal life”.

The focal point of this degree is the comparison between the Christ
and Satan, both represented by the bronze Serpent.

The Christ on the Cross becomes the Death of Death “in order
to destroy with death he that had the empire of death, namely, the
Devil”.

Satan, on his part, making that image his own, says to the Candidate
that it is he who healed the Jews in the desert; he, the Angel of Light
of whom the Serpent is one of the emblems. Hence in this manner,
placed on the Cross, the Serpent represents Satan, who presents
himself, by replacing Christ, as the true Savior of humanity, the
true “Master”.

The mystery of this degree is a profound one.

As the Christian Baptism, and the other Sacraments, are a mystical
transformation of the natural man into Son of God, dying to the pre-
vious life of sin in order to be incorporated into God, so the Devil
actuates, with the progressive work of Freemasonry, the incorpora-
tion of man into his diabolical personality. Man must die, like
Hiram, in order to resurrect as a new Lucifer!

The sacred Motto of this degree is “Moses”».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 348-351).


the Pentagram.


Satan presents himself to the Mason Candidate,
replacing Jesus Christ on the Cross and pre-
senting himself as he that gives the eternal life.
The “5-pointed Star” on the forehead of Christ
crucified, means that it is not Jesus Christ on
the Cross, but Satan-Lucifer.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


43


Left: Satan presents himself
as the true “Master” who gives
“divine life to man”.

The depiction of the “Master”
is the whole of the “5-pointed
Star” inscribed into the “6-
pointed Star” and with the
central Point.


Right: the 9 zigzag steps to
imitate the movement of the
serpent (4 red zigzag lines and
5 other to the side); and the 9
knocks of the battery, divided
into 5, 3, 1 (5 red lines, 3 yel-
low, 1 green on the chest and
the white, red, and blue rays
around the head).

The Sacred Motto “Moses” is
written in the Masonic alphabet
(2 yellow lines, 1 red and 1
green on the belly). The two
people (male and female) rep-
resent the 2 sexes of the
“Deity” represented on the
cross.


Side: depiction of the Bapho-
met, the god worshipped by
the Templars and by the High
degrees of Freemasonry.

- on the forehead stands out
the “5-pointed Star”;

- on the arms, the captions
Solve, Coagula;

- on the belly, the Cadu-
ceus, symbol of the 2
sexes of the Deity;

- above and below, the white
and black Moon;

- on the head, the Flare of
the God-Fire;

- etc...


Left Jesus Crucified replaced by Satan-Baphomet on the Cross:

- on the head is inscribed a “5-pointed Star”;

- on the hands stand out the letters “S” and “C” of Solve and Coa-
gula, which appear written on the arms of the Baphomet;

- on the arms, highlighted in green, appears the caption “Baphomet”
in the Masonic alphabet (the cross on the left arm, at the height of
the elbow, indicates the 4 letters B, a, p, t, gathered together)
whereas the others: h, o, m, e, are indicated singularly;

- the Moon is represented by the partial circle around the head;

- the flare on the head of the Baphomet is symbolized by the Sun
with the rays coming out of the larger circle with center in the no-
se;

- the Caduceus is represented by the two people (male and female)
at the foot of the Cross, whom receive the rays of the Deity, indicat-
ing its 2 sexes;

- the caption “INRI”, to the High Initiates, means: “Igne Natura Re-
novatur Integra” (la Natura Intera e Rinnovata col Fuoco - the Who-
le Nature is Renewed with Fire): the Fire of the God-Fire, Satan.


44


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


The Ritual

26 th degree of A. A. Scottish Rite

The Prince of Mercy


«The incorporation into the army of
the demoniac Spirits produces, as it
were, a New Spirit that, by its own na-
ture, must be able to enter the regions in
which its brothers dwell.

First the Candidate takes 9 steps
snaking, Sign of the previous degree,
and symbolizing the march of the God-
Serpent that never walks straight.

They attach two wings to his shoulders,
symbol of the spirits. Everywhere, even
in the Church, winged Angels are always
represented, to indicate their spirituality.
The Candidate, therefore, represents a
Spirit.

Incorporated into the chorus of the De-
mon, in the previous degree, he must
climb 9 steps, perhaps in honor of the 9
Sephirot submitted to the Great Archi-
tect of the Universe.

From the platform on which he is stand-
ing, blindfolded, he must fly out from the
first heaven, to the second heaven, and
then on to the third heaven, in the pres-
ence of the Prince of darkness, of the
God-Fire whom he must see “as is”.

The Sign of recognition consists in a
triangle made with the first two fingers
of the two hands and placed on the
belly: the Kabalistic physical triangle is
completed".

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 352-353).


Last supper

(The M ason, a new spi rit, f I i es i nto the three
"heavens" of Intelligence, Conscience
and Reason)


References to the ritual


- The floor of white and black tiles indicates the Masonic Lodge;

- the Candidate is welcomed by the Court of Lucifer composed of 9 Courte-
sans;

- the 9 zigzag steps of the Serpent are the tiles of the same color (black);

- the 9 steps the Candidate must climb, are the tiles of the other color;

- two wings are attached to the Candidate which allow him to fly out in the 3
heavens (1 st , 2 nd , and 3 rd );

- the particle, which Lucifer gives the Candidate, symbolizes his incorpo-
ration into the army of the demoniac Spirits;

- the diabolic Spirit of the Candidate is symbolized by the n. 6 marking him;

- the Sign of recognition is the Triangle the Candidate forms “with the first
fingers of the two hands and placed on the belly”, “suggested” by the
(green) arrow;

- in the 3 rd heaven, the Spirit of the Candidate finds itself in the presence of
the Prince of darkness, of the God-Fire whom he must see as is: Lucifer,
the “Sun with the 7 rays”; Lucifer, center of the blasphemous Masonic
“Triple Trinity”!


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


45


The rain of the manna
i n the desert

(The M ason knows the

1 st Scottish T ri nitary M ystery)

References to the ritual


- Moses represents the Candidate who, marked by the n. 13 and 7, by the 3 trian-
gles yet to be covered in Freemasonry, by the word “Moses” written with the fin-
gers of his left hand, in the Masonic alphabet, now knows the 1 st Trinitary
Mystery: the political Needs of Humanity = destruction of the 3 Enemies;

- this task is entrusted to the 7 people to the left and to the 8 to the right, who add
up to 15 = 5-pointed Star = Freemasonry;

- the person with the 15 small green circles on his head, carries written on his back:
2 times 9; 3 times 6, which are the knocks of the Battery of this degree;

-the 12 small circles and the 9 (2 incomplete + 7) indicate the Table of the 12
Commandments, not Moses’s, but of the Round Table of the Templars of the
27 th degree;

- the Great Hand indicating 3 (the 3 enemies to fight of which Religion, repre-
sented by the 3 tiaras, is the main one) is marked by the n. 3 (yellow), 13 (blue),
15 (red), 18 (green), 3 times 6 (green), 2 times 18 (red, yellow), 6x6 (the squares
on the background), is the hand of Lucifer, whereas the numbers 15 + 18 = 33,
indicate Freemasonry. To the left, in the foreground, appears the n. 6, the impious.


The Ritual

26 th degree of A. A. Scottish Rite

The Prince of Mercy


«The Candidate, to whom they at-
tached two wings to the shoulders,
symbol of the spirits, represents a
New Demonic Spirit.

From the platform on which he is stand-
ing, blindfolded, he must fly on to the
third heaven, passing first through the
first and through the second.

He hurls himself and falls onto a cover
held by some vigorous Friends. He is
in the first heaven, that of the wan-
dering stars - the stars representing
the Spirits; he is in the “air where are
scattered the Spirits of malice”.

The novel Spirit of the Candidate is
introduced to the

1st Scottish Trinitary Mystery.

He has soared in the region of the In-
tellect that corresponds to the politi-
cal needs of Humanity.

In this degree, one promises to work
on the 12 Commandments of the Ta-
ble of the Law. Certainly, that Table
is not Moses’, but the Round Table
of the Templars in the 27 th degree».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 352-353).


46


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


The Ritual

26 th degree of A. A. Scottish Rite

The Prince of Mercy


«The Candidate, to whom they at-
tached two wings to the shoulders,
symbol of the spirits, represents a
New Demonic Spirit.

From the first heaven, the Candidate
must move on to the next.

They make him move on to the second
heaven, the ethereal heaven, symbol-
ized with the soap-foam he must ab-
sorb. There, are the fixed stars: the
demons chained in hell.

He brings a burning candle to his fin-
gers, to represent the heat of the fixed
stars of hell wherein he has arrived.
To console him of the ominous thought
of the future eternal fire, he is assu-
red that, from now on, his body has ac-
quired the property of resisting the fire!
The novel Spirit of the Candidate is
introduced to the

2 nd Scottish Trinitary Mystery.

He has soared in the region of the
Conscience that corresponds to the

social needs of Humanity».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 352-353).


Elia is fed with bread
in the desert

(The M ason knows the

2 nd Scottish T ri nitary M ystery)


References to the ritual


- Elias symbolizes the Candidate who understands the meaning of the
social Needs of Humanity: the Materialization through the liberation of
mankind from the Priests and from all Religions;

- the Angel that feeds Elias is a Spirit of the Christian God, a Priest; in
fact his wings are studded with the numbers 3 and 10 (3 for the Holiest
Trinity with the 7 Attributes of God that, added up to 3, give 10); moreover,
he (the Angel) has the halo and the crown of thorns of Christ. His throat
has been cut, while behind his head are observed the capital letters CDL
= 450 (in Roman numerals), indicating the 450 Priests slaughtered by
Elias at Haifa. Blue-hatched, on the left shoulder, two arms lifting the
number 450, as if offering it in holocaust to the Deity-Lucifer, are
observed, represented (the n. 450) by the 13 red undulated sections, as if
they were swells of smoke flowing out of the flames, to the left, at the
bottom of which there appears a Phoenix, symbol of Lucifer.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


47


HlvV - Cjj 1

■ *


u^TI

r i' T ^


lMjL.

p.Jl , M ► i 1

1 1 i 1 T -


The Ritual

26 th degree of A.A. Scottish Rite

The Prince of Mercy


«The Candidate, to whom they at-
tached two wings to the shoulders,
symbol of the spirits, represents a
New demonic Spirit.

From the second heaven the Candi
date, having been fluttered in the air,
enters the third heaven, in the pre-
sence of the Prince of Darkness, of
the God-Fire, whom he must see “as
is”, “face-to-face”, as the Christian
will see good God.

He is shown the Truth that springs
from the well. That Truth is repre-
sented by a “Mason Sister in a tradi-
tional costume”, as is!

She is the Goddess of Reason.

At this point, the Candidate is left alone
with the “Truth” after giving him an
Arrow, vile symbol of the god Cupid.
The novel spirit of the Candidate is
introduced to

3rd Scottish Trinitary Mystery.

He has soared in the region of the
Reason that corresponds to the mate-
rial needs of Humanity».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 352-353).


M ult p cation of the loaves

(The M ason knows the

3 rd Scottish T ri nitary M ystery)


References to the ritual


- The Candidate indicates, with the 3 raised fingers, the 3 rd Trinitary Mys-
tery: the material Needs of Humanity: the Imposition upon the indivi-
dual, upon the family and upon the State of all that is Masonic, taking ad-
vantage of the material needs;

- The Dove carries the numbers 13 of Lucifer and 15 of Freemasonry,
which seem to have eclipsed the Cross; also the n. 10 of the curved lines
on the background seems to fade out into the horizon;

- the Candidate, who bears the signs of the n. 3 of the 3 triangles, and who
indicates with the fingers 3 times 5 = 15 of the “5-pointed Star” of Free-
masonry, is before this Mystery that contemplates the materialized hu-
manity (5 sheep, 11 people with children (= families), 7 dignitaries inclu-
ding the Priest wearing the tiara) that, with no more true Religion nor ref-
erences (do observe their expressionless and lifeless faces) find them-
selves under the direction of Freemasonry and of its God: Lucifer.


48


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


Emmaus

(The M ason knows the "two people" of Lucifer)


References to the ritual


- Jesus Christ with the two disciples of Emmaus, symbolizes the “secret
Master” of this 24 th degree who explains who the Gomel are: the 2
peoples of God-Lucifer with which the Candidate may speak outside
the Masonic Lodge;

- on the chest of the “secret Master” is written “Gomel”, in the Masonic
alphabet, and on his left shoulder appears the n. 7 of the Secret Master;

- the 26 small circles to the right in the background, indicate the 26 th
degree;

- the numbers 6 and 36 (6 x 6) indicate the 666; and the numbers 3, 5, 7,
9, 18 (bottom) indicate the Masonic people;

-the number 22 on the head of the person to the left; the number 12
bottom right, and, particularly, the 12 rays departing from the halo of
the “secret Master” indicate the 12 Tribes of Israel. This people, is
the people of the Jews.


The Ritual

26 th degree of A. A. Scottish Rite

The Prince of Mercy


«The new Spirit of this degree, having known
the 3 Scottish Trinitary Mysteries, is informed
of the “two peoples of God”.

The Password, entering the Lodge, is “Gomel”,
namely, “Peoples of God”, that is, “Peoples of
Lucifer”. To communicate outside the Lodge,
there are only two peoples: the Ghiblim and the
Gibeon; the two are the Gomel, the “peoples
of the God-Fire”.

The Ghiblim were a Phoenician people with
capital Byblos, famous for its cult of Adonis,
who was believed wounded by a wild boar in
Lebanon, whence the Adonis river that flows
through Byblos, has its source. The Egyptians,
every year, on the feast of Adonis, tossed a
head-shaped box they claimed to be the head of
Osiris in which was a letter for those of Byblos,
into the sea. That box, they said, would reach
Byblos unaided in 7 days.

Gibeon stood upon a height, as its name,
“Height of Iniquity”, suggests. Solomon tra-
veled there, at the onset of his reign, to sacrifice.
The Scripture reproached him for this: “Solomon
loved the Lord, walking in the statutes of his
father David, except that he sacrificed and
burned incense at the high places. He went to
Gibeon to sacrifice there”.

Gibeon was the capital of the Gibeonites, with
whom the Israelites concluded an alliance, and
then enslaved on account of their violence.
They remained always faithful to lsrael».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 353-354).


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


49


Thejewish Easter

(The M ason joi nes the "Court of Lucifer")


The cat

In this tile, appears a “sly cat” crouched down on the 4 th step. What does
this animal symbolize?

«The cat evokes the notion of primordial chaos, of primal matter non-fe-
cundated by the superior waters». «ln the Kabbalah, the cat, associated to
the serpent, indicates the “sin and abuse of the goods of this world”.
With this meaning, sometimes, it is portrayed at Christ’s feet».

«The cat represents the strength and nimbleness of the feline, which a
guardian deity puts at the service of man in order to help him to triumph
over his hidden enemies». «The cat is sometimes believed to be a servant
of Hell... hence, he is believed to be a sacred animal, which cannot be killed
if not toward religious ends and according to certain rites».

(“Dictionary of Symbols”, vol. I, pp. 485-486).


The Ritual

27 th degree of Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite

The Commander of the Temple


«The Candidate is welcomed amongst
the members of the Court of his infer-
nal majesty: he becomes his Courte-
san. The President is addressed as
Omnipotent and is wearing, as Jesus
Christ, a blue gown and a red cape; at
the tip of his string, there is a triangle.
He wears a crown of thorns on his
head.

The Candidate is brought into the room
blindfolded, to make him understand
that he is still under the yoke of pas-
sions! As an indication of that slavery,
image of political slavery, he is tied up,
placed upon a table, covered with a
mortuary drape, and carried in pro-
cession chanting a funeral prose.
Next, he is untied, to show him the dif-
ference between a slave and a free
man, and he is solemnly crowned.
Then, the Candidate vows to “always
obey the orders that will be transmit-
ted to him in a hierarchical way”.

The substitution of the existing govern-
ments with the power of the Order is
the aim of this 3 rd series of 1 1 degrees.
Freemasonry considers itself as the
secret executioner of the governments
and of the peoples. Jesus Christ,
I.N.R.I. who had assumed the title of
King of the Jews has been justly
condemned; the true King of the
Jews takes, here, his place, which
Jesus had usurped!


The Sign is this: to make a little sign
of the cross with the thumb of the
right hand.

In this degree that, with the next two,
represents the soul of the devil-pos-
sessed Man, the mother idea of the
Kabbalah is revealed through the
embroidery the partakers wear on the
collar of their apron.

The meaning of the collar is known: the
Teutonic Cross, sign of the quadruple
generation that produced the 4 worlds
- the perfection of the triple Phallus of
the Phoenicians - appears surrounded
by a golden laurel Crown. It is the
Phallus, the generating force that
opens all the treasures of nature.

Hence, one observes the Key embroi-
dered under the collar, naturally on the
apron, other form of the letter “G” (gen-
eration).

The Battery beats 3 times 9, that is,
27 knocks. They are divided into 2

times 12 and 1 time 3 knocks.

The “Great Supreme Trinity”, always
remaining at the apex, shines in a tri-
ple ideal light, whose supreme gen-
erating force, represented by the
mystic number 5 and of the “5-point-
ed Star”, spreads throughout the
universe».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 354-356).


The bull


In this tile also appears the figure
of a “bull”. With what meaning?
«The bull evokes the idea of might
and irresistible zest».

«The bull represents the celestial
gods on account of unflagging and
uncontainable fecundity... the
bull represents sexual energy».

«ln the Temple of Solomon, 12
bulls support the bronze sea, des-
tined to contain the lustral water: 3
look to the North; 3 look to the West;
3 look to the South; 3 to the East».
«The bull is always connected to the
Cult of the Great Mother: the
Moon... In Egypt, the deity of the
Moon was the “bull of the Stars”.
«ln Hebrew, the first letter of the
alphabet, alef, which means bull, is
the symbol of the Moon».

«Attributed to the solar deity Mithra,
the bull symbolizes the dead and
resuscitated god... ».

«ln the Mithriac cult of Cybel, the
bull was used for an initiation with
baptism of blood. The bull slaugh-
tered, its blood dripped onto the de-
vout who wished to benefit from it,
whom, through this bloody asper-
sion, was reborn for eternity, born
to a new life for eternity».

« Death is inseparable from life, and
the bull presents also a funereal
aspect. With the Egyptians, the
bull, holding a solar disc between
his horns, is at one time symbol of
fecundity and a funerary deity,
tied to Osiris (Lucifer) and to his
rebirths».

(“Dictionary of Symbols”, vol. II, pp.
477-483).


50


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


References to the ritual


The “Great Supreme Trinity”
and the “5-pointed Star”


In the tile, there exist characteristic lines and points: the
vertical line from the tip of the left thumb of the “Presi-
dent”, and which falls precisely onto the eye of the cat
(it is the Eye of Lucifer: sin, abuse of the goods of this
world, the serpent). The horizontal line that passes
through the eye, crosses the knee of the President and
of the Candidate. The horizontal line, which starts from
the navel of the President, meets the point of intersection
of the two lines, horizontal and vertical, on the shoulders
of the Candidate.

Connecting these 5 points one obtains a “5-pointed
Star”, perfect and supported by the left hand of the Pres-
ident, and resting on his left knee and on the left knee of
the Candidate; its vertical axis and the lower horizontal
line run through the eye of the cat.

The “upturned Triangle” of the blasphemous Masonic
“Holiest and Indivisible Trinity” stands out at the cen-
ter of the “5-pointed Star”, but the eye of the cat “sug-
gests” to speculate upon the meaning of the circle, at the
center of the Triangle: Lucifer: it is Lucifer that draws
his own Light from the Death of the Sacrifice of the
Lamb; Light which derives from the suppression of the
Sacrifice of Christ of the Cross, returning to Satan the
ancient power he had over men.

The 4 steps symbolize the 4 Worlds, namely, the Uni-
verse; hence the “5-pointed Star”, with its mystic n. 5,

propagates itself throughout the Universe”.


- The Court of Lucifer is symbolized by the n. 6;

- the President carries the halo of Christ, the crown of
thorns, the triangle at the tip of the string of his belt,
makes a sign of the cross (Tau) with the thumb of his
right hand;

- having condemned Christ, the President takes his
place sword in hand (Freemasonry executioner);

- Christ condemned is the upturned lamb with the cap-
tion INRI on its body (to be deciphered kabalistically),
carried onto the hands of the Candidate;

- “the mother idea of the Kabbalah”, the “Cult of the
Phallus”, is represented with the Teutonic Cross and
the Triple Phallus of the Phoenicians, on the back and
on the left shoulder of the Candidate;

- the bull represents the irresistible sexual energy;

- the cat, servant of Hell, indicates the passions to which
the Candidate has been subjected, but also the nim-
bleness and the strength to triumph over his enemies;

- the bull indicates the funeral to which the candidate is
subjected, and his resurrection to a new eternal life;

- the Candidate is “crowned” (plait with two cups);

- the Battery knocks: 3 times 9 are indicated by the 3
fingers of the courtesan n. 3 looking at the 9 studs of
the neighbor;

- the Battery knocks: 2 times 12 + 3, are represented by
the courtesan n. 4 indicating 2 + 3 with his fingers: the
courtesan n. 2 indicates 2 toward the bull that repre-
sents the 12 bulls of the Temple of Solomon: 3 for the
4 cardinal points.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


51


Pelican

(The M ason before the 6 degrees and before the
Mysteries of the highest degrees that allow him his
total incorporation to the "M istic Body" of Lucifer)


31 st degree


32 nd degree


33 rd degree


28 th degree


29 th degree


30 th degree


52


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


The Blasphemous
“Triple Trinity”


The deepest “Mystery”, revealed by the tile, is

the war on God, the erasing of the Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ on the Cross with the repla-
cement of Christ with Lucifer, and the repla-
cement of the Holiest Trinity with the blasphe-
mous Masonic “Triple Trinity”.

This “Mystery” appears, macroscopically, in
the large Cross at the center and in the three
circles: one at the center and the other two at
the top.

The smallest circle, top right, incomplete, and
within a triangle, indicates the 1 st Masonic
“Holy Trinity”.

The central circle at the bottom, with the lines
intersecting it to suggest the presence of a “6-
pointed Star”, with the presence of the 5 small
ones, in the two groups of 3 and 2, and that is,
the 1 st “Holy Trinity” that, divided into the 2
sexes, forms the “5-pointed Star”, and with the
central point, intersection of the axis, indicates
the 2 nd Masonic “Holy Trinity”.

The top left circle, with the odd head of the Pe-
lican, with the eye and the nasal hole nearly
mirror, suggesting the “upturned” triangle, with
the central point already seen, indicate the 3 rd
Masonic “Holy Trinity”.

In the lower part of the tile, there appears the n.
7: the “pointed cubic Stone” (red rectangle)
with the characteristic numbers 3, 5, and 7.

The 6 luminous green bodies, the 6 lines of the
caption, the 6 dark green identical bodies, at the
bottom, form 3 times 666, symbol of the war on
God.

It is the central “Mystery” of Freemasonry: the
erasing of the Sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross and His replacement with Lucifer, who
offers man his own “Redemption”!


The Tetragrammaton


The weapon to obtain the Erasing of the Sacri-
fice of Christ on the Cross is Masonic Ecu-
menism: symbolized by the Tetragrammaton,
namely, all the names of the Kaba-listic God-
Lucifer. The Tetragrammaton (or “Magic
Square”) has 9 points (vertexes and intersec-
tions) in which must be placed the 9 digits, from
1 to 9, in order to compose, in 8 directions, the
number 15 of the Kabalistic god.

The “square” and the 9 intersections are rep-
resented by the 4 rectangles that appear at the
base of the tile. The 9 digits are repre-sented in
two different manners: by 9 series of lines, abo-
ve the caption “Pie Pellicane...”, highlighted in
different colors, each identifying one of the 9 di-
gits.

The second manner of representing the 9 di-
gits is that of counting the “singularities” of the
caption “Pie Pellicane, lesu Domine”:

1 : the comma; 2: the accents; 3: Pie; 4: lesu; 5:
the 5 th letter “e” which appears 5 times; 6: Do-
mine; 7: the 7 points; 8: the 8 red lines; 9: Pelli-
cane.


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


53


The 8 Eagles


T he sculptor Mario Rossello
was asked to carve, in the
church-yard, “the flight of ei-
ght eaglets toward the Church”».

«The sculpted eagles are eight because
eight is the number indicative of Easter».
In the “Dictionary of Symbols”, we
read: «The symbolism of the eagle in-
volves also a evil aspect; the eagle is
the cruel bird of prey, the captor. Some-
times, being associated to the various
aspects of imperial power is also symbol
of pride and oppression. It is the per-
version of its own power».

Reads Troisi’s “Masonic Dictionary”,
at the call “eagle”: «in Dante’s poem the
references to the eagle are frequent,
such as, for example, as representative
of the Roman emperors who perse-
cuted the Church». And again: «ln Free-
masonry, the symbol of the eagle ap-
pears in the High Degrees starting
from the 30 th ... ».

In fact, the symbol of a two-headed
eagle appears in the 30 th degree; in the
32 nd , there appear two two-headed
eagles, and in the 33 rd degree there is

one two-headed eagle only: total
heads = total eagles : eight.

Pure coincidence? It seems not!


Observing the disposition of these 8 ea-
gles, one observes that they are placed
upon two different levels and in three
positions, one next to the other.
Numbering the eagles, of the bottom left
space, attributing the values from 1 to 3,
forming a triangle; then re-numbering,
with 1 and 2 , the two eagles in the two
bottom spaces adjacent to the previous
one; and from 1 to 3 the eagles at the
top, beginning from the left, one obtains
the key to discover that these eagles
belong in fact to the three mentioned
Masonic degrees.

In fact, the first group of 3, bottom left, in-
dicates 30 = 30 th degree; remaining at
the same level, and adding the 2 other
eagles, one obtains 32 = 32 nd degree;
adding to 30, the 3 eagles of the higher
level, one obtains 30 + 3 = 33 = 33 rd de-
gree. Moreover, from the heraldic em-
blems of these degrees, illustrated in the
following page, one observes that the ea-
gle with the raised wings is that of the
33 rd degree.

In fact, the two eagles with the raised
wings correspond to the “third”, amidst a
group of three, and to the “third” from
the left, of the higher level: 3 + 3 = 33 rd
degree.


54


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


33 rd degree: “The Man King”

«The degree teaches that one must destroy every Religion and
every Authority. The passwords are: “Ordo ab Chao”, motto of Lu-
cifer, and “Deus Meumque Jus” (D.M.I.), motto of the High Initiates.
Lucifer created moral Chaos with his rebellion against God, and the
Order he has brought about is the organization of Evil and the
recruitment of all those whom he has perverted in order to propagate
his revolt and his hatred against God.

The D.M.I motto of the High Initiates means, instead:

- Destruction of the Catholic Church, of Antimasonism and of all
that which Materialization does not reach;

- Materialization of the Consciences, of the State, of Teaching,
through disorder, corruption, ambition;

- Imposition of the Masonic doctrine on the Family, on the Nation,
on Humanity, through boldness, cunning, violence.

In this manner the hope of the fallen Synagogue will be effected;
only thus, will Lucifer see his own ambition satisfied!».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 386-387).


32“ d degree: “Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret”


«This is the Jewish degree par excellence: that of the Exile: sorrow,
hatred, rage! But the exile of Israel is but an image of the exile of Lu-
cifer. The general idea of this degree is the march toward the Holy
Land to reconquer it and rebuild the Temple. It is the political unifi-
cation of the World, through religious unification**.

The hatred is directed toward the Church of Christ that must be an-
nihilated, and the weapon used is the Great Pantheistic Lie of the
eternal transformation of the universe, from which derives the self-
deification of man and the edification of a New Tower of Babel.

«To destroy Christianity... we feign we are the only ones to have
the true Religion... This means to deliver mankind from every re-
ligion is but a pious fraud».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 372-384).


30 th degree: “Knight Kadosch”


«The Mason, in this degree plunges himself into an all out war
against God! He is, however, warned that no one rises to this degree
without performing a sacrifice to the object of his “Cult”.

After kneeling and lowering his banner before the image of Lucifer,
the “Baphomet”, he offers him the sacrifice of the scented incense,
and then addresses this prayer to him: “O omnipotent Sapience,
object of our adoration; it is you in this moment we invoke. Supreme
cause of the Universe; eternal Reason, Light of the spirit, Law of the
heart, how august and holy your sublime cult!...”.

The climax of the Satanic hatred against God is well expressed by
the symbolic gesture of the Knights Kadosh: they wield the dagger
against heaven, chanting their canticle, and terminate by repeating
their entreaty to Lucifer: “Holy God, Vindicator!” and their chal-
lenge to God: “Revenge, Adonai!”».

(Meurin, cited work, pp. 361-366).


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


55


he stone cross, scale
of the destinies of the
world”, thus introduced
in book “Pietre di bellezza e di santita”,
Stones of Beauty and of Sanctity, of the
Capuchin Friars, is a cross located at
the end of the main pedestrian lane.

«The great glorious cross without cru-
cifix, yet scale of the destinies of the
world, designed by the same architect
Renzo Piano... is over 40 meters high,
with a variable cross-section of 2.50 x

2.50 m. at the base up to 0.40 x 0.40 m.
at the top. In the upper part are inserted
two horizontal arms, narrowing outward,

4.50 m in length. It is composed of 65
large cubic stone blocks all different
from each other».


The Capuchin Friars assure us that «...
The great cross required careful preli-
minary design studies and the draf-
ting of a manual in order to ensure the
quality of executions
The work: “La chiesa di Padre Pio a
San Giovanni Rotondo”, The church of
St. Padre Pio at San Giovanni Rotondo,
by Maurizio Oddo, points out to us that
«Not satisfied with so much toil, Renzo
Piano and Mons. Valenziano, liturgical
consultant, thought of erecting the great
cross, 40 meters high with 10 m wide
arms, built entirely in stone with over-
laying and pre-compressed elements,
completing this unprecedented works
Oddo, without wasting time in descrip-
tions about the great cross, gives us a
precious present: at page 86 and 87, he


sterious

2ROSS


provides the drawings of the project,
complete with front and side view of the
great stone cross.

Something precise, at last!

The drawings are so reduced in scale,
that the elevations are hardly readable,
and some are unreadable altogether.
With the magnifying glass, with computer
graphics magnification and plenty of pa-
tience, one can finally obtain some da-
ta... about the “careful preliminary de-
sign studies”:

- base square: side 250 cm;

- height of the 54 vertical “stones”: 72 cm;

- height of stone at arms crossing: 80 cm;

- total height of cross = 3,968 cm;

- upper side 54 th stone at vertex = 42 cm;

- n. of vertical “stones” = 55;

- n. of “stone” in each arm = 5;

- n. of stones of upper arm = 7;

- arms width at upper point = 4.5 m;

- arms width between upper point-axis
= 4.86 m;

- arms width between lower point-axis

= 4.97 m;

- arms total width = 9.94 m.


Leaving aside the discordances with the
data already viewed, we felt we were in a
dream nonetheless... but the dream was
short-lived: observing the crystal-clear
photograph of the upper part of the cross,
we discovered that the number of the
“stones” of the side arms and of the
upper one were different from those of
the project: 7 instead of 5, for the side
ones; 8 instead of 7, for the upper arm!

So long! cross height; so long! arms
height. . . We realized it was no longer a mat-
ter of approximation or inability... there
had to be a mystery! And the presence
of mysteries in technical matters, relative
to the construction of a cross, after “care-
ful preliminary design studies and the
drafting of a manual in order to ensure
the quality of execution”, has aroused
our curiosity to the point that we decided
to proceed in another manner: first, to
discover the mystery; then, to identify the
actual dimensions of this mysterious
cross!


56


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


The upper part of the 40 m cross, viewed from the South. /Is the photograph clearly shows, the “stones” used in the two side arms
are 7 and not 5, as per design; whereas those used in the upper arm are 8 and not 7, as indicated in the project blueprints.


Observing the photo of the upper part of
the cross, one observes that the lines of
the stones of the two side arms are not
parallel, but converging. Where do they
converge? To a 50 meter elevation!

The “Dictionary of Symbols” (p. 89)
says: «50 is the number of Redemp-
tions With what already dug up, we
were certain it was not about the Re-
demption of Christ, but that of Lucifer!
We thought at once that 50, and that is,
5, would also indicate a “5-pointed
Star”.

The first verification was that of the 2 an-
gles at the vertex of the square base
pyramid of the vertical column; the result:
3°. The sum of the two angles: 3 ° + 3 ° =
33, the degrees of the Freemasonry of
the A.A.S.R.

Knowing that the vertical stones were no
longer 55, but 56 (with the upper arm of 8
stones), with all the stones of height 72,
less the cross stone of the two arms
with a height of 80 cm, we calculated the
height of the cross: 40.40 meters.

The “Dictionary of Symbols” says: «40 is
the number of the wait, of repentance,
of the trial of the punishment. ..», preci-
sely that which is required for a “Re-
demption”.

Hence the height of each stone was con-


firmed to be 72 and 80 cm, whereas the
side of the square of the 56 th stone, the
last one at the top, was marked on the
project: 42 cm.

The numbers 72 and 42 are not new to
us: they both indicate 666: 72 = 66 + 6 =
666; whereas 42 = 6x6 + 6 = 666; besi-
des, 72, we had seen, is the number ex-
pressing Masonic ecumenism, while 42
were the 42 Demons, the “Lords of the
Truth” and the “Judges of the dead” of
Osiris, the “Great Deity of hell”, whose
“Eye in the triangle” indicates Lucifer.
Now, all the stones of the vertical column
are truncated square-base pyramids con-
verging to elevation 50 m, hence they are
“pointed cubic stones”, and represent
the number 7, symbol of the “Master”,
the “perfect stone”, the “true man”, the
“divinized man” of Freemasonry.

One could object that, among all the
stones of the cross, there is not a single
cube; in addition, they are all different
from one another. The “perfection”, that
is, the “cubic” shape of all these stones,
however, is not represented by their ac-
tual dimensions, but by the number 666,
the “spiritual” “perfect cube” of the
Antichrist: they are the “stones of the
Antichrist”!

The 48 th stone, crossing point of the two


arms, from graphical verifications has
resulted to have the side of its upper
square of 72 cm. The difficulties, howe-
ver, have aroused in defining the dimen-
sions of the 14 stones of the two side
arms, in order to verify their attribute of
“perfect” cubic stones.

The three project elevations of the width
of the two arms lost their reliability for the
reason that the stones are no longer 5,
but 7. Always through graphical verifica-
tions on photographs, we found the solu-
tion: all 14 stones have a width of 66 cm,
with angles of vertical conicity of 9° and
horizontal angulation of 6°, whereas the
outward narrowing angle of the two arms
is of 4° on either side; all these angles
correspond to those reported in the de-
tailed drawings of the project.

As detailed in the boxes of the photo-
graph above, we observe that not all the
stones have the same “valence” of im-
piety”: they are all worth 1 time 666, with
the exception of the 48 th which is worth 2
times 666; the 56 th and the 14 of the side
arms, instead, are worth 3 times 666.

The “stones” used, overall, are 70, while
the total of the 666 is 101.

What do the numbers 7 and 70 character-
izing the symbology of the “stones”,
mean?


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


57


o


Elevation 5,000 cm


Elevation 3,464 cm


Construction of the “5-pointed Star” and of the center of the “Upturned Triangle".


Reads the “Dictionary of Symbols”:

«7 is the number of the perfect man, that
is, of the perfectly accomplished man...
The number 7 indicates the totality...
principally on the spiritual level.
According to the Talmud, the Jews saw
in the number 7 also the symbol of hu-
man entirety...

Chapter 10 of Genesis enumerates 70
peoples of the earth that were scatte-
red after the construction of the Tower of
Babel... the number 70, as a multiple of
7, indicates the idea of entirety...* 1 .

Are these 70 “stones”, each of which, in
the number 7, represent the “divinized
man” of the Lodges, and representing
the entire humanity, perhaps the 70
peoples (the entire humanity) scattered
by God which are reunited by Freema-
sonry to rebuild, in hatred to God, a “New
Tower of Babel”?

Does the evocative number 5, of eleva-
tion 50, symbolizes a “5-pointed Star”?
Yes! The three points A, B, O, of which
we know elevations and distances, con-
sti- tutes the triangle that defines in an
univocal manner a “5-pointed Star” with
side measuring AO. Tracing the sides AD
and BC with equal length and angles of
36° and 144°, one obtains the Star with
center in point L.

Now, tracing a circle with center in L
and radius such as to graze elevation
40.40 m of the summit of the stone cross,


one finds that such a radius is of 108 cm,
which, kabalistically, means 1 +8 = 18 =
666 and 108 = 6 x 666, in total: 7 times
the “Mark of the Beast”, divided into

1 + 6 .

Reads the “Dictionary of Symbols” (p.

375): «An Hindu tradition attributes to the
Sun 7 rays: 6 corresponding to the direc-
tions of space, the 7 th corresponding to

the center.. .».

On the stone cross, we had 70 “perfect
stones” totalizing 101 times 666 to
which, now, is added another “stone”
worth 7 times 666, with a total of 108
times 666, the same number of the ra-
dius of the central circle to the “uptur-
ned Triangle”, symbol of the Masonic
“Holiest and Indivisible Trinity”.

What does that circle, then, represent?

It is the All-seeing Eye of Lucifer in-
side the Triangle!

One curiosity: speaking of the occult
meanings of the Meditation Room at the
UN, Spenser writes: «on February 16,
1953, the “Group of Friends of the
Meditation Room at the UN” (1,500
members), presented the “Guest Books”
of the Room, where everyone could enter
his name, address, and practiced religion.
Between October and June of 1963, circa
4 million people visited the Meditation
Room, and over 750,000 of these signed
108 of these books, each containing
7,000 names» 2 .


Let us continue the construction of the
stone cross: let us trace a straight hori-
zontal line at elevation 5,000 cm (point O)
and two more at 60° and 120° passing
through C and D; with center always in L,
let us construct the “6-pointed Star”, re-
produced in full at page 57. The construc-
tion is now complete: they are the 1 st , 2 nd
and 3 rd Masonic “Holy Trinity”, the very
construction already seen on the Taber-
nacle. Is it, indeed, the same one?

The meaning appears to be different: the
“Triple Trinity” on the Tabernacle regard-
ed the “Man Redemption” of the single
individual; now, instead, this “Redemp-
tion” of Lucifer is extended to all the 70
peoples representing the entire divini-
zed humanity that, organized by Lucifer,
throws itself against God, with the re-
newed impiety of willing to rebuild the
Temple of the “New Tower of Babel”.
The “stone cross” represents another
particularity as well: it exposes Freema-
sonry’s worldwide hierarchical structure:
the side of 25 dm of the 1 st stone, indi-
cates the Scottish Rite of Perfection,
whence the Freemasonry of the
A.A.S.R. was born in 1801 (first 33
stones); the 34 th “stone”, indicates the
“New Reformed Palladian Rite”, foun-
ded by Giuseppe Mazzini and Albert
Pike in 1870; the 22 stones, from the
35 th to the 56 th , indicate the High Jewish
Freemasonry of the B’nai B’rith, whose
symbol is a “Menorah”.

The 7 “stones” of the side arms have
the particularity of representing, together
with the 48 th at the center, 7 Tetragram-
maton:

- 48 th : h = 80, upper sides = 72 x 72;

- each of the 7 stones of each arm has
the following angles: 2 of 9° intersecting
with one of 6°, forming 4 points of inter-
section of value 15. Taking two symme-
trical stones with respect to the central
one, one obtains the 8 numbers 15 of the
Tetragrammaton. Each side block, be-
sides, contains the numbers 4 and 8; in
fact, the outward narrowing angles of the
arms are of 4° on either side.

What do these “stones” whose valence
of impiety is 3 times 666, symbolize?
Using the lines of convergence on the
point of elevation 50 m, intersecting them
with an horizontal straight line at eleva-
tion 40.40 m, one obtains 7 sectors, on
either side, plus the central one of the
stone cross.

Taking the central sector and the 3 side
ones of odd numbers 7, 5, 3, and joining
them with the transversal arm of the
cross, one obtains an immense “Meno-
rah”, nearly identical, in the shape, to
that which symbolizes the High Jewish
Freemasonry of the B’nai B’rith (see
photograph at p. 56).

The representation of this “Tower of Ba-
bel” is completed by the “Sun of Luci-
fer” with “7 times 18 rays”, numbers
that symbolize the “infinite totality of
heavenly perfection”... Satanic, that is!


1 J. Chevalier, A. Gheerbrant, “Dictionary of
Symbols”, pp. 373-380.

2 R.K. Spenser, cited work, p. 1 1 .


58


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


TheTemple
of the "Ecumenical
Counter-Church"
of the Antichrist

Reads the “Dictionary of Symbols”:
«40 marks the fulfillment of a cycle,
which must not lead, however, to a mere
repetition, but to a radical change, to a
passage to an order of action and life».
And again: «40 is the number of the
waiting, of the trial, of the preparation,
of repentance, of punishment” 1 .

There come to mind the words of the fa-
mous Jewish professor Jean Izoulet
(theorist creator of the UN), who in his
work “Paris capitale des religions, ou
la mission d’lsralel”, wrote: «Christian-
ity is a mosaic unconsciously camou-
flaged for use in the pagan world and
which, in that manner, has conquered to
Israel 650 millions souls. Today, the
disguise disappears, and Moses ap-
pears as the one and only chief of the
fundamental religion; as the one and
only chief of the civic and scientific
religion; as the one and only chief, at
last, of the secular religion» 2 .

The Jewish Grand Master B. Cremieux,
speaking of the fusion of the various
world religions under the high Jewish
inspiration, said: «the times are come
when... the most wonderful of Temples, a
Temple whose stones are alive and
endowed with thought, raises to wel-
come... under the flag more and more
sacred of reason and of philosophy, all
that mankind holds in its noble breast, of
hostile to mystery and ignorance, of
worthy of the true sons of light and free-
dom. This Temple will host the Hebrew
religion, which survived everything...
a religion that is vast and worthy of
the entire humanity» 3 .

Jean Izoulet, in the same quoted work,
went on to write: «The idea of progres-
sive unification of the globe is an idea
on the go. It is bound to the idea of re-
ligious unification since Religion is the
very essence, as it were, the double,
triple, fourth, fifth essence of politics.
One must come to the sound and holy
secularization of our Western churches,
that is, to the world Religion that will
found the Mystic Unity and, conse-
quently, also the political Unity of


1 Cfr. “Dizionario dei simboli”, Dictionary of
Symbols, Ed. Dizionari Rizzoli, vol. II, under
the call “ 4 ”, p. 266.

2 Cfr. Jean Izoulet, “Paris capitale des reli-
gions, ou la mission d’lsralel”, Ed. Albin Mi-
chel, Paris 1926, p. 184.

3 Cfr. “Libertaire” of New York, 1902, Di 402.


The “stone cross” is a representation of the “Temple of Solomon”, or “Mason-
ic Temple”, the Temple the Jewish Grand Master B. Cremieux so described:
«The times are come when this Temple... the most wonderful of Temples, a Tem-
ple whose stones are alive and endowed with thought, raises to welcome...
under the flag more and more sacred of reason and of philosophy, all that
mankind holds in its noble breast, of hostile to mystery and ignorance, of
worthy of the true sons of light and freedom. This Temple will host the Hebrew
religion, which survived everything... a religion that is vast and worthy of
the entire humanity».

Do the 8 bells with the 9 columns housing them indicate, perhaps, that the sound
of the bells of Masonic ecumenism must resonate in the 8 directions of the “Ma-
gic Square”? And does the product 8 x 9 = 72 indicate, perhaps, that this sound
expresses all of the 72 names of the Kabalistic God-Lucifer?


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


59


Above: a “Menorah” in a Synagogue. The gigantic “Menorah” which is obtained by the symbolic elaboration of the 40 m

Below: the “ Menorah ” of the symbol of the High Jewish Free- high cross, as by extracting from the overall symbology only the portion above the

masonry of the B’nai B’rith. 34 th block, which represent the Jewish Freemasonry.


mankind. And the spiritual and tempo-
ral hegemony of Humanity will lawfully
belong to that race... and to its Reli-
gion, the most authentically and sub-
stantially divine.. .» 4 .

Here you have the “UPTURNED TRIAN-
GLE” of the Masonic and Satanic ‘HO-
LIEST AND INDIVISIBLE TRINITY”
towering on top of the stone Cross 40.40
meters high: Lucifer, the self-styled “infi-
nite Sun” flanked by the two crowned
heads of the eagle: the Great Patriarch
of the World, or Director of Spiritual
power, and the Great Emperor of the
World, or Director of temporal Power.
Here you have Lucifer who, after the


declaration of war on God, launched by
Jewish Freemasonry, symbolized by the
3 times 666 of the 56 th stone of the Tem-
ple, launches on God the challenge of his
blasphemous “Triple Trinity”, symbol-
ized by the 9 times 666 emanating from
the solar Center, from Hebraism (“6-
pointed Star”) and from Freemasonry
(“5-pointed Star”), completely incorpo-
rated into the “mystic Body of Lucifer”
and elevated to the vertex of the Temple
of the Ecumenical Counter-church of
the Antichrist!

The Masonic “dogma” of fighting the
supernatural, namely, God, in the Three
Persons of the Father, of the Son, and


of the Holy Spirit, and the replacement
of Jesus Christ with Lucifer on the
Cross of Redemption, calls for the an-
nihilation of the “Church of Christ”,
and the weapon used is Masonic Ecu-
menism.

Only thus will Satan be able to offer his

Redemption: when «men will receive
the true light, through the universal
manifestation of the pure doctrine of
Lucifer, finally revealed to the public
eye»!


4 Cfr. Jean Izoulet, cited work, pp. 50-52.


60


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


the TEMPLE

OFTHE "ECUMENICAL COUNTER-CHURCH"

OFTHE ANTICHRIST


50 is the symbol of Redemption


Lucifer is «the “pointed cubic stone” tossed by Jehovah into the
abyss to create the world ».

Lucifer wants to replace Christ on the Cross, and offer man
his “Redemption”: freedom from sin, and has founded his
Church (Freemasonry) to incite man to rebellion against
God, to get rid of God, replace God, fight God.

Freemasonry obtains this by fighting Virtue, Morals, and
Catholic Authority in the world and by replacing the
Kingdom of God of the Catholic Church with the King-
dom of Satan of Freemasonry.


‘Infinite Sun” of Lucifer.


Lucifer wants the “Cult of Lucifer” in the public view, and Univer-
sal Freemasonry’s Pontiff Pike, who belonged to its “Holiest and
Indivisible Trinity”, proclaimed this; but that will not be possi-
ble until when the Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross will have
been completely erased: that is the task entrusted to the
18 th degree of the Rose Croix. Moreover, 18 is the “Mark
of the Beast” 666 and of the Antichrist, but it also sym-
bolizes (Satanic) “heavenly Perfection”, whereas 7 is
the number of totality. Here is the reason of the 7 times
18 rays around the “Infinite Sun” of Lucifer!


3 rd “Trinity”: “Holiest and Invisi-
ble Trinity”: “upturned Triangle
with the “Central Point”.

2 nd “Trinity”: “6-pointed Star”,
“5-pointed Star” and the “Cen-
tral Point”.

1 st “Trinity”: base “Triangle”
(green) of the “5-pointed Star”.


The “5-pointed Star”
is the perfect image of the
DIVINIZED HUMANITY.

The “base Triangle”

(green) is the image of
the DIVINIZED MATTER.


The universal axis: in this
geometry, the axis is that of the
“5 and 6-pointed Star”: the truth
communicated to man by Lucifer
s the “divinization of Humanity,
of Creation and of the Matter”,
with Lucifer at the Center.

The destruction of Catholic Authority.
It is the “Cult of Lucifer”.

It is the 3 rd temptation of Christ
in the desert: “power”.

It is “man fighting God”.

It is the aim of the 3 rd series
of the 11 degrees of
the A.A.S.R..


Lucifer replaces Christ as King of the Universe!


40.40 m: it is the symbol of waiting,
trial, and punishment.

Menorah: symbol of the B’nai B’rith.

High Jewish Freemasonry of the B’nai B’rith.

34 th stone: “New Reformed Palladian Rite”.

33 degrees: “Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite” (A.A.S.R.)

25 degrees of the “Scottish Rite of Perfection” whence the
A.A.S.R. was born with the addition of the 8 degrees of the
Order of the Illuminati of Bavaria.

The 14 stones of the two side arms are always “pointed cubic
stones”, as they converge to the vertex of 50 m, and have:
Length = 66 + 6° (arm’s lower angle) = 666
2 side angles of 9° = 2 x (9 = 1 + 8 = 18 = 666) = 2 x 666

The height 72 of the stones expresses the number of the

Antichrist 666.

The two angles at the vertex (50 m) of 3° of each stone indicate
33, namely, the Freemasonry of the A.A.S.R.

The height of the 54 “perfect stones” of the column of the
cross, of 72 cm, expresses the 72 Names of the Kabalistic
name of God (namely, of Lucifer) in the ecumenical reunion
of all the religions of the earth.

The “New Tower of Babel”

«Chapter 10 of Genesis enumerates 70 peoples of the earth that
were scattered after the construction of the Tower of Babel ».
Masonic Hebraism intends to reunite these 70 peoples (there
are 70 stones in the cross) in order to build the “Temple of the
Ecumenical Counter-church of the Antichrist”, which is the
“New Tower of Babel”.

The 1 st stone has the side of the base square of 25 dm.


► \/

^ 33

32

31

30

29

28

27

26

25

24

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

15

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

KM


The central circle of radius 108
and the two Stars represent
9 times 666 (the Triple Trinity)

108 = 1 + 8 = 18 = 1 x666
108 = 6x 18 =6x666

6-pointed Star = 1 x 666
5-pointed Star = 1 x 666

Total = 9 times 666


The “6-pointed Star”
is the perfect image of
DIVINIZED CREATION.

The number 666 of the cross:

54 stones: 1 x 666 = 54 x 666
48 th stone: 2x666 = 2x666
56 th stone: 3 x 666 = 3 x 666
14 side st.: 3 x 666 = 42 x 666
Radius circle = 108 = 6 x 666
Center circle = 108 = lx 666

Total = 108 times 666


56 th stone: 5 + 6 = 11 = Jewish Freemasonry

3°+3°=33 = Freemasonry of the A. A. Scottish Rite

Height: 72 = 66 + 6 = 666

Upper sides: 42 x 42 = 2 (6 x 6 + 6) = 2 x 666

Total: 3 x 666 (The Masonic Hebraism declares war on God).

The 48 th central stone with the two side arms of 7 stones each,
form 7 Tetragrammaton, or 7 “Magic Squares”:

The square is that of side 72 x 72 of the 48 th stone
The 8 directions are expressed by the height 80 of the 48 th stone;
The 8 n. 15 for each “Square”, are obtained as sum of the 2 side
angles of 9° with the lower angle of 6° of each side stone, which
form 4 intersections of 9 + 6 = 15.

48 th stone: Upper sides 72 x 72 = 2 (66 + 6) = 2 x 666

The sides 72 x 72 and the height = 80 indicate the Tetragrammaton.

72 = 7 + 2 = 9 9x8 = 72 2x72 = 2x(66 + 6) = 2x 666.

The stones used to build this Temple are the 70 “pointed cubic
stones”, each represented by the n. 7, which is the number of the
“Master”, the “perfect man”, the “perfect Stone”.

The “perfection”, the “cubic” shape of all these stones, notwith-
standing their diversity, is represented by the number 666.

The stones, therefore, are not “the angle stone discarded by the
constructors”, that is, Jesus Christ, but precisely the opposite:
the Antichrist!


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


61


The 33 DEG REES


of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite


«The true division of the 33 degrees into 3 series of 11, is only found in the most secret
instructions, outside the 33 degrees, and in the symbols, under which the true Masonic
secrets are “impenetrably hidden”» 1 . One of these documents is the “Secret Instruction
given to general Giuseppe Garibaldi” on the occasion of his promotion to Chief of Free-
masonry. This document, one of the vividest lights ever to emerge from the darkness of
Freemasonry, with all the Authority of the Hidden Chiefs of Freemasonry, exposes, in a
clear and unequivocal manner, the real meaning of the subdivisions of the 33 degrees of
the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite, into the three series of eleven. 2


H ere is an excerpt of the docu-
ment:

«(...) in our Order, no degree reveals
completely the Truth; it merely makes
less thick the veil that hides it from the
prying gaze. To us, invested with the
supreme power, and to us only, does it
unveil it entirely, and, by flooding our in-
tel- ligence, our spirit and our heart, it
makes us know, see and hear that:

Man is, at one time, God, Pontiff and
King of himself. (...).

Hence Freemasonry, perfect synthe-
sis of all that is human, is God, Pon-
tiff and King of Humanity; (...)

As for us, grand chiefs, we form the
Holy Battalion of the Sublime Patri-
arch, whom, in turn, is God, Pontiff
and King of Freemasonry.

Here, Brother, is the third triangle,
the third triple truth that will give
your intelligence, your mind and
your heart the ineffable happiness of
the absolute possession of the Truth
without veils! The entire Organiza-
tion, functioning and teaching of the
Order, appears now to your eyes,

Brother, beaming with clar-ity, and you
see, you comprehend that all our teaching finds its fulfillment in
this: to restore the triumph of our Virtue, of our Morality and
of our Authority throughout the whole of Mankind.

For that, our degrees have a triple classification, depending on
whether they are called to fight that which our impla- cable ad-
versaries, our mortal enemies, our infamous persecutors, the
clerical, dare call: their Virtue, their Morals and their Authority.

In order to fight their abject Virtue, we have the degrees: 1 st ,
Apprentice; 2 nd , Fellow; 3 rd , Master; 4 th , Secret Master; 5 th ,


Perfect Master; 6 th , Intimate Secre-
tary; 7 th , Provost and Judge; 8 th , In-
tendant of the Building; 9 th , Elect of
the Nine; 10 th , Elect of the Fifteen;
11 th , Elect of the Twelve; which allows
us to lead a profane from the unaware-
ness of the “Apprentice” up to the mis-
sion of “Elect of the Twelve”, for the
defense of Masonic virtue, for the cru-
sade of Man, God of himself (...).

In order to fight their foul Morals, we
have the degrees: 12 th , Grand Master
Architect; 13 th , Royal Arch of Solo-
mon; 14 th , Grand Elect Perfect and
Sub-lime Mason; 15 th , Knight of the
East; 16 th , Prince of Jerusalem; 17 th ,
Knight of the East and West; 18 th , Kni-
ght Rose Croix; 19 th , Grand Pontiff;
20 th , Master ad Vitam; 21 st , Patriarch
Noachite; 22 nd , Prince of Libanus (...).

In order to fight their guilty Authority,
we have the degrees: 23 rd , Chief of the
Tabernacle; 24 th , Prince of the Taber-
nacle; 25 th , Knight of the Brazen Ser-
pent; 26 th , Prince of Mercy; 27 th , Com-
mander of the Temple; 28 th , Knight of
the Sun; 29 th , Knight of St. Andrew; 30 th , Knight Kadosh;
31 st , Inspector Inquisitor Commander; 32 nd , Sublime Prince
of the Royal Secret; 33 rd , Grand inspector General (...).

The clerical, infamous assassins of humanity, oppose, you
see it, Brother, to our Virtue, to our Morals, to our Author-ity,
their Property, their Religion and their Law; and these are th-
ree mortal enemies of Freemasonry which you will fight
from this time forth, as army commander (...).

Neither the Law, nor Property, nor Religion can thus impose


Giuseppe Garibaldi with the 33d degree of A. A. S.R.


1 Leone Meurin, cited work, p. 261. («AII of our Masonic secrets are
impenetrably hidden under the symbols®, ref. Paolo Rosen, “II Nemi-
co sociale”, The Social Enemy , p. 297).

2 The “Secret Instruction” was published by Paolo Rosen in his


book, “II Nemico sociale”, The Social Enemy, and by Mons. Leone
Meurin in his work, “La Framassoneria: sinagoga di Satana”, Free-
masonry: Synagogue of Satan, Siena, 1895, pp. 261-266.


62


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


themselves to man; and because
they annihilate him, depriving him of
his most precious rights, they are as-
sassins of which we vowed to draw
terrible revenge; they are enemies
on which we have sworn a relent-
less war, a war to the death!

Of these three infamous enemies, it is
Religion that must be the constant
thought of your assaults; for a peo-
ple has never survived his Religion,
and because, by killing Religion, we
shall have in our hands Law and
Property; because by establishing,
over the cadavers of these assas-
sins, the Masonic Religion, the Ma-
sonic Law, the Masonic Property,
we shall have regenerated Society
(■■■)■

As our God is neither substance,
nor body, nor soul, nor creator, nor
father, nor word, nor love, nor para-
cletus, nor redeemer, and nothing,
we have submitted the Church to
the secular power and upturned the
temporal power of the Pope, waiting
for the disruption of his spiritual
power.

Because we are the builders of the
new Temple of the happiness of
Mankind, and because in order to
build it, it is necessary to commence
from demolition, from the destruction
of the current social State, we have
suppressed religious teaching; we
have suppressed the right of the
peoples.

After having overthrown the tempo-
ral power of Pope, of our infamous
and mortal enemy (...) our Supreme
Chief will reign alone over the
world, and, sitting on the steps of
its throne, Freemasonry will share
with him Omnipotence!...

Grand and dazzling it is this supreme
aim that we have shown to you, but
great and patient are the works and
toils that are nec-essary to obtain it.

Today, as you seat among the Grand Masters, your works must
increase in intensity, and to better point out to you their tenden-
cies, assuring at one time their success and their triumph, we will
clearly outline to you the Great Light of the supreme initiation:
You are to yourself God, Pontiff and King. Your reason is
the sole rule of Truth, the sole key to science and politics.
Your appetites and your instincts are the sole rule of Good,
the sole key of progress and happiness.


EQUALITY, the omnipotent level
through which we transformed
the world, means:

- Equality of properties, for man’
rights of on the common earth, as a
citizen of one and the same world,
as the son of one and the same mo-
ther, are more ancient and more
sacred of all the contracts and all
the customs, and, as a consequence,
these rights must be shattered,
these customs must be abrogated;

- Equality of fortunes, with the pro-
portioned equilibrium of salaries,
with the complete and radical aboli-
tion of inheritance rights, with the
expropriation of all financial Compa-
nies, with the appropriation to the
national solidarity of each people, of
banks, channels, transports, insur-
ances and mines;

- Equality of individuals, through
solidarity, through the equal enjoy-
ment for each to one's own solidari-
tarian production.

It is through Equality, as a lever,
and human appetites, as a pivot
point that we will wipe out forever
the Silver Aristocracy, implacable
executioner of mankind.

BROTHERHOOD, the omnipotent
promise with which we esta-
blished our power, means:

- Brotherhood in Freemasonry, to
build a State within the State, with
means and functioning independent
of the State, unbeknownst to the
State;

- Brotherhood in Freemasonry, to
build a State superior to the State,
with a Unity, a cosmo- politism, a
universality that make it (Freema-
sonry) superior, leader of the State;

- Brotherhood in Freemasonry, to
build a State against the State (...);

It is through Brotherhood, as a le-
ver, and human hatreds, as a pivot point that we will wipe
out forever Parasitism and armed Repression, these pla-
gues as yet unchecked, these fierce bugbears of mankind.

Brother, here is the term of your instruction as Chief of Free-
masonry. And now, take with us the Supreme Oath:

- I vow to have no homeland other than the Universal
Homeland.


11 + 11 + 11=33 ( 3 + 3 ) = 6

11 + 11 + 11 s 33 (3 + 3} = a

11+11+11^33 (3 +3) -6

666

The “5-pointed Star”, formed by the three
triangles symbolizing the self-divinization of
Humanity, of Freemasonry and the Masonic
Leadership, in its numerical composition ex-
presses, as sum of the three series of 11 de-
grees of each triangle, the number of the
‘‘Mark of the Beast” 666.


You must comprehend and interpret, as follows, our holy enter-
prise: «FREEDOM, EQUALITY, BROTHERHOOD».

FREEDOM, the omnipotent weapon with which we have
disrupted the world, means:

- Independence, without limits and without restrictions,

subtracted to any kind of authority;

- Independence of spirit, which could not be generated by any
revelation, nor limited by any dogma;

- Independence of will, which will not submit to any power,
which will recognize no King, or Pope, or God;

- Independence of personality, which has severed all the
chains that enslaved it; physical and moral alike, chains of the
earth and chains of heaven, in order to achieve the indepen-
dence of humanity, toward its absolute and complete emanci-
pation.

It is through Freedom, as a lever, and human passions, as
a pivot point, that we will crush forever the Kings and the
Priests, these implacable enemies of mankind, more fate-
ful to humanity than the tiger to the other animals.


- I vow to fight relentlessly, always and everywhere,
the boundaries of the nations, the boundaries of
the fields, of the houses and of the factories, and
the boundaries of the family.

- I vow to shatter, sacrificing my live, the boundaries
where humanicides have traced, with blood and
with mud, the name of God.

- I vow to sacrifice my existence to the indefinite
triumph of progress and of universal unity, and I
declare to profess the repudiation of God and of
the soul!

And now, Brother, that the Nation, Religion and the Family
have disappeared forever, for you, in the immensity of the work
of Freemasonry, come into my arms, Most Powerful, Most
Illustrious, and Dearest Brother, to share with us the unlimited
Authority and the boundless enjoyment that we exert over
Humanity»!


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


63


SUMMARY

OF THE 33 DEGREES OF A.A.S.R.


The “Patriarch of Universal Freemasonry”, Al-
bert Pike, concerning the secrets and symbols of
Freemasonry, said: « All true dogmatic religions
have come out of the Kabala and return to it: all that
is great and scientific in religious ideals... comes
from the Kabala; all the Masonic associations
owe their secrets and their symbols to the Ka-
bala».


In fact, the 33 degrees of the Ancient and Accepted
Scottish Rite, are divided in three series of 11 de-
grees, where the number 11 is the mystical number
of the Kabala, representing the “deification of
Man” with the 10 divine attributes emanated from
the Ensoph: Kingdom, Foundation, Glory, Tri-
umph, Beauty, Justice, Mercy, Intelligence, Sapi-
ence, Crown. This is the pantheistic lie that is:


- the denial of the eternity of the Holiest Trinity;

- the denial of the creation from nothing;

- the denial of the difference between God and the universe;

- the lowering of God to the level of His creature;

- the elevation of Man to the level of God;

- the separation of Man from God, to the perdition of his soul.

In one word: a satanic Kabala!


Middle Column

(Triangle-Fire)


Masculine Column

(Sun-Earth)


Femminine Column

(Moon-Water)


Sapience


Mercy


Brotherhood


Equality


Freedom


Kingdom

■v /


64


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


“Chiesa viva”


In the three Series of 1 1 degrees,
the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite
“perfects” these ten “divine attributes” of each mason
respectively promoting:

the corruption of the Body, by means of the “Cult of Phallus”,
the corruption of the Soul, by means of the “Cult of Man”,
and the corruption of the Spirit, by means of the “Cult of Lucifer”!


The Profane, animated by the “Fire” of rebellion against God,
with his “divine attributes”, that is his three Columns: Earth, Water, Fire,

enters the Temple of Masonry

as the “rough stone” also called the blasphemous, satanic and masonic

Jst

“Holy Trinity”.


This 1 st “Holy Trinity” will be later smoothed into a cubic stone (11 th degree)
and then into a pointed cubic stone or Master (15 th degree),
the Man-God, the Man with the spirit freed by any divine Authority,
also called the blasphemous, satanic and masonic

2nd

“Holy Trinity”.


Only who, among the vertex of Freemasonry, succeeds to become

Patriarch of the World and Emperor of the World,

he will form, together with Lucifer in person,
the blasphemous, satanic and masonic

3d

“Holiest and Indivisible Trinity”.


March 2006


65


FIRST SERIES OF 11 DEGREES

(the corruption of the Body, by means of the “Cult of Phallus”)

The 1 st Series of 11 degrees of the 33 degrees
of the Freemasonry of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite

serves to fight the

“abject Catholic Virtue” with the “Man-God”.


Heraldic emblem
of the 11 th degree.


1 st Kingdom - Apprentice: Recruitment: from the Kingdom of profanes, the Candidate, animated by the fire of re-
bellion against God, the Rough Stone, has to be perfected into a Cubic Stone for the masonic Perfect People. This
Recruitment is the masonic Baptism to enter the kingdom of Satan. The Candidate, at the first degree, represents

the 1 st HOLY TRINITY.


2 nd Foundation - Fellow: Origin of a Man with the Cult of Phallus. The two sexes of the Deity, added to the Rough
Stone lead to the formation of the Body of a Perfect Man.

3 rd Glory - Master: Conception of a son of Lucifer, for the glory of Lucifer who is called Master. “What is the fate
of man? Amidst dust, corruption and worms!”

4 th Triumph - Secret Master: Birth of a new conscience. Nine months from the day of Conception having passed,
the Soul enters the Body of Man: human Conscience is to obey instincts.


5 th Beauty - Perfect Master: Cult of deification of the human soul, as divine spark of the Primal Cause. The Mat-
ter is eternal; these exists an evil God: that one of the Christians.

6 th Justice - Intimate Secretary: Extension of the human soul to the entire humanity. The human soul is a particu-
lar revelation of the universal soul revealing itself with immensity.

7 th Mercy - Provost and Judge: Completion: the royal art is the government of the souls, mysterious key to move
war on Faith and Religion to win the enemies.


8 th Intelligence - Intendant of the Building: War on Holy Faith which is harmful to intelligence. Corruption of
intelligence. The mason is admitted to the building of the Temple.

9 th Sapience - Elect of the Nine: Conquest of Religion. Corruption of Sapience revealed for its prudence in seeking
revenge of Religion. The candidate stubs the dummy of Religion.

10 th Crown - Elect of the Fifteen: Domination: complete Victory over the enemies. The Candidate receives the
crown when, beside the dummy of Religion, he stubs those of the Law and Property.


11 th Ensoph - Elect of the Twelve: MAN WITHOUT GOD, apogee of the Masonic Perfect People. Adoption of a
new Jewish brother for Lucifer. Human reason, revelation of divinity, is itself divine, hence independent from any
authority: the Rough Stone has become Cubic Stone”, that is, Perfect Mason. It is sovereign: Man is God to him-
self! Hence he fulfils his duties toward himself!


66


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


SECOND SERIES OF 11 DEGREES

(the corruption of the Soul, by means of the “Cult of Man”)

The 2 nd series of 11 degrees of the 33 degrees
of the Freemasonry of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite

serves to fight the

“foul Catholic Morals” with the “Man-Pontiff”.


Heraldic emblem
of the 22 nd degree.


th

12 Kingdom - Grand Master Architect: Recruitment: from the Kingdom of the Perfect People of the freema-
sons of the 1 st series of 11 degrees, one must form the priestly People, elect People or Levitic People. Confession
and Communion: mystic union with the Great Architect of the Universe.


th

13 Foundation - Royal Arch of Solomon: Origin of a new Priest. The new doctrine: pantheistic notions about the
Primal Cause. The Cult of Man to abolish of the submission of the political and scientific power to the spiritual
power of the Church. Freedom of Masonic education of the people.

14 th Glory - Grand Elect Perfect and Sublime Mason: Conception of a new soul of a pantheistic Priest: the

voice of conscience is hushed forever. Freedom of conscience of the people. Freedom of ignoring the ordered good
and of committing the forbidden evil.

th

15 Triumph - Knight of the East: Birth of a soul of a new Priest. Freedom of thought. The spirit freed by any di-
vine authority creates the Master, the perfect Stone, the Divinized Man, representing the 2 nd HOLY TRINITY.


th

16 Beauty - Prince of Jerusalem: Cult of the new Temple: the universal Masonic Republic founded upon a univer-
sal cult: the multi-ethnic and religiously ecumenical State.

17 th Justice - Knight of the East and West: Extension of Judaism in the Christian field. The Masonic infiltration
into the Church Hierarchy and its perversion.

th

18 Mercy - Knight Rose Croix: Completion of the Masonic Antichristianism. The Knight Rose Croix must elimi-
nate the Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross in the Holy Mass. The Candidate becomes Jewish Pontiff!


19* Intelligence - Grand Pontiff: War to conquer the absolute freedom of teaching in order to lead humanity to
the scientific-philosophical religion of the Gnostics.

th

20 Sapience - Master ad Vitam: Conquest and elimination of any form of Christian “obscurantism” as a

premise to the Caesarpapism of the next degree.

21 st Crown - Patriarch Noachite: Domination with the Caesarpapism exercised by the Jews over all the nations as
merge of the spiritual and temporal power into the same hand.


22 n Ensoph - Prince of Libanus: MAN PONTIFF, apogee of the masonic priestly People. The King-Pontiff, wor-
shiper and sacrificer to Lucifer. The freemason becomes Jewish Pontiff and he is called to propagate the lies, the
vices and the sacrileges to which he has been initiated; in this manner, he fulfils his duties toward his neighbour!


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


67


THIRD SERIES OF 11 DEGREES

(the corruption of the Spirit, by means of the “Cult of Lucifer”)

The 3 rd series of 11 degrees of the 33 degrees
of the Freemasonry of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite

serves to fight the

“guilty Catholic Authority” with the “Man-King”


Heraldic emblem
of the 33 rd degree.


23 rd Kingdom - Chief of the Tabernacle: Recruitment from the Kingdom of the Priestly People of the 22 nd degree,
to form the People-King for the Masonic Government, whose political aim is to declare war on Religion and to
eradicate it with shrewdness.


th

24 Foundation - Prince of the Tabernacle: Origin of a new Lucifer who, with the Cult of Lucifer, starts to com-
municate with the evil spirits. The Candidate performs the acts of faith, of submission and of worship.

25* Glory - Knight of the Brazen Serpent: Conception of a new Lucifer. The cult of the God Serpent: Satan re-
places Christ of the Cross as man redeemer.

th

26 Triumph - Trinitary: Birth of a new Lucifer who enters the three regions of Intelligence, of Conscience, and of
Reason, which correspond to the political, social and material needs of Humanity.


27 th Beauty - Commander of the Temple: Cult of blind obedience to the hierarchical orders, premise to build the
Masonic Government. Political Freedom for the new Lucifer.

28 th Justice - Knight of the Sun: Extension of the army of Lucifer. The great secret is revealed: the spectacle of Na-
ture and her Intelligence as sole rule of faith. Follows the most infamous libertinage and principles of black magic.

29 th Mercy - Knight of St. Andrew: Completion of the Candidate’s “sanctification”: act of obedience to the
Supreme Master who appears under the figure of the Baphomet. The soul of the Candidate is perfectly incorporated
into the kingdom of Satan.


30* Intelligence - Knight Kadosh: War on God. The Candidate burns scented incense to Lucifer and becomes Holy
Kadosh, who wielding the dagger against heaven, chants his hatred to God with the words: “Revenge, Adonai!”.

31 st Sapience - Inspector Inquisitor Commander: Conquest of the judicial Supremacy. Oath to the Masonic Au-
thority and dissolution of any other oath made in the past to the Homeland and to the Laws.

32 nd Crown - Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret: Domination of the Masonic Authority over the hatred funneled
toward the Church of Christ that must be annihilated. The weapon used is the Great Pantheistic Lie from which de-
rives the self-deification of man and the edification of a “New Tower of Babel”. The Motto is: “Revenge, Carnage!”.


rd

33 Ensoph - Grand inspector General: MAN KING, the Man against God, apogee of the People-King. This de-
gree is that of the Emperor-Pope of the Masonic Caesarpapism. The double motto of this degree is: “Ordo ab chao”
and “Deus meumque Jus”. Man his King to himself! And that is how he fulfils his duties toward God!

68 “Chiesa viva”


***


March 2006


« Jesus, regrettably, has reason to complain
for the ingratitude of his own ministers!
How many unfortunate brothers of ours
correspond to the love of Jesus
by throwing themselves with open arms
into the infamous sect of Freemasonry !».

(Saint Padre Pio to F. Agostino, Pietrelcina, April 7, 1913).


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006


69


70


‘Chiesa viva


***


March 2006
