LAPD accused of spying 
on anti-spying citizen’s group 
By Joel Sappell 
H^ald Examiner ataff writer 
* ' 
Leaderi of a coalition dedicated to exposing and 
ending political spying by law enforcement agencies 
clajm the Los Angeles Police Department ’infiltrated'* 
.U)eir group in 1978.

* The Citizens' Commission on Police Repression 
planned to hold a news conference today announcing 
it would‘file a lawsuit charging the LAPD's Public 
Disorder and Intelligence Division improperly spied to 
gain information about the coalition's anti-spy activi- 
ties.

The citizens* commission, a coalition of more than 
45 community groups, also planned to demand an 
investigation of their charges at today's Los Angeles 
Police Commission meeting.

Linda Valentino, a citizens' commission leader, 
claims that officer Edward Camarillo, while working 
full time with the LAPD.

was an active member of the 
group from January to May 1978.

Valentino provided the Herald Examiner with 
documents from three of the coalition's meetings, 
signed by everyone who attended.

Camarillo's signa- 
ture appears on all three.

‘ Camarillo.

29.

1s an LAPD officer assigned to the 
discovery section, which assists the department in civU 
suits.

At the time of his membership in the activist 
group.

Camarillo waa aligned to the LAPD's personnel 
division — the same division to which another officer 
accused of infiltrating community groups was as-i 
signed.

.

The Herald Examiner contacted Camarillo twice 
yesterday by telephone at his LAPD office, but he 
refused comment both times.

He would neither 
confirm nor deny the allegation.

j 
PAPD spokesman Cmdr.

William Booth also 
refused comment Booth said the department will 
respond to the Police Commission if awed to do so.

The LAPD's intelligence-gathering guidelines, 
adopted in June.

1976.The LAPD's intelligence-gathering guidelines, 
adopted in June.

1976.

state that **the political or 
personal beliefs or preferences of any individual, 
group, or organization are not of relevance or of 
, concern to the department." 
Valentino charges that the department has not 
complied with those guidelines.

Her group's only 
"crime." she said, is that it opposes police surveillance i 
of lawful political groups.

"The irony and arrogance is incredible," declared 
»Valeniina 'Tm outraged." 
roiinHlman Tw Vamalsvakv who has been a ' 
vocal critic of the LAPD's intelligence activities, is 
particularly Inter^ted in the allegaUon because 
during the period of alleged infiltration, the citizens' 
group was helping him draft legislation that would 
give individuals acce^ to their police files.

Yaroslavsky introduced his legislation.,in July.

1978.

following the release of a list of 200 organzations 
on which the intelligience division was keeping files.

About the same time as the list was released, the 
citizens' commission was instrumental in identifying 
five LAPD officers ^ho h^d allegedly infiltrated 
activist groups in Los Angeles.

Those groups, four of 
which had been highly critical of the LAPD.

filed suit 
against the department.

As a result, the plaintiffs 
recently obtained more than 1,000 pages of confiden- 
tial intelligience division documenti, detailing the 
activities of those five officers.

But commission leaders are not the only ones 
outraged by Camarillo's LAPD connection.

Attorney 
Antonio Rodriguez is.

too.

For three years.

Camarillo 
was a member of an activist Hispanic group that 
Rodriguez headed — the now-disbanded Center for 
Autonomous Social Action.

It was Rodriguez who learned of Camarillo's police 
status a few months ago.

and then notified the citizens' 
commission last week.

Rodriguez is Joining in the 
lawsuit.and then notified the citizens' 
commission last week. Rodriguez is Joining in the 
lawsuit. Camarillo left the citizens' commission in May, 
1978, when the commission and other community 
groups sUrted discovering that LAPD officers were 
.l.’SfiaLysSi  is,.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

(ms 
I Tfaday, March 2S, 1980, Loa Angales Herald Exaounef