SOUTHWEST MISSOURI 
STATE COLLEGE 
SPRINGFIELD <0801 
May 12, I960 
Deqr Gary: 
I wish to thank you for your efforts in getting me a .Zapruder film. I shall look forward 
to receiving it in the near future. I have loaned my film to a friend in Mo. University and 
will not have it back until June 1 or so (x asked him to bring it back in person and not 
send it through the maills. I lost one sent to him from Little Rock, so want to be safe} X 
also will not send the film to Western Cine in Denver as I did for your copy. I had the film 
of the Zapruder femake edited in backwards to see if they were watching this type of thing 
and received my copy back turned around properly, so they did know what it was and did change 
it. Also the copy was not good, so I am going to try Ray-Chris in Little Rock again. I shall 
have to take it down there sometime in June when I go for work on my thesis. So I shall get 
you two more copies, but it will fake some time. I hope you will understand. 
I have not received anything from the Committee to Investigate Assassinations, but shall 
look for the material. Incidentally, the semester ends here June 1, so nlease send all corres- 
pondence to my home address 511 2. Normal St. Spfd. Mo. 65804 after then. I do not teach this 
summer, sofl am unsure about my mail here. 
L have been inquiring about Bolden and all I can discover is that he was moved from here 
"about a year ago" according to the director of the Medidal Center here. I am in the Army 
Reserve here in a medical unit, and some of the men work at the Med. Center so they are going 
to look for me. One man said the material was "classified" but thought'he was released from 
tne federal institutions altogether. He said Belden was sent here bedause of the obscurity of 
tne Springfield facility (although the Birdman of Alcatraz died here Nov. 21, I963 and the 
head of the Mafia died here also) because he was "a federal man gone bad" I don't know the 
whole case, but did read of the charges against Bolden for selling priviledged information. 
1 shall keep my ears open. Incidentally, not that this has anything to do with the affair 
but a body was found across the streeS from the med center in the attic of a toolshed on a 
golf course who had been dead since summer. He was itentified as an escaned criminal from the 
uexxerson City Prison. James Earl Ray was a prisoner at Jeff City and escaped before he started 
his cli.uo to his eventual capture and trial for assassination of Dr. King. Please don't cuote 
me on the body story, but you might be interested in knowing it if Bolden is not found any- 
pJLctC6« , 
Thanks again and I am watching for the film. I shall copy your film in June when I 
the original oack and get it to Little Rock this tine. 
get 
Sincerely yours,