Revenge for the Bay of Pigs

Committee between 1975 -76 when, among
other things, we discovered CIA efforts to
assassinate foreign leaders, efforts euphe-
mistically characterized as "executive ac-
tion” and code-named “ZR/Rifie.” The
prime- target, pursued with almost de-
mented insistence for "executive action,”
was Fidel Castro. And the principal assets:
of these anti -Castro plots were three Mafia
figures called Sam Giancana, Johnny Ros-
selli, and Santo Trafficante, now all dead.
Giancana died of “lead poisoning” and:
Rosselli was killed- during the Church
Please Turn to Page 13


- Hart represented the state of Colorado in
the U.S. Senate between 1975-1987, during
which time he was a member of the Senate
Select Committee to Investigate the- InteUir
gence ' Community and the Senate Intelli-
gence Oversight Committee.


PROMISES TO KEEP

by George Bernttu

(Warner Books: $ 19.95 ; 642 pp.)


Reviewed by Gary Hart


B eorge Bernau was 18 years old
when John Kennedy was killed,and.
he never got over it. One hopes this
book will help him do so.

“Promises to- Keep” took five years to
write. In doing so, Bernau, m his ' first
published - novel, has clearly : researched
both his Warren Commission Report and
his Church Committee Report— among
other things. And one guesses that he has
put not only his time but a great deal of
himself into this project.

. . This is a story of conspiracy and corrup-
tion, of assassination, of regicide. For a


generation of Americans, it is the story of
then: age.

Another conspiracy story? Yes. Why
would Warner Books pay so much money
($750,000) for another one? Simple. It has
,adevice.ThedeviceisthiS:John Kennedy
survived. No r not in the ghoulish El-
■ ms/Manlyn-is - alive- today - and- living -
in -Buenos Aires sense. John Kennedy
- survived the assassination attempt, even-
tually to disclose his own role in the plot
that almost killed him.

Also (and this is a crucial part of the
device): John Kennedy was the Last
American Hero. Else, why write the book?
i:.- Reviewers should disclose their biases.
Although Bernau denies this book is a
roman d clef, I believe his theory of the 1
assassination is right. I think President
Kennedy was the victim of a conspiracy.
And I’ve particularly thought so since
. serving as a member of the Church


‘Promises To Keep’


Continued From First Page
Committee’s investigation. On the
theory of Hart’s fourth law of
politics (nothing of consequence
happens by accident), then Ber-
nau’s story deserves attention.

Actually. Bernau tells several,
stones— one conspiratorial, anoth-
er political, a third pastoral, in
descending order of them persua-
siveness. The pastoral story, of the
Kennedy marriage, is least con-
vincing It is too sweet, too per-


George. Bernau


feet— even given a bump or two
thrown in by an Onassis figure and
someone who most resembles An-
gelica Huston at age- 15. All in all,
given what we know of the com-


plexity of both its partners,: the
Kennedy' marriage was probably a '
lot more interesting than the some-
what cloying portrayal it receives
in “Promises to Keep.”

The political story is this. Having
survived three bullets— one to the
brain— John Trelawney Cassidy
(John Kennedy) chooses not to
seek re-election. But his heroic
stature enables him to negotiate his
brother Tim Cassidy (Boh Kenne-
dy) onto the ticket with Ransome
Gardner (Lyndon Johnson) m
1964. Vice President Tim Cassidy ;
begins to separate himself from ,
President Gardner’s hawkish Viet- ,
mam policy in 1967, then dies m a
helicopter ambush during a tour of
Southeast Asia. In a histone rever-
sal, John Cassidy, recently re-
elected to the Senate from Massa-
chusetts, picks up his dead broth -
" er’s torch and challenges Gardner,
m the 1968 pnmanes. Gardner
withdraws from ' the race after
losing to John Cassidy in the New
Hampshire primary. Thereafter,
the contest for the 1968 Democratic
-nomination seesaws between Sen. t
Cassidy and replacement Vice
President Putnam (Humphrey).
Read the book to see how it turns
out.

The real story is conspiracy, and
this is the one Warner Books (and
some television syndicate) pad a
Iotof money for. And this is the one
to read. Because, Bernau says,
there were tw o gunmen in Dallas,
They were the -remnants of a
‘‘ZR/Rifle’’ team authorized, ironi-
cally, by Kennedy/Cassidy in 1961.
One was Arthur Strode (Oswald)
and one a demented Cuban called
Antonio Lopata (a character tailor-
made to win Edward James Olmos
an Emmy). They are hired by a
Mafia-Cuban-exile combine to
work retribution on John .Cassidy
for failing to provide air cover at


the Bay of Pigs and for calling off.
the Castro assassination plots be-
fore they could succeed.

Aside from- John Cassidy, the
story’s other hero is an oxymoroni-
cally independent FBI agent .called
Jim Sullivan. (Bernau loves the
Irish.) Resisting cover-up pressure
even from FBI Director. John Sum-
mers (J Edgar Hoover), Sullivan
relentlessly unpeels the onion of
conspiracy and, in the end, pays the
supreme sacrifice for his troubles.
As m real life; anyone involved in
the conspiracy by circumstance or
who seeks the truth by choice gets
eliminated, one way or the other. ,

Leaving aside: the not-so-coinci-
dental timing of the publication


date, 25 years after the first Ken-
nedy assassination; one believes
uncynically that Bernau was com-
pelled to write this boot John
Kennedy (with, it must be said, all .
his faults) was the Last American ,
Hero. For, within the decade fol-
lowing his death, America went,
from the noble and idealistic Peri-
clean sentiment of public and na-
tional service, to the seamy, self--
serving Snopesian politics of Wa-
tergate. Wewent from fewer than
10,000 “advisers" in Vietnam and a
policy described by “Kennedy be-,

fore his death as y it is the
Vietnamese’s war and they must
win it,” to an American force level
of 500,000, and 50,000 dead. We’ve


had an embassy held, hostage for -
months. Marines dead in Lebanon,
shuttle disasters from shoddy
workmanship, invasions of tiny
islands, Iran-gate, and the phony-
baloney euphoria of “morning in
America” financed by Japanese :
creditors.

History has been different be-
cause of John Kennedy’s assassina-
tion, regardless of how one comes
down on Tolstoy’s agony over the
impact of great figures' With a
fractional twist of ballistics, Bernau
turns it all around. With five years
of effort and a monster manuscript,,
he has, one hopes, loosed this
animus from his soul. ...

Now, how about the rest of us? ■
