PICTURE
SCOOP
NOVEMBER
10c
12g IN CANADA
YOUR
DOLLAR'S
FUTURE
By ED WYNN
By HENRY
"ThePerfect Fool"
MORGENTHAU, JR.
Sec'yoftheTreasury
BROADWAY
NIGHT LIFE,
1942 STYLE!
What Should We Do With Hitler After the War?
By HERBERT AGAR * QUINCY HOWE FRAZIER HUNT
GEORGE PUTNAM JOHANNESSTEELEREX STOUT

--- PAGE BREAK ---R.
Sec'yoftheTreasury
BROADWAY
NIGHT LIFE,
1942 STYLE!
What Should We Do With Hitler After the War?
By HERBERT AGAR * QUINCY HOWE FRAZIER HUNT
GEORGE PUTNAM JOHANNESSTEELEREX STOUT

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PICTURE ScooP's Do's and Don't's
For Preventing Inflation
WHATHAPPENEDAFTERWORLDWAR1
N 1920,a 10-pound bag of sugar cost $2.67; a dozen eggs, 92c;
a 10-pound bag of four, 88c; a pound of butter, 76c, These basic
foods, aswell as countless others, like bread, bacon, ham, and
coffee, were twice as expensive as they had been in 1915, five years
before. Shelter, fuel, and clothing had also doubled in cost; com-
medities like cotton goods had even tripled.Thus, a family with
mally buy.
Whenwe were on the brink of disastrous infation, in 1920,
President Wilson took steps to prevent catastrophe, and for this
reason, we did not experience the misery of less fortunate coun-
tries abroad. In certain European nations, housewives carried
eoaueasnduos
ful of flour. The bare necessities of life were denied most people,
and sickness, death, and want followed in the wake of this dread-
ful economic chaos.
Today, President Roosevelt and his administration are deter-
mined to avert such disaster. Price ceilings have been placed on a
large number of commodities for a two-fold purpose: to keep
greedy enterprisers from profiteering, and to insure a fair distribu-
tion of consumer goods armong people in all income brackets.
DON'TGOONASPENDINGSPREE.
BUY
If you do,prices will soar, the pur-
DO INVEST IN WAR BONDS.You
decrease, and inflation may result,
up a reserve for necessary post-
war purchases, and prevent inflation.
THAT$17,OOO,OOO,OOOBUBBLEOFTROUBLE
X/HEN merchandise becomes scarce, prices rise.Today, the
X7UOA
non-essential class, has been curtailed, and few are on the market.
Yet, many Americans will have·the funds with which to buy such
luxuries, as well as essentials.
This year,ournational inome willset arecord:$1,0,
000.Whenour taxes and savings are subtracted$8600000
will rernain.At current prices, there is an estimated $69,000,000,000
worth of goods available for. purchase. This will leave $17,000,-
000,000. Unless this sum is invested in war bonds, the prices on
available goods will, in all likelihood,rise until theyhave absorbed
the$10000,0Thiswllean thatyourdollarwilluymuh
less than it should--unless you invest a regular portion of your
income in war bonds.
yeairs, when thousands of factories will cease making war materials
and workers will return to the manufacture of much-needed
commodities. But, this industrial conversion will be useless unless
we need these commodities and have the money to acquire them.
By redueing your present purchases and buying war bonds,
11uch-needed
commodities. But, this industrial conversion will be useless unless
we need these commodities and have the money to acquire them.
By redueing your present purchases and buying war bonds,
11

--- PAGE BREAK ---THIS FAMILY,like
other patriotic Ameri-
can families,knows
that the government
spends $150,000000a
day to finance this
war.To share the
burden they invest 10
per cent of their in-
come in war bonds.

They are also making
father's suit,mother's
coat, and the children's
shoes last longer.

RDOLLARS
TIRE
By HENRY MORGENTHAU, Jr., Secretary of the Treasury
INCE President Roosevelt outlined his na-
tional economic program,the American
but itincreases ouraoarresources.In this battle
on the home front,the wage-earners and con-
comes.In the same way，we have urged Con-
sumers ofAmericahold the key positions.

port the menat thefront byeffort andsacrifice
eo
bywhicha cormparatively few wealthy tax
greatest andcostliestof allwars,a war which
us,inWashington,to see the voluntaryco-
iscosting more than $150,000,000 a daymore
their fair share of the burden.We havealso
thanadollaradayforeverymanwomanand
recommended the taxation ofmillons of.people
toprice-fixing,rationing, and saving.That
child in the country.It is also our job to finance
voluntary cooperation will be more andmore
the war and to avoid,as far as possible,upward
had to pay direct taxes before.But we recom-
necessary in the months ahead.A great change
in nationaleconomic habits cannot be acom-
pressure on prices and interference with war
production.

To accomplish these purposes,we
would include taxing the higher incomes more
heavily.

"Write anExecutive Order."
The willingness of the American people to
Essentially,the President's program calls for
our disposal:the frst is taxation,and the sec-
ondis the sale of war bonds and other Govern-
self-restraint—not just by a few of us,but by
in the buyingof war bonds and stamps.A goal
allofus;not just occasionally,but every day，
ment securities.

The administration recommended to Congress
of $1,000,000,000a month is necessary in order
as long as the war will last."Write anExecutive Order."
The willingness of the American people to
Essentially,the President's program calls for
our disposal:the frst is taxation,and the sec-
ondis the sale of war bonds and other Govern-
self-restraint—not just by a few of us,but by
in the buyingof war bonds and stamps.A goal
allofus;not just occasionally,but every day，
ment securities.

The administration recommended to Congress
of $1,000,000,000a month is necessary in order
as long as the war will last.

If we spend our
that new taxes should yield $8,700,000,000 of
to carry out a vital part of the President's pro-
money extravagantly， carelessly，or even to
additional revenue.That is a colossal sum; yet
gram.To reach this goal,everyone will have lo
satisfywhat wouldhave been ournormal
war expenditures alone are many times that
ue ndpueuuds euosiad uo umop n
wants in normal times,we handicap our war
erage of atleast10per cent of current earnings
production program.We take away from our
amount,even now，and it seems to me that
$8,700,000,000 is the very least that we can af-
in War Bonds.If we do this,we will raise abont
fightingforces the supplies they need for Vic-
$12,000000,000αyear to pay for our Victory
ford to ask of the American people at this
tory.At the same time,we create pressure on
drive.

critical time.

But meeting the $1,000,000,000 per month
effort and to our economic future.

We have proposed sharply increased taxes
goalmeans even more than that.

It mears
This means inflation.

Infation is not a threat
on corporations and on higher individual in-
thatwe are building the kindof future we
remote from our daily lives.We are facing it
want for ourselves and our children.

now and must dealwith it at once.If we are
We can doa great deal to shape our future-
selfish,or shortsighted in facing this issue,the
now.Our present actions wildetermine the
kind of world in which we shall eventually
for years.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Infation is not a threat
on corporations and on higher individual in-
thatwe are building the kindof future we
remote from our daily lives.We are facing it
want for ourselves and our children. now and must dealwith it at once.If we are
We can doa great deal to shape our future-
selfish,or shortsighted in facing this issue,the
now.Our present actions wildetermine the
kind of world in which we shall eventually
for years. live.Whatever success we achieve by voluntary
Every time you are about to spend your
money，your conscience should ask you:“Do
Ifeel strongly that every war bond·bought
todaywill play an essential part in the build-
dowithout it?Whynotwait until after the
ing of a free and democratic world. Millions
in this country are quietly establishing a re
family in.the future?”
serve of spendingpower for themselves in the
Ifyou obey your conscience,you will put
years after the war,and in thatway they are
fortifying themselvesagainstunemployrment
strengthen your nation'seconomy after the war. and want. In dead earnest,I say that any man orwoman
There is nothing dramatic in saving your
who chooses this time to go on a buying spree
is committing an act of sabotage against our
no medals forself-denial in this war,no matter
war effort.The patriotic and intelligent thing
how much courage or sacrifice it may involve. todois to make old clotheslast longer,to eat
simpler meals,to patch up old household appli
ances, instead of buying new ones,and to cut
Victory，Wehave a great opportunity，right
now.And we are going to rise to that oppor-
strengthens our economy and combats inflation,
HENRY MORGENTHAU, JR,
tunity.In the words of the President of the
United States, “We can, we will, we must!"
10:
PICTURE SCOOP