l?tt i, l>^ C{rimt u((_ 
THE WAR ON CRIME: 
THE FIRST FIVE YEARS 
by James Vorenberg 
Nixon and Mitchell vowed to turn the tide.

“Operation Intercept” and three years later, 
it’s their turn to face a fact of life: crime is 
rising, and law enforcement alone won’t 
stop it 
Five years ago the President’s Commission on 
Law Enforcement and the Administration of 
Justice—generally known as the Crime Com- 
mission—reported the results of its two-year exam- 
ination of crime and made more than 200 specific 
recommendations to overhaul our system of criminal 
justice.

The Commission, for which I served as executive 
director, had been appointed by President Johnson 
in 1965, partly in response to Senator Barry Gold- 
water’s introduction of “crime in the streets’* as an is- 
sue in the 1964 presidential election.

But as we met 
in the White House to accept the President’s thanks 
for our rep>ort, politics seemed remote.

The Commis- 
sion, chaired by Attorney General Nicholas Katzen- 
bach, included among its members Democrats and 
Republicans, prosecutors and academics, the execu- 
tive director of the Urban League and the vice presi- 
dent of the International Association of Chiefs of Po- 
lice.

It had, nonetheless, been able to reach 
agreement on what the President described as “the 
most comprehensive and detailed program for meet- 
ing the challenge of crime ever proposed in this 
country.” 
The President promptly submitted to Congress 
proposed legislation that would provide funds to 
states and dlies to carry out the Commission’s rec- 
ommendations for change.

Even those of us who had 
two years earlier been a bit cynical about the reasons 
for the Commission’s creation and doubtful about 
what it would accomplish were optimistic.It had, nonetheless, been able to reach 
agreement on what the President described as “the 
most comprehensive and detailed program for meet- 
ing the challenge of crime ever proposed in this 
country.” 
The President promptly submitted to Congress 
proposed legislation that would provide funds to 
states and dlies to carry out the Commission’s rec- 
ommendations for change.

Even those of us who had 
two years earlier been a bit cynical about the reasons 
for the Commission’s creation and doubtful about 
what it would accomplish were optimistic.

Yet five years later crime is unquestionably a far 
worse problem for the country than it was then, and 
our system of criminal justice—the poUcc, courts, and 
corrections agencies—seems less capable of coping 
with it The Department of Justice consoles us with 
the assurance that although crime is stiU increasing, 
the rate of increase is slower.

For former Attorney 
General John Mitchell, who made heavy use of 
crime statistics in the 1968 presidential campaign, the 
30 percent increase in the reported crime rate during 
the first three years of the Nixon Administration 
must present a strategic puzzle as he plans the 1972 
campaign.

In 1967 the Crime Commission could review the 
FBI reports of the seven “index” crimes—homicide, 
rape, aggravated assault, robbery, burglary, larceny 
(over $50), and auto theft-for 1960-1965 and report 
increases for the five-year period of 36 percent in 
crimes against property and 25 percent in violent 
crime.

This was troubling, to be sure, but hardly the 
uncpntrolled rampage about which Senator Gold- 
watcr had warned in the 1964 campaign.

The Com- 
mission noted that because of the post-World War II 
“baby boom,” an unusually large part of the popu- 
lation was between fifteen and twenty-five years of 
age.

Since this group commits most of the serious 
crimes, about half of the 1960-1965 increase could be 
attributed to this temporary disproportion.The Com- 
mission noted that because of the post-World War II 
“baby boom,” an unusually large part of the popu- 
lation was between fifteen and twenty-five years of 
age. Since this group commits most of the serious 
crimes, about half of the 1960-1965 increase could be 
attributed to this temporary disproportion. The 
Commission also suggested that some of the increase 
in crime might be the result of better reporting by or 
to the police. Generally, it counseled against over- 
reaction. But the figures for the last five years of the sixties 
have convinced all but the most skeptical that some- 
thing more ominous than population changes or re- 
porting errors is involved. By 1970 the rate of crimes 
against property had increased 147 percent for the 
decade and the rate of crimes of violence had in- 
creased 126 percent. And the latest FBI figures show 
that during the first nine months of 1971, there were 
63

--- PAGE BREAK ---further increases of 10 percent for violent crimes and 
6 percent for property crimes compared with the 
same period in 1970.

In the past five years self-pro- 
tection has become the dominant concern of those in 
our cities and suburbs, evidenced by the rapid 
growth of a multibillion-dollar-a-year private secur- 
ity industry and the emergence of the German shep- 
herd as the second most popular breed of dog.

No one can say for sure what accounts for the 
enormous increase in the danger which 
Americans face from each other.

We do 
know that those agencies on which we are accus- 
tomed to rely for crime control—police, courts, and 
corrections—seem less capable of that task today than 
they did five years ago, and many police chiefs, 
judges, and prison.officials openly acknowledge that 
there is nothing tlifey can do to help.

We also know 
that each year there are thousands of new drug ad- 
dicts, most of whom are driven by their addiction 
and the nation’s drug policy to prey on their fellow 
citizens in order to get money to buy heroin.

And we 
have compelling evidence that during the past five 
years the frustration of poor people and minorities 
with continued denial of opportunities to improve 
their lives by lawful means has made reliance on 
crime an increasingly acceptable alternative.

The 
fifth anniversary of the Crime Commission’s report, 
fppr" 
-H50 
+ 140 
+ 130 
$i20 
+110 
+ 100 
+ 96 
+80 
+ 70 
+60 
+40 
+ 30 
+20 
+i0 
CamSffiS AGM PROPERTY 
1960-1970 
PERCENT CHANGE OVER 1960 - 
..

.

:r 
- 
■:-.r 
: 
1^.

■ - 
- S 
■ f: ' — 
- 
,T-‘■ 
- 
T 
..

<: 
n^iooo .

t96VT-1964 1965• .

I966r..i967.

1970 
iURdlARY, lARCENY «0 AND OVEW; AND AUTO TiiErr:<i.

.

'» 
Source: FBI Crime Reports, 1970.

coinciding as it does with the beginning of a presi- 
dential election contest in which crime is once again 
certain to be a central issue, is an appropriate time to 
explore why we have done so poorly and what the 
prospects are for the years ahead.'» 
Source: FBI Crime Reports, 1970.

coinciding as it does with the beginning of a presi- 
dential election contest in which crime is once again 
certain to be a central issue, is an appropriate time to 
explore why we have done so poorly and what the 
prospects are for the years ahead.

The Crime Commission sought to show how po- 
lice, courts, and correctional agencies could both re- 
duce crime and treat people more decently.

A review 
of where these criminal Justice agencies stand today 
indicates virtually no progress on the first of these 
goals and only sp>oliy progress on the second.

The Police.

The principal gains by the police in the 
past five years have been in lowering the level of hos- 
tility between the jjolice and young people, partic- 
ularly blacks.

This progress has taken place despite 
the fact that President Nixon came into office after a 
campaign that invited the police and the public gen- 
erally to blame crime on Supreme Court decisions 
designed to curb police abuses.

Improvement has 
been especially marked in cities such as Oakland and 
New York, where the chiefs have made it clear that 
decent treatment of citizens is a top priority and will 
be given weight in promotion and assignments of of- 
ficers.

Many police departments now have their own 
legal offices and are getting advice from the inside on 
how to respect due process.

The Brandeis University 
Center for the Study of Violence cites better training 
in community relations as one reason for the decline 
in disorders in the past five years.

Increases in the 
number of minority-group police offi- 
cers have also helped, although here 
the record is mixed.

The nation’s five 
largest cities in total have shown a 23 
percent increase in black officers in the 
past five years.

Yet some departments, 
such as Cleveland’s and Philadelphia’s, 
have lost ground.

Alabama and Missis- 
sippi still bar blacks from their state 
police, and Massachusetts has only two 
on its 870-man force.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Yet some departments, 
such as Cleveland’s and Philadelphia’s, 
have lost ground. Alabama and Missis- 
sippi still bar blacks from their state 
police, and Massachusetts has only two 
on its 870-man force. Changes which seem to have im- 
proved relations between citizens and 
the police in many cities have not been 
matched by new crime-reduction 
methods. Much of the federal aid to 
police has gone for such flashy items as 
helicopters, computerized communica- 
tions systems, and new weaponry. Yet 
these have not produced a significant 
impact on crime. Little progress has 
been made on Commission proposals 
that police presence on the streets be 
increased by hiring civilians for clerical 
and administrative tasks. (New York 
City, with 32,000 policemen, has a 
maximum number of 3500 on the 
street at one time.) One discouraging 
indication of how little change has 
been made in five years is the striking 
similarity between the chapter on the 
1970 
UP 147% 
1965 
UP 36% 
64

--- PAGE BREAK ---The War on Crime 
I 
I 
I 
I 
police in the Crime Commission’s 1967 report and 
the police section of “Planning Guidelines and Pro- 
grams to Reduce Crime,” just released by the Justice 
Department for use in its eight “high-impact” cities, 
where a special effort will be made to reduce crime.

The most promising “new” crime-control idea for 
the police is New York Commissioner Patrick Mur- 
phy’s neighborhood team system, a blend of the 
Crime Commission’s teams of policemen with the 
traditional “cop on the beat.” Simply stated, Murphy 
wants to decentralize responsibility so that each 
neighborhood has its own team of officers who would 
come to know its crime patterns, its residents, and its 
potential offenders.

The team would then be held re- 
sponsible for reducing crime in the neighborhood.

Murphy’s crime prevention and anticorruption 
strategies overlap, since the team’s commanding offi- 
cer would also be fully accountable (Murphy’s favor- 
ite word) for any corruption among his men.

Murphy instituted his system in Detroit but left to 
become commissioner in New York before its results 
could be tested.

He is adopting the same approach in 
New York; and Chief Jerry Wilson in Washington, 
D.C., Murphy’s prot6g6, believes his own form of this 
plan is responsible for some reductions in street 
crime in the nation’s capital.

The neighborhood team has probably improved 
police-community relations in the cities where it is 
being used.

It remains to be seen whether it will also 
result in significant reductions in crime 
or whether it will simply provide pres- 
sure for incomplete reporting of crimes 
to central headquarters, a time-hon- 
ored practice in earlier days when a 
precinct captain’s Job depended on 
keeping a “clean beat” 
Corrections.The neighborhood team has probably improved 
police-community relations in the cities where it is 
being used.

It remains to be seen whether it will also 
result in significant reductions in crime 
or whether it will simply provide pres- 
sure for incomplete reporting of crimes 
to central headquarters, a time-hon- 
ored practice in earlier days when a 
precinct captain’s Job depended on 
keeping a “clean beat” 
Corrections.

The same two goals it 
set for the police—crime reduction and 
humane treatment—also ran through 
the Commission’s 1967 report on cor- 
rections, where, as with the police, it 
believed that the goals were not incon- 
sistent and could, in fact, reinforce 
each other.

To achieve these goals, the 
Commission urged a shift from the use 
of prisons to community treatment of 
offenders.

Its reasoning can be simply 
summarized: if we take a person whose 
criminal conduct shows he cannot 
manage his life, lock him up with oth- 
ers like himself, increase his frustra- 
tions and anger, and take away from 
him any responsibility for planning his 
life, he is ^most certain to be more 
dangerous when he gets out than when 
he went in.

On this basis, the Commis- 
sion urged that only the very dan- 
gerous should be held in prison.

It 
called for the development of halfway 
houses, programs to send offenders 
home under intensive supervision, special school and 
employment programs, and other forms of nonprison 
treatment.

In a few places there has been progress in carrying 
out these recommendations.

California has devel- 
oped an extensive work-furlough program for prison- 
ers and also offers a subsidy to counties, which helps 
keep the state prison population low by putting more 
offenders on probation.

The number of state prison- 
ers has declined from 28,000 to 21,000 in the past 
three years.

Plans for new prisons have been 
scrapped and some of the existing ones are being 
closed.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The number of state prison- 
ers has declined from 28,000 to 21,000 in the past 
three years. Plans for new prisons have been 
scrapped and some of the existing ones are being 
closed. The boldest approach is that of Jerome Miller, 
Massachusetts Commissioner of Youth Services. Mr. Miller concluded that his institutions were do- 
ing juvenile offenders more harm than good at a 
per capita cost to the state of $ 10,000 a year, enough, 
in his words, “to send a child to Harvard with a S100- 
a-wcek allowance, a summer vacation in Europe and 
once-a-week psychotherapy.” Within the next few 
months he plans to close ail his institutions for com- 
mitted offenders and move the inmates to commu- 
nity-based work and education programs. He esti- 
mates that only 30 of the 800 juveniles now 
incarcerated are dangerous enough to be locked up, 
and he eventually hopes to get these into private psy- 
chiatric facilities. A few other states are moving more cautiously in 
4120 
!;^iio 
fe^ioo 
+80 
.470 
7+50 
+40 
+20 
+ 10 
■ ,Vi. ' 'X' 
•+• • 
: i ^ 
^ * 
■ •' i 
• ■ .. • 
r “ 
re? 1 
t. ■ 
/ X 
* 
- J 
■ : 
f.' 
- 
, 
^ k 
T 
■»sr 
'T' 
74- 
^:?r. y 1965 
UP 25% 
1980' 1081-^ 1002 1903 im 1905 1966 1968 19M 
MuiuiEa^’roaciBLEtwROBBEIYAWDACGIAVATED ASSAULT 
Source: FBI Crime Reports, 1970. 65

--- PAGE BREAK ---the same direction.

But as a whole the country has 
continued to place heavy emphasis on prisons.

A re- 
cent survey by the Center for Criminal Justice at 
Harvard Law School showed that there arc residen- 
tial facilities outside the walls of traditional prisons 
for less than 2 percent of adult offenders—and that 
most of these facilities were set up in the first two 
years after the Crime Commission’s report 
Ironically, the best hope for a move away from in- 
carceration may lie in the system’s reaction to the 
slaughter at Attica.

In much the same way that the 
fear of city riots prodded police chiefs to develop 
community relations programs in the late sixties, the 
fear of prison uprisings has forced officials to con- 
front such questions as how many of the 1200 in- 
mates at Attica really had to be in prison.

It is sad but probably true that the fear of riots and 
the fiscal squeeze^ on the states are more likely to 
close down prisoiw than either a sense of humanity 
or a desire to prevent crime.

The Courts.

While there has been some overall im- 
provement in the police in the past five years, and 
perhaps corrections has held its own, the quality of 
the adjudication process—the responsibility of the 
courts—seems clearly to have deteriorated over the 
same period.

Many lower criminal courts look more 
like factories than halls of justice.

More than half of 
the people in jail in this country are there because 
they are awaiting trial, not because they have been 
convicted.

Whatever deterrence of crime the threat of 
penal sanrtions might exercise is undermined as 
thousands of defendants go free, not because they 
have been* acquitted but because courts and prose- 
cutors are too overwhelmed by their work load to 
consider their cases.

The total number of arrests, the source of the 
courts’ business, increases about 5 percent a year.Whatever deterrence of crime the threat of 
penal sanrtions might exercise is undermined as 
thousands of defendants go free, not because they 
have been* acquitted but because courts and prose- 
cutors are too overwhelmed by their work load to 
consider their cases.

The total number of arrests, the source of the 
courts’ business, increases about 5 percent a year.

More defendants are represented by lawyers who are 
asserting their rights in court, including rights relat- 
ing to confessions and police searches spelled out by 
the U.S.

Supreme Court during the 1960s.

The result is that a cumbersome process, which 
had managed to keep moving by herding large num- 
bers of defendants through the courts on guilty pleas 
without consideration of possible defenses, has been 
further slowed.

And delay begets delay.

The only 
way prosecutors and judges can keep the glacierlike 
process moving at all is to drop cases or offer con- 
cessions to defendants who will agree not to assert 
their rights.

Often the best way for defense counsel to 
get these concessions is to make repeated motions, 
seek adjournments, and generally try to drag out the 
process as long as possible.

Even lawyers who do not 
deliberately seek delay achieve the same result owing 
to their own overloaded schedules and the courts’ in- 
efficiency.

The rewards to defendants from this delay 
are enormous.

Ninety-four thousand felony arrests in 
New York City last year resulted in only 550 trials.

The other cases were dismissed or reduced to misde- 
meanors in return for a guilty plea.

To blame the Supreme Court or defense lawyers 
who seek their clients’ best interests is rather like 
blaming highway congestion on those who set speed 
limits and on drivers themselves.

If we want the 
criminal system to be able to handle the present vol- 
ume of traffic, we must double and triple the number 
of courtrooms, judges, prosecutors, and defense 
counsel—and be ready to keep on increasing the 
number in the future.To blame the Supreme Court or defense lawyers 
who seek their clients’ best interests is rather like 
blaming highway congestion on those who set speed 
limits and on drivers themselves.

If we want the 
criminal system to be able to handle the present vol- 
ume of traffic, we must double and triple the number 
of courtrooms, judges, prosecutors, and defense 
counsel—and be ready to keep on increasing the 
number in the future.

And even with such increases 
the system will depend heavily on bargaining for 
pleas of guilty.

Five years ago the Crime Commission called for 
resources to enable courts to handle increased traffic, 
but it also outlined two possible approaches to reduc- 
ing the traffic.

First, most cases involving drunks, first 
offenders, persons in need of psychiatric or medical 
treatment, and nondangerous offenders should be 
handled outside the criminal system.

Prosecutors and 
defense counsel were encouraged to agree on alterna- 
tive forms of treatment before such cases get to court, 
thus avoiding court congestion and the destructive 
effects of pretrial stays in jaiL In fact, most of these 
cases now are disposed of without a formal court de- 
cision, but usually only after they have added to the 
jam in the courts.

Second, for those cases that remain, the Commis- 
sion urged the courts to adopt modem administrative 
and business management methods that would avoid 
repeated appearances and continuances.

This recom- 
mendation has been ignored, although adopting it 
would help not only the courts but also the police, 
since prosecuting witnesses, including policemen, of- 
ten are required to come to court on five or more sep- 
arate occasions for a single case.

Our society surely 
has the technology to schedule its judicial business to 
eliminate repeated appearances, continuances, and 
delay.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This recom- 
mendation has been ignored, although adopting it 
would help not only the courts but also the police, 
since prosecuting witnesses, including policemen, of- 
ten are required to come to court on five or more sep- 
arate occasions for a single case. Our society surely 
has the technology to schedule its judicial business to 
eliminate repeated appearances, continuances, and 
delay. The only way to keep delay from being ma- 
nipulated as part of the bargaining process is to have 
a system that gives the parties their “day in court”— 
but not a day every week. For the past five years crime has been a major 
national issue. More than $1.5 billion in new 
federal money has been appropriated for the 
nation’s criminal justice system. One may fairly ask 
why there has been so little progress. Much of the answer lies in the inevitable hostility 
to change in any large bureaucracy. Proposals to sub- 
stitute halfway houses for high-security prisons and 
computers for court docket clerks, or to establish new 
educational requirements for police officers, threaten 
job security and challenge the propriety and worth of 
what is being done. When Commissioner Miller in 
Massachusetts abolished punishment cells for juve- 
nile offenders and allowed them to have long hair, 
some staff members permitted a series of escapes de- 
signed to discredit his administration. Two comments 
by employees suggest their frustration with the 
changes: “Years ago you could flatten the kids out 
66

--- PAGE BREAK ---.f 
The War on Crime 
and lhal would be the end of il.’* “You wonder who’s 
in jail, us or the kids.” 
City dwellers have learned recently about the 
“blue flu” that often afhicts police ofhcers who arc 
suspicious of proposed changes.

Commissioner Rus- 
sell Oswald’s apparent sense that he had to cater to 
the views of the guards at Attica—even at the risk of 
scores of deaths—suggests how powerfully existing 
values now hold those working in the system.

Strong 
and militant police and correctional officers’ unions 
in the past few years have provided an organization 
which can mobilize this opposition to change.

Not all of the opposition to reform comes from 
within the bureaucracy.

Many state and dty legisla- 
tive bodies tend to be wary of changes, particularly 
those that may seem “soA” on criminals or that cost 
money.

And some changes—such as attempts to es- 
tablish halfway houses or drug-treatment centers in 
residential neighborhoods—have evoked enormous 
hostility from private citizens.

Notwithstanding these inherent pressures against 
change, there was a strong sense of optimism in the 
mid-sixties that something could be done about 
crime.

For the first time the federal government had 
acknowledged a responsibility to help the cities and 
states.

Local police chiefs, prosecutors, and correc- 
tional administrators worked with the Crime Com- 
mission from 1965 to 1967, and with the prospect of 
federal financial aid, began the arduous task of over- 
hauling their agencies.

The year 1968 was a bad one for criminal justice.

During the 1968 presidential campaign, Mr.

Nixon 
repeatedly cited decisions of the United States Su- 
preme Court as being the major cause of crime.

The 
result was to provide police officials, prosecutors, leg- 
islators, and the general public wuth an easy ex- 
planation for the enormous increases in crime in the 
late sixties.Nixon 
repeatedly cited decisions of the United States Su- 
preme Court as being the major cause of crime.

The 
result was to provide police officials, prosecutors, leg- 
islators, and the general public wuth an easy ex- 
planation for the enormous increases in crime in the 
late sixties.

This relieved some of the pressure for 
change, a process which criminal justice officials were 
finding more painful and difficult than expected.

It wa.s also in 1968 that the Congress, aAer a delay 
of more than a year, finally passed the Safe Streets 
and Crime Control Act to provide aid to cities and 
states.

As originally proposed, the Act would have 
given the Justice Department the power to dispense 
funds directly to criminal justice agencies which car- 
ried out the changes such as those recommended by 
the Crime Commission.

But Attorney General Ram- 
sey Clark became embroiled with Congress over Sen- 
ator John McClellan’s insistence that the Act provide 
authorization for wiretapping and bugging.

Clark 
and President Johnson were strongly opposed to 
electronic surveillance.* However, Johnson’s rela- 
tions with Congress had deteriorated over the Viet- 
nam War, and Clark had emerged as the Republi- 
cans’ whipping boy in preparation for the 1968 
presidential campaign.

When the smoke had cleared, 
the Administration had settled for legislation which 
not only authorized electronic sur\'eillance but which 
also substituted “block grants” of federal funds to the 
states for the broad grantmaking authority in the 
Justice Department.

The seriousness of this legislative defeat soon be- 
came clear.

The principal justification for federal aid 
was that it would provide an incentive for cities and 
states to make changes in criminal justice agencies.

But with block grants the federal government cannot 
directly push for reform.

It simply gives a lump sum 
to each state to be distributed in accordance with the 
state’s own written plan.But with block grants the federal government cannot 
directly push for reform.

It simply gives a lump sum 
to each state to be distributed in accordance with the 
state’s own written plan.

These plans are the prod- 
ucts of large new state bureaucracies, many of which 
are controlled by old-line representatives of the state 
and local police departments, courts, prosecutors, 
and correctional agencies that need to be changed.

Since the state plans are rather general and require 
only superficial changes in the agencies, much of the 
money has been spent to preserve the status quo.

Thus, except for a few states where the plan- 
ning agencies have insisted on substantial 
change as a condition of funding, there is little 
to show for the almost one billion dollars that has 
been spent.

Some of the early funds were wasted on 
military equipment for riot control.

In one state a 
congressional committee found federal funds had 
been used to send families of law-enforcement offi- 
cials to college.

At a hearing last fall, the Conference 
of Mayors charged that “there is a wide-spread fail- 
ure to comply with the spirit of the law as it relates to 
distributing funds to cities to fight crime.” And the 
former administrator of the Act, Charles Rogovin, 
has made the drastic suggestion that the Law En- 
forcement Assistance Administration’s funds “be fro- 
zen until its house is in shape.” 
Unquestionably some of the problems are those at- 
tendant on any new federal grant program.

Some re- 
sult from the highly political natur| of the crime is- 
sue.

It has been suggested that the eight “high- 
impact” cities, each of which will receive $25 million 
in the next two and one half years, were picked with 
at least one eye on the 1972 election.

Perhaps the 
most fundamental defect in terms of crime control is 
the lack of research.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It has been suggested that the eight “high- 
impact” cities, each of which will receive $25 million 
in the next two and one half years, were picked with 
at least one eye on the 1972 election. Perhaps the 
most fundamental defect in terms of crime control is 
the lack of research. Largely because Congressman 
John Rooney of Brooklyn, the chairman of the key 
subcommittee of the House Appropriations Com- 
mittee, is suspicious of research, there has been a 
five-year drought in funds for the research autho- 
rized by the original Act. Thus, not much more is 
known about specific techniques of crime prevention 
today than was known five years ago, and the pros- 
pect for new answers in the next few years is bleak. •Jtihnson fell so strongly on this subject lhal when he heard a mis- 
taken rumor that the Commission had voted an endorsement of 
electronic surveillance, he told his staff he did not want the Com- 
mission's report delivered to the White House. Before I had to re- 
sort to the alternative, suggested by Elizabeth Drc^^• in her May, 
1968. article in The Atlantic (“On Giving Oneself a Hotfoot, Gov- 
ernment by Commission”), of “tossing the report over the While 
House fence,” the President’s staff agreed to receive the Report 
67

--- PAGE BREAK ---4i 
Even if every change ihe Commission called for in 
police, courts, and correctional agencies had been 
made, the resulting reduction in crime would prob- 
ably have been more than offset by increases result- 
ing from the enormous spread of drug addiction.

The 
best present estimate is that there are 250,000 addicts 
in the United States, of whom between one third and 
one half live in New York City.

Research has shown 
that the same young people at the bottom of the so- 
cial and economic ladder who commit the bulk of 
predatory crime are most likely to become addicts.

(Five out of every six addicts in New York City are 
black; about half are under twenty-two years of age.) 
Their addiction adds to the already great likelihood of 
their committing crimes the need to raise $25 to'S100 
each day to buy heroin.

The results have been ex- 
plosive.

Some cities are reporting that almost half of 
those in jail are fiddicts.

One judge in Washington 
found that 75 percent of the defendants brought into 
court on felony charges were addicts.

Five years ago, the Crime Commission recognized 
addiction as a major source of crime, but as four dis- 
senting members of the Commission noted, the ma- 
jority was unwilling even to explore alternatives to 
the present drug enforcement policy, which, by re- 
quiring addicts to get their heroin illicitly, puts 
enormous pressure on them to rob, steal, prostitute 
themselves, or sell drugs to raise money.

Recently, as 
an extension of this policy, we have negotiated with 
Turkey, France, and Mexico and other drug- 
producing countries in an attempt to cut off the sup- 
ply at the source.

This has been combined with at- 
tempts to stop drugs at the borders of the United 
States.Recently, as 
an extension of this policy, we have negotiated with 
Turkey, France, and Mexico and other drug- 
producing countries in an attempt to cut off the sup- 
ply at the source.

This has been combined with at- 
tempts to stop drugs at the borders of the United 
States.

The most dramatic example was ‘Operation 
Intercept,*’ aimed at persons bringing mariju^a 
across the Mexican border, and some experts think 
that the only result was a temporary increase in the 
price of marijuana in the United States and a switch 
by thousands of marijuana users to heroin.

In any 
event, it is perfectly clear that heroin and other drugs 
are still plentiful and that federal law enforcement 
has served primarily to keep the price at a high level, 
with the resultant pressure on addicts to commit 
crimes to support their habits.

The most significant change in drug policy in the 
past five years is that at the same time that several 
agencies of the federal government are devoting 
enormous resources to the apparently futile effort to 
stop heroin traffic, the country has moved quietly to 
a policy of dispensing another addictive drug—meth- 
adone—on a maintenance basis.

Labeled as “experi- 
mental,” methadone projects now exist in cities and 
towns all over the country.

Many such projects are 
funded by the Department of Health, Education, and 
Welfare and all require a federal permit.

It was originally thought that methadone in some 
mysterious way provided a “blockade” to the effects 
of heroin, but it is now clear that many addicts take 
heroin and methadone (and other drugs) inter- 
changeably.

Both drugs are addictive; both can give 
a “high” if taken in large doses; and both can prob- 
ably be given at sustaining dosages that would per- 
mit most addicts to lead more or less normal lives.It was originally thought that methadone in some 
mysterious way provided a “blockade” to the effects 
of heroin, but it is now clear that many addicts take 
heroin and methadone (and other drugs) inter- 
changeably.

Both drugs are addictive; both can give 
a “high” if taken in large doses; and both can prob- 
ably be given at sustaining dosages that would per- 
mit most addicts to lead more or less normal lives.

Many doctors prefer methadone as a sustaining drug 
because they believe it is easier to stabilize doses; 
some would prefer heroin because they think it has a 
belter effect on the patient’s emotional state.

The 
biggest difference between heroin and methadone is 
probably political rather than pharmacological— 
methadone does not have the history and the con- 
notations that make it so difficult for heroin to be 
considered as a form of medical treatment.

Partly for the same reason, among addicts heroin 
is still clearly the “drug of choice.” As long as it is 
available it is unlikely that even a massive meth- 
adone maintenance program open to all addicts 
would dramatically reduce the number of heroin 
users.

Concern about crime by heroin addicts has re- 
sulted in support for experimental heroin-main- 
tenance programs from unexpected sources.

In recent 
weeks a special committee of the staid American Bar 
Association has called for such experiments.

So have 
United Stales Attorney Whitney North Seymour, Jr., 
and Police Commissioner Patrick Mu^hy in New 
York City and Sheriff John Buckley in Middlesex 
County, Massachusetts.

Mayor Lindsay would al- 
most certainly have set up such a program already 
but for the strong opposition of Congressman Rangel 
and several other black leaders.--- PAGE BREAK ---

So have 
United Stales Attorney Whitney North Seymour, Jr., 
and Police Commissioner Patrick Mu^hy in New 
York City and Sheriff John Buckley in Middlesex 
County, Massachusetts. Mayor Lindsay would al- 
most certainly have set up such a program already 
but for the strong opposition of Congressman Rangel 
and several other black leaders. They see this ap- 
proach as “writing off” their people and fear that 
whatever deterrent effect the possibility of addiction 
might have on marginal drug users might be under- 
mined if the worst they faced by becoming addicted 
was a daily trip to a government dispensary. Another factor that has discouraged such pro- 
grams is a prevailing misconception in this country 
that the British system of making heroin available to 
addicts at government-regulated clinics has resulted 
in a large increase in addiction. While this was true 
when individual doctors were permitted to prescribe 
heroin freely, two years ago the British began con- 
trolling distribution by individual doctors and now 
make drugs available through government-spon- 
sored clinics. The result is that the number of ad- 
dicts in England has stabilized at less than 3000. (A recent study counted six times that number in 
one forty-block area in New York City.) There ap- 
pears to be little crime committed in England to- 
day by addicts seeking money for drugs, because 
addicts pay either nothing or 2 cents per dose for 
their heroin. It would be a mistake to expect that most addicts 
will give up crime altogether once they can get free 
heroin from clinics. A prostitute in the Addiction Re- 
search and Treatment Corporation Center in Bed- 
ford-Stuyvesant explained it clearly: “Now that I’m 
on methadone, 1 feel like a human being for the first 
time. 1 want some nice clothes and the only thing Fm 
good enough at is boosting [shoplifting] and turning 
68

--- PAGE BREAK ---The War on Crime 
tricks.

But 1 don’t have to do as much as long as I can 
gel my drugs here.” 
Just as methadone is turning out to be no ”magic 
bullet,” so we would have to anticipate that many 
heroin addicts maintained at clinics would commit 
crimes.

But controlling crime is not finding one total 
answer; it is chipping away with a number of partial 
answers.

By relieving the enormous economic pres- 
sure of addiction, it may be possible to offset par- 
tially the enormous increase in criminality accounted 
for by addiction.

Unless researchers find a nonaddictive substitute 
for heroin, we will probably soon see a few govern- 
ment-sponsored heroin maintenance experiments in 
the United Stales.

And if the experience with meth- 
adone is any guide, it seems a fair, if somewhat 
gloomy, guess that five years from now public pres- 
sure to reduce crime will have forced acceptance of 
heroin maintenance as a generally available form of 
treatment.

Neither improving the criminal justice system 
nor relieving addicts of the additional eco- 
nomic pressure to commit crimes that their 
addiction imposes on them is likely to make much 
difference in crime rates if millions of people believe 
crime is their best route to a decent life.

We rely for 
self-protection more than we usually recognize on 
moral restraints based on a sense that each member 
of society has a stake in obeying the law.

The sense 
of belonging to a community that underlies much of 
this moral restraint is undermined if the conduct of 
the rich and the powerful is characterized by self- 
ishness, and if the government appears to have little 
concern for the plight of those for whom life is diffi- 
cult.

Continuing denial of opportunity, combined with 
the anonymity of city life, is destroying the social 
pressure to abstain from crime.The sense 
of belonging to a community that underlies much of 
this moral restraint is undermined if the conduct of 
the rich and the powerful is characterized by self- 
ishness, and if the government appears to have little 
concern for the plight of those for whom life is diffi- 
cult.

Continuing denial of opportunity, combined with 
the anonymity of city life, is destroying the social 
pressure to abstain from crime.

The riots of the mid- 
sixties showed one possible outlet for the deep frus- 
tration and hatred fell by young blacks in the cities— 
the same group that is already responsible for a large 
proportion of serious crime.

In New York City pred- 
atory *Yat packs” of Juveniles roam the city.

They 
justify what they do as “getting even,” and the 
thought that their viaims are human beings with 
lives and feelings of their own seems foreign to them.

It would be a tragic mistake to assume that we can 
look to the law-enforcement system to control crime 
if other restraints disappear.

To understand this we 
need only look at the situation from the point of view 
of the potential criminal.

The odds against the police 
catching the average burglar—either at the scene or 
later-are probably no better than 50 to 1.

And if he 
is arrested, he has a good chance of having his case 
dropped or of being put on probation.

A middle- 
class citizen with a reasonably comfortable life may 
be deterred by these odds; he has too much to lose.

But 25 million people in the United States live below 
the officially defined poverty line.

In a society where 
television commercials are constantly reminding us 
that every self-respecting American should be driv- 
ing a new car and flying off for a Caribbean vacation, 
crime may seem like the only good bet for those 
whose lives are little more than a struggle to survive.But 25 million people in the United States live below 
the officially defined poverty line.

In a society where 
television commercials are constantly reminding us 
that every self-respecting American should be driv- 
ing a new car and flying off for a Caribbean vacation, 
crime may seem like the only good bet for those 
whose lives are little more than a struggle to survive.

Even if we double or quadruple the effectiveness 
of law enforcement (and there is no reason to think 
we can) and reduce the odds proportionately, it may 
still be a good bet.

Crime will be a worse gamble 
only when people have decent enough lives on the 
outside so they are unwilling to risk arrest and con- 
viction.

The view that the level of crime is determined less 
by law enforcement than by the extent to which we 
make life worthwhile for those at the bottom of the 
economic and social ladder is not a partisan one.

Five years ago the Crime Commission, which in- 
cluded such staunch conservatives as William Rog- 
ers, currently Secretary of Slate, and Lewis Powell, 
one of President Nixon’s most recent appointees to 
the Supreme Court, unanimously reported that the 
Commission 
.

.

.

has no doubt whatever that the most significant 
action that can be taken against crime is action de- 
signed to eliminate slums and ghettos, to improve 
education, to provide jobs, to make sure that every 
American is given the opportunities and freedoms 
that will enable him to assume his responsibilities.

The country seems to be proceeding on the con- 
trary assumption.

In a two-year period when federal 
appropriations for the Law Enforcement Assistance 
Administration program increased from $270 million 
to $7(X) million, funds for the fedeltl juvenile-delin- 
quency programs were cut from $15 to $10 million.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The country seems to be proceeding on the con- 
trary assumption. In a two-year period when federal 
appropriations for the Law Enforcement Assistance 
Administration program increased from $270 million 
to $7(X) million, funds for the fedeltl juvenile-delin- 
quency programs were cut from $15 to $10 million. Against the background of the tremendous increase 
in crime committed by blacks, whatever notions of 
fiscal soundness or social justice are thought to un- 
derlie the Administration’s apparent acceptance of 
Daniel P. Moynihan’s proposal for “benign neglect” 
of blacks, that policy seems almost certain to have 
disastrous effects on crime. The Crime Commission’s final conclusion was that 
“controlling crime in America is an endeavor that 
will be slow and hard and costly. But America can 
control crime if it will.” At that time I thought there 
was hope for changes that would both strengthen the 
agencies of criminal administration and reduce the 
injustices that underlie much crime. I still do not be- 
lieve that we have to settle for a society where we live 
in fear of each other. But today, I find it hard to 
j>oinl to anything that is being done that is likely to 
reduce crime even to the level of five years ago. □ 
69 
ii