FEDERAL BUREAU OF II
Cossnission No.
fo-aea a-a-S0)
1'
Dat«
4/2/64
« t
JOHN MARTIN, JR., Superintendent of Safety, Room 517*
United States Post Office Terminal'Annex, 207 South Houston
Street, telephone nvunber RI 9-3l8l, advised he resides at
9846 Shoreview Road, Dallas, Texas, and has telephone number
DI 8-3^6. MARTIN said he was born September 21, 1905 at
Two Harbors, Minnesota.
MARTIN advised that on November 22, 1963* He knew
the route of the Presidential Motorcade and had brought his
8
DeJtir Movie camera with him for the purpose of taking
pictures of the Presidential Motorcade.
At approximately 12:10 PM on November 22, 1963^,.
MARTIN said he left his office at the U. S. Post Office
Terminal Annex and took up a position on the west aide of
Houston Street, a few feet north of Main Street. At approxi-
mately 12:30 PM, MARTIN said the car bearing President
JOHN P. KENNEDY came Into his view and he took pictures of
the President as his car tiu:*ned north on Houston Street
from Main Street. After getting movie shots from this
position, MARTIN said he ran north on Houston Street and
stopped at the north end of the reflection pool which lies
west of and Is adjacent to Houston Street. He said this Is
about 135’ south of the Texas School Book Depository Building.
MARTIN said he took some movie shots of the President as
he passed by on Elm Street. A few seconch after the President
had passed and was departing from his view, he heard a loud
report and first thought that It was a firecracker and a
few seconds later heazKi two moire-reports and then knew It
was rifle fire and that someone was apparently shooting at
President Kennedy'.' MARTIN stated that the shots sounded
to like they came from the Texas School Book Depository
Building and said he looked toward where he thougH; the shots
came from, namely the Texas School Book Depository Building,
but did not see anyone.that aroused his suspicion.
Following the shooting, M.ARTIN stated the whole
area was In a state of chaos with many people running in
the direction of the President's car. He said he also ran
in the direction of the President's car thinking that perhaps
the person who fired the shots had left the building and
was being pursued by the police. MARTIN advised when he
realized this was not so, he stopped and talked to a man who
3/31/64 Dallas, Texas
J^JaE^^E P. PETRAKIS Se A. RAYIIOND
by Sp.cial Ag.nt^, SMIT7.S?V^aa-
^ DL 100-10461
FiU # :
Dot* dictated 4/1/64
This doouaant eontalaii a*ithd»r r«coaa*BdiatioA« nor concluolons cl th« FBI. It la tho proporty of tho FBI and La loanad to
your agancy; It aad Ita ooatanta ara not ta ka 41atri^uta4 autaida your agaooy.doouaant eontalaii a*ithd»r r«coaa*BdiatioA« nor concluolons cl th« FBI. It la tho proporty of tho FBI and La loanad to
your agancy; It aad Ita ooatanta ara not ta ka 41atri^uta4 autaida your agaooy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---*ithd»r r«coaa*BdiatioA« nor concluolons cl th« FBI. It la tho proporty of tho FBI and La loanad to
your agancy; It aad Ita ooatanta ara not ta ka 41atri^uta4 autaida your agaooy.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MOr#c 8«rvio« agent and told Miii the
il the T«3cas Sehool Book Deposltozy
•^d hik then ran haok toward the Texas
lxiS> he told'a United Press International
'jMllee offlo^ that the shots had oooe
ool fipok Depository and that
d'be Bihprounded. NA2QMX stated he remained
1 Book Depository Building for about ten
id td.'the 'U. S« Post Offloe Teralnal
HaaTZii edwiaed that he returned to the area of
the Texaa Sohool Book Dsposltoxy Building at aboht 12:30 PM
and took SKire aorles of ,the eoene. He stated it was at about
thle time that he. was standing about .30* north of Conmeroe
Btreet on thO;^ iMat side of Houston when he saw a cab believed
Dd a blaek and white CBteoloer Oab» traveling south on
.Bouaton Street. He stated he did not know where the cab
but the oab was eerrylng one male passenger.
MaHTfll deeorlbed the individual as telng a white male in his
early bareheaded, and waa wearing a dark ahlrt which
appeaeed to have vertteel broken pin stripes. He stated he
thooght It «aa unoahal for a man drwed thla way, to be in
Bfc'that tine, and -the thought raced
thro<igh 1^ tdad^ t It be tuxmr If he were the
a^caegdkkllfaF .lUURSZX etated this man looked straight at Him
aro ha bellevea frov^ploturee that'he eaw. subaequently In the
newspapers end mi .television, that this male was T.WW HARTXT
OSHAID. lUBTIir advised that he hed never met LIS EARVlf
OStOLD and based his possible Identification of OSWALD by
refereaoe to the above mentioned pictures.
t -z*
NABTSf advised that he left, the ax*ea of the Texas
Sehool Book Depository Building about 3:20 PM and drove home
ob Moveodber 22, 1963.
that when he got home his son' Informed
d been telephoning for him, aid left
atructloDs on how they could be
ntaoted a ra^fseentatlve of Life
, and agreod- to let Life Magazineoveodber 22, 1963.
that when he got home his son' Informed
d been telephoning for him, aid left
atructloDs on how they could be
ntaoted a ra^fseentatlve of Life
, and agreod- to let Life Magazine

--- PAGE BREAK ---

CO 1 OCf
DL 100-10461
J»ve his film he had taken of the Presidential Motorcade
because he felt this film could be a matter of n^tlo^l
Interest. MAOTIN aid Life Magazine, to his knowledge
returned it to him. MARTIN^sald
25 feet of^iim?^