Knights
of Lucifer


Latin Ameri


Luciferians


@ HYPERBOREAN 2


Publishing Company


"Knights of Lucifer"


Index


1) "Analysis of the Virgin of Agartha"

2) "Two Initiates of Nimrod from Rosario speak about The Hyperborean Wisdom"
3) "The History of OCTRA"

4) "Dialogue Between a Pontiff, Virya-Berserker and a Hyperborean Initiate"


5) "The Black Magic of Chang-Shamballah",
(From: "The Return of Quetzalcoalt, Huiracocha and the Cosmic Warriors", L.Wotan)


6) "The Mystery of Agartha", |lgnacio Ondargain

7) "The Tree of Navutan", Piedra Iberica

8) "Trip to the Center of the Earth", |gnacio Ondargain

9) "On Democracy; Hypocrisy and Lies", by Tyrodal Knight, Orlando Croy Romero


10) The Serpent: Writings of Geburah Michel Lycanon


11) "The True Meaning of Lucifer: Destroying the judeo-christian Myths"


Analysis of the Virgin of Agartha
by Johnny McClue


The hidden hyperborean symbolism of the Virgen de la Vega, or of Agartha, Mother of the
Andes: In today's article we would like to analyze the hidden symbolism in one of the most
recently created pagan virgins. We refer to the so-called Virgen de la Vega Madre de los Andes,
sculpted for the first time in history by a Bolivian artisan in 2010. Said artist was commissioned
to make the sculpture by the Emerging Vegan Movement of Bolivia.


The entire Latin American vegan movement is based on what they call "hyperborean wisdom",
launched to the Spanish-speaking public through a novel of "divine inspiration". This work
entitled "The Mystery of Belicena Villca" was written in the last century by Nimrod de Rosario,
the alias of the enigmatic Argentine writer Luis Felipe Moyano.


"The Mystery of Belicena Villca" is a desperate attempt to search for the origins and reasons for
the existence of human beings who do not know who they are, what the hell are they doing
here and where the hell are they going. In this book in the format of a historical novel written in
the last century, Nimrod de Rosario tried to give answers to all these questions, rescuing from
oblivion the ancient hyperborean wisdom. According to this Argentine writer, we live in an
imperfect world for the simple reason that the god who created our world is a god who does
not know perfection, he is the god whom Nimrod calls "Demiurge-Jehovah-Satan". Our
existence takes place in a universe created by said Demiurge, for this reason we live with
diseases, sufferings and death.


Another of Rosario's Nimrod works captured her hyperborean philosophy in a series of books,
before her body mysteriously disappeared, never to be seen again.


Apparently, the beings who "inspired" all the works he wrote, and later "took him away", they
were the ones who later contacted his mother Rosalia to spread her son's writings throughout
the world.


Well, the Emerging Veganist Movement bases its political, social and spiritual ideas on
everything that Nimrod de Rosario wrote. According to the founder of this Bolivian movement,
all the ideology applied in the movement is born from two characters: "The lord of absolute
orientation, Nimrod de Rosario and Rosalia, the mother who bore him". Within this
hyperborean historical novel of "The Mystery of Belicena Villca", is where we find a detailed
description of all the symbology that surrounds this pagan virgin that in Latin America is
becoming popular with different names:


Virgin Mistress of the Andes


Virgin of Vega

Virgin of the Andes

Virgin of Agartha

Virgin Mother of the Andes


Reading the paragraphs detailing the characteristics of this pagan virgin, one is already
beginning to realize the monumental mythological and historical mix enclosed in The Mystery
of Belicena Villca.


This is the description of the virgin in question:


"The Sculpture of the Virgin is made of painted wood, of small dimensions: seventy centimeters
high, thirty wide and thirty deep; she is sitting, in a majestic attitude, on a Chair also made of
wood; the face is of beautiful western features, since it reproduces one of the Ladies of Tharsis,
and smiles softly as her eyes stare forward; the hair falls in the form of sixteen finely carved
braids, which immediately arise below the Crown; because so much She, like the Child, they
exhibit the attributes of the Royal Dignity: both Crowns are triple and octagonal; As for the
Child, he is sitting on his lap, on the left knee, while She lovingly holds him by the shoulder with
her left hand: unlike the Sculpture of the Virgin, which is made of painted wood,that of the
Child is of White Stone; Madera Virgin, Stone Child: the Face of the Virgin is painted in
Immaculate White, the Golden Hair, the Red Body and the Black Chair; with the right hand, the
Virgin wields a beam of sixteen Wheat Spikes and a Rod, with the left hand she holds the Child;
his feet are apart, as well as his knees, and under his right foot he is crushed, poking the head of
a snake; the Child Kristos Rey, meanwhile, stare forward, in the direction your Divine Mother is
looking, and he has a book in his left hand while with his right he makes a gesture that
highlights the right angle between his index fingers and thumb."the Red Body and the Black
Chair; with the right hand, the Virgin wields a beam of sixteen Wheat Spikes and a Rod, with the
left hand she holds the Child; his feet are apart, as well as his knees, and under his right foot he
is crushed, poking the head of a snake; the Child Kristos Rey, meanwhile, stare forward, in the
direction your Divine Mother is looking, and he has a book in his left hand while with his right
he makes a gesture that highlights the right angle between his index fingers and thumb."the
Red Body and the Black Chair; with the right hand, the Virgin wields a beam of sixteen Wheat
Spikes and a Rod, with the left hand she holds the Child; his feet are apart, as well as his knees,
and under his right foot he is crushed, poking the head of a snake; the Child Kristos Rey,
meanwhile, stare forward, in the direction your Divine Mother is looking, and he has a book in
his left hand while with his right he makes a gesture that highlights the right angle between his
index fingers and thumb."stare forward, in the direction your Divine Mother is looking, and he
has a book in his left hand while with his right he makes a gesture that highlights the right angle


between his index fingers and thumb."stare forward, in the direction your Divine Mother is
looking, and he has a book in his left hand while with his right he makes a gesture that
highlights the right angle between his index fingers and thumb."


For the Emerging Vegan Movement, this image has no religious connotation, but represents the
longing for liberation and the symbol of transformation that the movement raises in Latin
America. Let's see how the movement born in Bolivia itself presents this image from a
perspective in the purest hyperborean style, giant builders, stone walls, fortresses and warriors:


"Behind the female image crowned by an octagon of edges, the stone boy, the ears of wheat,
the rod and the snake crushed by the right foot, lies a story of Beings from beyond the stars
who brought a liberating strategy for the spirits who fell captive in this world of madness.


A history of Giant Builders of fortresses and stone walls possessing the Lithic Wisdom. Story of
Heroes and Warriors with Stone hearts, who opened an exit route to lost freedom and
happiness represented by the eight-pointed star, symbol of the Venial, Venusino and La Virgen


But what interests us here is not the "legitimacy" of Mary as Virgin; but what "The Virgin"
means as the Original Myth, since the Myth as we saw it; it is ancestral and is much more than
two thousand years old."


The above phrases are a clear example of how hyperborean wisdom has broad mythological
and symbolic foundations that clearly feed on sources long before the appearance of Christ and
the Virgin Maria. In the description of this curious and modern pagan virgin there is a detail of
extreme symbolic importance: the virgin and the throne are made of wood, but nevertheless
the child is made of white stone. This difference in the raw materials used to sculpt the image is
not usually found in other similar images. It is not by chance that the virgin is made of wood
and the child of white stone.


Stone is a powerful animistic sign of forces believed to exist within matter. Stones and rocks in
general symbolize strength, integrity and eternity in all ancient cultures. As lasting symbols of
the life force, stones and rocks have always been used to indicate sacred places, protect and
store them. The altars and sacred places where sacrifices and ceremonies were made were
always made of stone. Stones in the Celtic world have a clear relationship with oracles,
predictions, and the Celtic belief that they bestow the "gift of lip".


Stone is the oldest and most widespread human tool on the entire planet, giving its name to
the famous Stone Age. It is the universal symbol of the liberation of the gross nature and for
this reason it has been associated as a symbol of divinity within the raw material itself. The
stones and rocks materialize the spiritual forces, hence they are objects of worship in all ancient


cultures. But most of the sacred and adored stones are black and dark because they are actually


meteorites fallen from the sky. They are called "stones of heaven", "stones of lightning", or
"stars of stars" and all of them are completely black or very dark.


So why is the Child Kristos Rey a white stone?


In symbology the white stone has a very concrete and profound message. | am pleased to share
the meaning of the white stone that my dear Professor Lester taught me in his exciting
Symbology and Numerology classes:


"The white stone is a clear sign of initiation. In the Mysteries the white stone had the word
"Prize" engraved and was delivered to the neophyte when at his initiation he had managed to
pass all the tests. The medieval Rosicrucians called it "the mighty coral" and took it from the
ancient Gnostics. The white stone is already mentioned by Saint John in the second chapter of
the Apocalypse: Whoever has ears to hear what the Spirit says to the Churches: To the one who
is victorious | will give the hidden manna; | will also give him a white stone that will have a new
name written, that no one knows but who receives."


The great white stone of the altar of the new church ofOmia, Peru. Now that we know the
symbolic meaning of white stone, let's see what the symbology tells us about wood. For most of
the cultures and civilizations of our planet, wood represents and symbolizes:


Vital energy
Maternity
Protection

Wisdom
Superhuman science


All Nordic traditions are linked to the cult of wood. Trees and wood were considered by the
Celts as synonymous with wisdom and knowledge. The wood of the tree is the matter that,
starting from the earth, rises and directs towards the sky. For this reason, wood was considered
to be the best way to connect the earth with the sky, thanks to the wood, the man from the
north agreed to everything related to heavenly wisdom.


The world of druids, magicians, and witches have always been related to forests, ancient trees,
and magic wands. It is from the depths of the forest that everything magical and powerful
arises at night.


The most precious object of any druid was its magic wand that had to be made of wood. To
make his wand to the druid, he did not serve any wood and to cut and work it, he had to wait
for the right moment to come. The wand was the symbol of maximum power that druids used
to rule the elements. The power concentrated in the wood of the wand was believed to be of
superhuman origin.


The wood communicates below with above, being located within the "nature scale" in an
intermediate position. It is the silver cord that the ancient Sumerians already said connected
the divine and heavenly, with everything earthly and human.


The description of this virgin details that she is sitting on a throne, as are most of the other
pagan virgins and goddesses in history. The ancient Greek goddess of reason, so often
represented during the French and Spanish republics, always appeared majestically sitting ona
throne. These types of feminities have always had a staging full of symbolism. In the following
image we can see the goddess reason being shown before the French, where honoring the
ancestral symbols, the throne and the pyramid could not be missing.


Another very frequent symbolic attribute in this type of female image is the footfall. In this type
of actions, very emblematic symbols are always trodden. On this occasion described by Nimrod
de Rosario, the one who receives a good stomp is a snake. The serpent that steps on the Virgin
of Agartha represents the wisdom of the Demiurge, thanks to which he creates an imperfect
world where everything is suffering and death. The Virgin of Agartha when stepping on this
serpent is showing us what is the path of liberation to stop being slaves of the Demiurge. The
snake throughout the Nordic culture has a special relevance, highlighting the so-called "World
Snake" that Thor finally kills with a clean hammer with his famous double hammer.


Thor with his hammer and the Serpent of the World.


Snakes and their deadly poisons star in a curious story in Norse mythology with Loki and Sigyn
where they are punished in the depths of a cave. The punishment consisted of having Loki
chained to the rock of a cave, while the venom of a snake leaked on his head. Sigyn tried with a
vessel that the drops of the deadly poison did not fall on Loki's face, until the container was
completely full.


snake inside the cave


The act of treading represents the destruction and abolition of what is under the foot. In the
following image we have the French goddess reason sitting on a throne again but with one of
her feet she is treading what she had deceived every man and woman from what from the


Vatican. One of these clear examples where an image is worth a thousand words is the strength
of the symbols and archetypes that some use, but the vast majority ignore.


The description of the image of this pagan virgin also contains secrets related to my beloved
Numerology. There are many images of goddesses and gods that show possessing the power
and strength locked in Numerology.


On the right we can see how the same goddess of reason is usually represented with an amulet
around her neck that shows the 9 numbers with which the Numerology bases all her knowledge


We are going to reveal the numbers that from the description of the image of this Andean
virgin, have seemed more important and significant to us.


We can start with the external dimensions of this virgin since they are intimately related to the
right angle that the stone child performs with his thumb and index finger. These are the
dimensions of the image reported in the previous description:


70 cm high by 30 cm wide by 30 cm deep. At first glance these dimensions have nothing to do
with the 90 degree angle, but look at what happens when said description is executed as
written using the science of Numerology that my dear Professor Lester taught:


70 x 30 x 30 = 63,000.- Remember that when in Numerology we reduce the quantities, the 0 do
not count, therefore the reduction of 63,000 to obtain its numerical value would be:


63,000 =6+3+0+0+0=9 Let's apply the same methodology to know the numerical value of
the 90 degrees that have all the right angles, like the one who performs the white stone child
with his fingers:


90 = 9+0=9 With this simple numerological calculation, we have just verified that the
dimensions of the image and the right angle have the same value, consonance, they are living in
mutual harmony. The whole set of this image is related to number 9 and everything that this
number archetypically represents. The beings who channeled the information with which
Nimrod de Rosario wrote "The Mystery of Belicena Villca", had the science of Numerology very
present, there is no doubt.


Number 9 is a number closely linked to the powerful god of magic, Odin. Mythological legend
tells us that Odin introduced runes into the world, in exchange for suffering a difficult sacrifice
of hanging 9 nights of the World Tree. But in reality, experts acknowledge that the real reason
why number 9 is so important in all of Norse mythology is ignored. There is no other number
like 9 that is so often named in boreal lands:


The 9 days Odin was learning the 9 spells.


Heimdall had 9 mothers.

Aegir had 9 daughters.

Hermod traveled 9 nights in search of Balder.

Freyr waited 9 nights for his girlfriend Gerd.

Njord and Skadi lived 9 nights each at each other's house.
Every 9 nights 8 Draupnir rings fell, Odin's ring.

Thor before dying retreated 9 steps from Jormangand.


For 9 days they were held every 9 years in Upsala, a festival where 9 representatives of each
living creature, including humans, were sacrificed.


As we have seen, one of the most prominent symbols within this image of the Virgin of Agartha
is the gesture that the stone boy makes with his thumb and index finger of his right hand. At
the end of the description of the sculpture, this gesture is very evident:


"The Child Kristos Rey, for his part, stares forward, in the direction that his Divine Mother looks,
and he has a book in his left hand while with his right he makes a gesture that highlights the
right angle between his index fingers and thumb."


The Kenaz Rune has value 6


The right angle symbol is not just any symbol, nor is it of recent invention. Within the old world
of runes, the so-called Kenaz rune is exactly the shape of a right angle.


Runes are a set of symbols that were used for divinatory purposes in ancient sacred practices in
northern Europe. We have already seen that for Norse mythology the introducer of the runes
was Odin. The origin of the symbols that make up the runes seems to be found in an ancient
alphabet, called "futhark" used by some ancient Germanic tribes.


The Ancient Futhark alphabet is the oldest of all known runic alphabets. Specialists believe that
it developed in Northern Europe, starting from the Etruscan. The Kenaz rune occupies just sixth
place in that alphabet, which directly relates it to everything number six represents.


This alphabet was named "futhark" because it is made up of the first six letters of that old
alphabet. As can be seen in the image above, if we grasp the first six letters of the list, we are
left with the word that gives its name to this Germanic alphabet: FUTHARK. The sixth rune is
the Kenaz rune which is equivalent to our letter K.


10


The emerging vegan movement has incorporated the right angle symbol, the Kenaz rune, as its
identifying element and representative image. For this movement the symbol of the 90 degree
angle of the Kenaz rune represents the torch, the creative energy, the primordial fire and the


source of wisdom.


The stone boy with his left hand is holding a book. It is the book of hyperborean wisdom that
the human being has completely forgotten. The stone boy's mission to humanity is symbolized
by this book and the Kenaz rune: be the creative energy and source of wisdom that brings a
better world to all humanity. For this reason, the right angle symbol is the one that identifies all
this recently created Latin American movement.


Bolivian Vegan Movement:


But the Emerging Veganist Movement also identifies with another symbol related to the world
of runes. We refer to the Odal rune that the Bolivian movement sports on its coat of arms. The
Odal rune symbolizes kinship between the family through the union of blood and represents
the pure race. It was a symbol widely used in Germany by the SS and was later adopted by the
Seventh SS Mountain Division and the Waffen SS.


For this hyperboreal Latin American movement, the Odal rune is the reflection of ourselves
with our backs to the right angle, fostering the right moment for the change towards a new
paradigm. But if we look closely at the Odal rune in front of the symbol used in Bolivia, they
have an important difference: the square point at the bottom is only in the symbol of this Latin
American movement.


Where the hell does this square point come from under the rune that shines in the Odal rune
because of its absence? Symbolically speaking, the answer to this question has a lot of crumb.


The origin of this square point has nothing to do with the Odal rune, but it does have a lot to do


with one of the most used symbols on Nazi flags and uniforms: the swastika or swastika.


At first glance, we can hardly find out anything. In order to discover this question we have to go


through the same mirror trick used on the famous cover of the Beatles by Sargent Pepper. On
this cover, the letters written on the battery drum contain an encrypted message that can only


be read if we reflect half of the hype in a mirror. It is a method widely used in occult symbology.


As well, the symbol used by veganists uses the same trick used on the cover of the British music


group. In the following two images we can see how the swastika is transformed as reflected in
the mirror one way or another.


If we place the mirror on the swastika so that the figure is divided into two equal parts, the
resulting image when adding the one reflected by the mirror itself, It is an Odal rune with the


11


black square point that we discussed. A square that contains a great secret, symbolically
speaking: it is formed from the union of by its bases two equilateral triangles of two different
origins, one triangle belongs to the original swastika and the other corresponds to its own
reflection.


With this mirror trick, the swastika is completely camouflaged. In this way everyone thinks that
it is a nice logo, anew movement, when it is nothing more than the swastika of a lifetime. An
excellent way to work the power of the swastika, without raising suspicions. It must be
recognized that, symbolically speaking, this distinctive sign of the vegan movement is very, very
elaborate.


In the article that we dedicate to the symbol of the cross, we already explained that the
swastika is one of the first and most powerful geometric signs that the human being used in his
civilized beginnings.


The 16 fundamental runes:


In the description of the image there is a number that has a very special role, being named
twice: number 16. We have the 16 ears of wheat that the virgin carries in her right hand and
the 16 braids made from her blond and long hair.


Within the hyperborean world and in all the old Nordic traditions, the 16 has a special
relevance. The fundamental Nordic rune alphabet is made up of 16 runes, hence the 16 has
such a close relationship with the Nordic world.


An old doctrine told that the whole of creation is made up of the 4 fundamental elements (
Earth, Water, Air and Fire ), which are subdivided into 16 sub-elements. The subdivision of the 4
elements plays a very prominent role in the entire magical vision of the Nordic world. The 16 is
a symbol of harmonious plurality in most religious rites and ceremonies, as it is the result of
promoting by 4 the 4 fundamental elements.


The Tarot card with the number
16: The House of God


But the number 16 also reflects the opposite side of what perfection means and then the 16
becomes the number of dismemberment. This complicated aspect of 16 is masterfully
explained in the Tarot letter that represents this number: La Torre, also called the House of
God. We are before the earthly domicile of God, which is none other than the temple or
sanctuary of so many cultures, mythologies and religions. A temple, an institution that is
annihilated by the force of a powerful heavenly ray.


12


The Tarot letter with number 16: The House of God


characteristics: The curious and unusual crowns of the virgin and the child cannot go unnoticed.
Each of the two carries a triple octagonal crown.


The crown expresses dignity, power and holiness. In most cultures it is a sovereign and divine
attribute. In Hinduism, Buddhism, and Islam, the crown symbolizes the exaltation of the spirit
over the body. The crown represents the defeat of matter because of the spirit. On the other
hand, the octagonal shape indicates perfection and universality. The octagon evokes the
eternal life that is achieved by the immersion of the neophyte in the baptismal font. For this
reason, baptismal piles and fountains are usually octagonal in shape. Eight is the number that
expresses cosmic balance and infinity. The spokes of the wheels of fortune and the wheel of
Dhamma, usually always have 8 spokes. Number eight and octagon have a mediation value
between the square and the circle, between heaven and earth. There are 8 guardians of space
corresponding to the 8 arms of Vishnu and the forms of Shiva ( murti ), there are also 8. The
symbolism of the central balance represented by number 8, we also find in the octopus and
gnostic. The Quechua myth that relates the origin of the Inca dynasty, mentions the 8
primordial ancestors, 4 brothers and 4 sisters.


Animals with 8 legs:


According to hyperborean philosophy, the number 8 is represented in a hidden way by
arachnids and scorpions, which, having eight legs, they resemble the 8 points of the star that
symbolizes Venus and because “ cool” animal passion. This animal passion in Andean culture is
called aiming. Animals with 8 limbs have always attracted human attention, since they
represent an animal typology that normally has nothing. A class of animals that in our
subconscious have very sinister and parasitic connotations.


The god Freyr with his wheat


But Venus and its 8 points, also represents agriculture and for this reason, the virgin in her right
hand carries the ears of wheat. In the Greco-Roman world, the goddess Ceres was the one who
gave men the wheat seeds and instructed them in their cultivation. But in Norse mythology we
also have in mind the bundles of wheat with the god Freyr, god of fertility and brother of the
goddess Freyja. In this engraving we see him sitting on his throne along with his two attributes:
the bunch of wheat and the sword with the helmet.


Wheat is also closely related to the magical world and during the Middle Ages it was one of the
most widely used ingredients in making spells and protective amulets. One of the greatest
specialists in these magical leaders, Fernando Gutierrez, tells us about the making in those
times of one of these amulets used in Catalan lands.


13


The 7 points of Apollo


In all mythologies there is usually a god or goddess in charge of giving man seeds with which
God teaches agriculture to man. A bunch of ears of wheat is usually the attribute that western
mythologies give to this type of deity.


The 7 points of the crown of the Statue of Liberty


From all the description that the Argentine Nimrod de Rosario left written of this virgin, we
were surprised from the first moment by the shapes of the two crowns. Most crowns are
circular, whether real or virginal. But when mythological gods wear crown with tips, the
number of tips is always seven as in the case of Apollo and the goddess of Liberty of the famous
apple city monument.


The reason that the virgin and child crowns are octagonal should not be simply aesthetic.
Number 8 has deep and hidden meanings, the same number 8 set horizontally represents
infinity. However, previously we have already explained that the entire Nordic and hyperborean
tradition has 9 as its representative number, not 8.


This octagonal shape in crowns is very rare. If we add to this that the crown of the virgin and
that of the child are also triples, ... it is when the question arises:


Could it be that these two triple hyperboreal octagonal crowns have a cat locked up?


At this point is when my beloved numerology gives us a possible answer to such a strange starry
crown:


Triple octagonal crown.- 3 x 8 = 24

Two triple octagonal crowns.- 24 x 24 = 576

A stone boy doing the right angle = 90 degrees

If we add 90 to 576, there is no number whatsoever: 576 + 90 = 666


So far our humble symbolic analysis of this "new" South American pagan virgin. They always tell
me that | am usually very poorly thought out and that all these things with symbols and
archetypes are just coincidences. Let each one decide the way to take. What you cannot be
standing is stopped. At least in Latin America, with this pagan virgin they have started the
boludos cutting machine and thanks to this movement people are waking up. Meanwhile in my
beloved Spain the Zionists of the illuminated triangle walk through the squares, since in the
Iberian Peninsula the boludos cutting machine is on vacation.


14


My dear Tato, the Argentine king of monologues, already said it:


"If we were to put the bolute cutting machine inside the time tunnel machine and start cutting
historical bolutes retroactively. Today, ... another would have been the comic."


15


Two initiates of Nimrod from Rosario speak about The Hyperborean Wisdom


The writings reproduced here belong to their authors and were taken from the website
sabiduriahiperborea.com.


Dialogue between Guibur and Blackwolf
Guibur


I will try to be as clear as possible on this delicate subject. When an esoteric teaching is
delivered, it carries an implicit objective, an end, a goal, directed to all those who are interested
in that doctrine. For this purpose, a whole strategy is developed so that the objectives are
achieved, obviously, successfully.


Well, with the Hyperborean Wisdom, which by the way, goes beyond any esoteric doctrine, the
elements for its study and understanding were also delivered, also within a strategy to achieve
the objectives.


It is because of this that a Hyperborean Pontiff creates the Order and dedicates himself fully to
developing its mission. Now, as what is being delivered goes against all systems or let's say
everything created, since it demonstrates the illusory nature of creation and the reality of the
spirit, which has nothing to do with it, those who are controlling and managing this illusion, so
that no one is aware of this reality, intervene with all their power and certain circumstances occur
by which the strategy of the Order cannot be followed as the Pontiff had planned it.


The main objective was the printing of the Novel and its distribution, which would lead all those
who read it and "woke up" to contact the Order, since it contained the number of a mailbox to
contact, and then would come, after "selection", the admission or not in the Order, if they
entered, they would be given the other books to continue deepening in the teaching and to
prepare those who were in conditions to initiate them.


Well, this was not achieved as planned, the Pontiff at the beginning had to deliver a part of the
Fundamentals first and the Novel could not be printed to fulfill its purpose.


How does everything look now that the Pontiff is no longer there and there is no general strategy
or someone to grant Initiation?


The main theme continues to be the Novel, which is the one that provokes the awakening of the
virya who is in conditions, that is to say, the one whose degree of strategic confusion does not
have him so submerged in his soul, that is why he called it "Magic Novel" and it is the one that
in turn will prepare us to face with honor the next end of the story.


As one reads and rereads the Novel, the blood is purified and that purification at some point may
reveal to us the Mystery of A-mort. And as it says in the Fundamentals (the first book):


16


"Whoever knows the secrets of the Mystery of A-mort is not an "initiate" but a TRANSMUTED,
an immortal Siddha, or for a brief time, an "awakened virya"...".


The only one who gave the Initiation was the Pontiff, since he left, no one was left in his place to
be able to grant it. As for the preparation, it is still the same, the reading of books, but especially
the Magic Novel, since the specific mission that he had, was to write that Novel in a special way,
so that he would achieve in the one who would read it, the awakening of the Minne, his essential
warrior nature, the spiritual awakening and understand the truth of his situation in the World
Created by the demon called Demiurge, and prepare himself with all his "new will" and
awakened hostility, to fight and free himself from his condition of slave of this universe.


In other words, since there is no initiation, the preparation is valid for the moment when the
Siddhas come and there, the one who is prepared, will achieve transmutation and liberation.


Nothing is casual, if someone found the Hyperborean Wisdom now, it is because in some way in
his other existence he was related to its foundations or did some work, even intuitively, to get
closer to its spirit. Moreover, the "viryas, whether lost or awakened, are all synchronistically
connected by the common origin, this connection forming an acausal bond, independent of
transcendent time and space."


That is to say that every virya participates in the Golden Cord or Catena Aura, due to his
Hyperborean Lineage, this same fact drives him in his spiritual search, of course, the intensity of
this search will also depend on his degree of strategic confusion.


What was most important for Luis Felipe was to write the novel and obviously he did, what
happened afterwards is a matter of conjecture.


Now, the novel was entitled "The Mystery of Belicena Villca" Magic Novel, this Magic Novel,
coming from a Hyperborean Pontiff was not a term to call attention, that can be deduced by
anyone who reads it, I understand that with its mere reading some people have already awakened
to the reality of the Spirit.


Well, I tell you this about the Novel because the Hyperborean Teaching is, as I said on another
occasion, something directly directed to the Spirit, that is, only understandable to those who have
previously awakened, and precisely that is and will continue to be the objective of the Novel.


That is why he said that the first thing to read is the Novel (he also said that with the novel and
the "Fundamentals of the Hyperborean Wisdom" -the first book-, the one who was prepared, was
already self-initiated).


Then, taking this into account, and due to the infernal advance of the enemy and the
"acceleration of the times", perhaps it was not necessary to continue with everything else, since if
there was a Racial strategy and it did not happen, it is that there was no longer any chance with


17


the enemy, then the strategy became personal. It is simple, if there is no racial it is personal and
there it depends on the "purity of blood" of each one.


What I think, is that if everything that is seen on the Internet serves to clarify some things that we
need to know for our process, I think it is very good, but if we use the Internet only to acquire
more and more knowledge and then confront to see who knows more, and enter into debates, it
seems to me that we will continue sleeping.


When we begin to question existence itself and we are not satisfied with anything that "life" is
giving us and we begin to intuit that there must be something more than the simple fact of living,
being born, growing, acquiring experience, achieving a place in society, reproducing, growing
old and finally "dying", We can say that an attitude of "Gnostic predisposition" is operating in
us, that is where our search begins, and if the Gnostic predisposition is strong, sooner or later we
will find the truth of our situation, within the immense labyrinth of false doctrines, beliefs,
dogmas and siren songs.


From that moment on, our way of living becomes strategic, we know where we want to go,
because when we realize that we are not from here, that our true nature is not material but
spiritual and that we are here against our will, nothing that the world offers us will be able to stop
us in our march towards our Origin.


It is there where what surrounds us ceases to have the importance that we gave it and we feel a
kind of nostalgia when we remember our true origin, although we still do not see it at that
moment (This has to do with the Memory of the Origin).


We already know that there are thousands of beliefs and it is true that each one claims to be the
true one, but we can spend our lives studying them and in the end we will realize that in the end
they are all the same with variants of all kinds. The only thing they teach is the submission to the
divinity whatever it is called, nobody says that our spirit is chained here and they use it for a well
determined objective and that our spirit has nothing to do with the Creation nor with the Creator
God nor with anything or anybody of this Hell called "Universe".


So if we already have a more or less clear idea of what the Hyperborean Wisdom teaches about
what the body, the soul and the spirit are, and what we really are, we will see that everything else
is part of our prison, which can even be made of gold, but it is still a prison, and there our
objective, obviously, will be to look for the way to free ourselves, which of course is not as easy
as blowing up the planet and floating around, liberation will only be achieved by waging war
against those who chained us and not against any sect, religion or earthly entity, not even against
the so-called spiritual masters who are generally the most confused, although they believe the
opposite.


The Hyperborean Wisdom is not a religion or anything of the sort, the H.S. is a teaching directed
directly to the spirit of each one, and it is in each one the attitude that he will take before that


18


teaching, if he adopts it as a Strategy of War and deepens its contents or if he remains only in the
concepts.


As for the issue of truth or lies, within the beliefs, it is only a ruse that is used very well by the
enemies of the spirit, in their strategy to confuse.


As we have already read, we are totally chained to this world of illusion. The chains that have us
spiritually trapped are Time and Space, these two essences of the chaining demiurge that do not
let us free ourselves, but fortunately the Hyperborean Wisdom gives us the way to break this
infernal encirclement through a way of liberation that is the way of strategic opposition, with
which we can eliminate these influences with the "archemonic technique", which is an infinite
encirclement, an act of individual war projected by our own spirit.


Being an act of war, it must be accompanied by Essential Hostility, which is the normal nature
that the spirit has before the insane work of the creator, and which is present in our awakened
Self.


This hostility has nothing to do with animal aggressiveness, which is the normal nature of the
pasu and which is currently highly developed due to his state of strategic confusion and is
leading him rapidly to "animal rage".


This theme of the Archimona and Essential Hostility should be deepened in the chapter: THE
AWAKENED VIRYA: In Search of the Principle of the Fence, and in all its sections of the first
book "Fundamentals of the Hyperborean Wisdom".


The virya has to struggle to achieve his own awakening, no one will awaken if he does nothing
for it, that is why he must adopt an attitude of alertness, assuming his condition of spiritual
watrior, to perceive and act upon everything that permanently tries to submerge him in the dream
of the pasu. And as he strips himself of everything that binds him to the world, it is logical that
he himself will see clearly the way out of the Labyrinth, and will also be able to achieve his own
"self-initiation”.


The gregarious impulse of our soul part, sometimes makes us believe that we need a group to
study, but it is only seeking to escape from something that it knows "unconsciously" that does
not suit it, in a group it remains as "protected" and already depending on it.


It would be very different if there was an Authentically Hyperborean Order, where a Charismatic
Leader was present and therefore, a Mystique, there would be a spiritual impulse to be under that
mystique, then yes, the Hyperborean Wisdom could be studied, but within that context, which
has nothing to do with a synarchic "esoteric school".


At present we know that the conditions are not like that, which means that the study must be
personal and there it is up to each one to develop his personal mystique and deepen in the
teaching.


19


It is easy to recognize when this enemy is acting because his strategy is to deform, change the
meaning, create confusion, confront, etc., and, mainly, to slowly try to move away the chosen
ones from the Novel and the Fundamentals of the Hyperborean Wisdom, as he cannot alter its
contents, since these are the ones that truly fulfill the objective of achieving the spiritual
awakening. In other words, what it would be really convenient and strategic to do about all this,
is simply to advise that they do not lose the connection with those books delivered by the Pontiff,
regardless of which "Order" they are in, and that they do not stop reading them. This is the only
way to avoid confusion. And also beware of those who take fragments of what Philip delivered,
to write their own book, supposedly to "clarify" or "expand" something, that is also when they
begin to distort everything. To what was delivered by the Pontiff, it is not necessary to take
away, add or clarify anything, unless it is to intentionally distort its content. As for the manner
used to make known the teaching delivered by the Pontiff, in these dark times in which we live,
it is relative, and depends on the limitations that may exist in each country. Let us remember that
in the Novel, the Pontiff placed a photocopy of the advertisement of the Post Office of the Order
of Cordoba, which he had placed in the Spots Magazine, a "yellow" magazine, of "low moral
level", as propaganda, that is to say that in this, the important thing is that it reaches the one who
has to receive it, and the one who receives it, according to his spiritual state, will know from that
moment where he stands and what he should do. On a personal level, in the circumstances that I
knew the Hyperborean Wisdom, I was a priest, I did rituals and consecrated neophytes to enter
the "church", which as you know was the Gnostic movement. At that time a "friend" gave me to
read a photocopy of only the part of the novel of "Nimrod the Defeated", according to him, so
that I could give him my opinion, without explaining anything to me and out of all context, well,
I read it and with that I almost transmute myself, that is why I say that it does not matter where
one is at the moment of receiving Wisdom, the important thing is to receive it.


The preparation to face with Honor the Next End of History, depends now only on our warrior
attitude and let us remember, in addition, that there are 7 ways of liberation plus an Eighth which
is that of Rescue, and in all of them the blood purification is logically required, which is one of
the objectives of the Magical Novel.


As for what you say about Gurdjieff, I think that there are things that are delivered according to
the time and the context in which one is living, although at the time Gurdjieff's teachings were
shocking, it is also true that he did not say everything he knew, I guess because it was not the
time, and to a greater or lesser extent I think that it helped us all in our search, It is also true that
he did not say everything he knew, I guess because it was not the time, and to a greater or lesser
extent I think that it helped us all in our search, to realize that we were "asleep", but he never
said that our spirit was chained, but well, having already in our hands the Hyperborean Wisdom,
I think it is not necessary to waste time or even comparing it with other teachings, because we
have The Source and The Original of the true gnosis.


20


Each one of us in the situation we find ourselves, we are all "children of Jehovah", we will only
stop being children of Him, if we discover our true spiritual nature, understand the Great Farce
and fight like Nimrod to free ourselves from the slavery of "our father".


To conclude I only want to advise all those who are sincerely interested in the Hyperborean
Wisdom and have really felt the call of the spirit, not to get entangled with other supposedly
hyperborean books, the only books that will achieve this spiritual awakening, because they are
also strategically written, are those of Nimrod de Rosario, especially the Magical Novel Belicena
Villca and the first part of the Fundamentals of Hyperborean Wisdom.


Blackwolf


It is not necessary to go anywhere when the Final Battle is presented, the virya who is prepared
will receive the influence of the presence of the Siddhas wherever he is, since the mere presence
of Them will provoke a collective mutation, that is why it is recommended to prepare to "face
with Honor the next end of history".


21


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


The History of the Tirodal Knights of the Argentine Republic


Part one.


HOW WE GOT ON ODIN'S BOAT. THE VIRYAS

THEIR ORIGINS.

THE ORDER: THE CAUSE OF ITS EMERGENCE IN CORDOBA.
THE FOUNDATION OF THE ORDER BY MEANS OF A
HYPERBOREAN INITIATION, TAKING AS AN ANALOGICAL
MODEL: THE "ROYAL SYSTEM" OF A MEDIEVAL CASTLE.


THE FOUNDING ACT OF THE ORDER, THE TACTICAL
DESIGNATIONS


THE TACTICAL ORDERING OF THE ORDER.


THE INSTRUCTION OF THE FUNDAMENTALS: BACKBONE OF
EVERY HYPERBOREAN INITIATORY ORDER.


THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN VIRYAS AND THE CIRCLES OF THE
ORDER.


THE NOOLOGICAL ETHICS OF THE LADY AND THE GENTLEMAN
TIRODAL.


SPECIFIC TASKS.
WAR ACTIONS AGAINST THE VAPLADS AND THE SINARCHY.
THE SECRET OF THE COBBLESTONE ROADS


22


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


Comrades: this text emerges to the light of the world to put to the
consideration of all the loyal Viryas of OCTIRODAE the _ historical
events that took place and allowed the emergence in the psychoregion
of CORDOBA (Argentina) of the ORDER OF THIRODAL KNIGHTS OF
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC. The reason

The purpose of this work is due to two strategic reasons, first: to clarify
this history describing as faithfully as possible how the events
unfolded, trying to narrate this history respecting the times, | try to
order them in the most precise way possible, describing
chronologically how the events occurred. Second: | narrate these
stories because | obey an ORDER from my superiors who indicated
me that after the withdrawal of the Vraya ROSALIA, to open the
Cultural Registry of OCTRA to bring to the understanding of the
comrades the absolute truth of the history of OCTRA and its strategic
continuity OCTIRODAE.

In this first part | describe the history of OCTRA in the second part
when | am _ authorized to enter the Cultural REGISTRY of
OCTIRODAE.

Sin mas saludos atentamente a todos los camaradas de OCTIRODAE.


OCTIRODAE CORDOBA.
GUSTAVO BRONDINO
VVV


23


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


HOW WE GOT INTO NIMROD'S BOAT.


| want to make it clear that | have nothing to hide, to remindall the
comrades of the world that we followed FELIPE with WILL and Courage, and we

did it from the beginning
without knowing where that "destiny" that the pontiff was tracing for us was taking
us, we got on the Hyperborean Myth (myth of the Hero, of the Boat, of the Voyage,
of the Anchor, of the Foundation) that he revealed to us and we joined that
mythical argument with LOYALTY and HONOR.

Because we were asleep, CHAINED TO THE HEAVY CHAINS OF
ILLUSION, we were not CLEAR about the destiny that would lead us, how we
would navigate with this boat through the impassable MYTHICAL OCEANS full of
monsters that would devour us without mercy, if we were wrong, perhaps like
Ulysses we would only be devoured and only a single HERO could return to his
HOMELAND. | knew perfectly well of the innumerable dangers that we would have
to face and so | told Nimrod and my comrades. That journey was a risky adventure
from which only the STRONGEST AND BRAVE would emerge free of WAR
SEIZURES, | knew it would be SO, and SO IT WAS. But, our HONOR IS CALLED
VALOR, without hesitation we entered his BOAT, because the CHARISMA OF
THE PONTIPHYCE and his LETTER TO THE ELECTED instilled in us VALOR.
Thus, we boarded his boat, we began the ODYSSEY, to navigate this
LABERINTHIC OCEAN OF MAYA, to transcend its limits, heroically crossing its
countless INITIATIVE TESTS. The comrades, crew members of that ship, of that
ETERNAL CONSTRUCTION, we acted with LOYALTY and HONOR because
NIMROD carried the WISE SWORD, as CAPTAIN of the ship he had the POWER
of the TRUTH OF THE UNCREATED RUNES, with which he would open the WAY
for us, he would destroy all the obstacles; And so he worked, he OPENED a paved
ROAD for us, a Gnostic Path, he built his SNAIL STAIRWAY, through it we
crossed to the other shore, we entered ARMED to the territory of the liberating
Gods, to the REAL world of the SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA.

After so much traveling roads without end, of searching without finding
anything, of suffering from the deception of the esoteric or scientific
languages of MAYA, of being lost, blind in the LABYRINTH, without seeing,
nor being aware of the TRUTH OF THE LABYRINTH, without knowing of the
LABYRINTH, submerged in the depths of the PRIMORDIAL WATERS of the
ABYSSAL OCEAN OF MAYA, carrying in our blood the BEING OF THE
ENGAGEMENT, the illusion of LIBERATION by LOVE, by the BEAUTY and the
CONSCIOUSNESS of the ONE; by the ETERNAL GRACE OF OUR INFINITE
SPIRIT, WE WERE ABLE TO SEE AND FEEL IN OUR BLOOD THE
UNCREATED LIGHT OF THE GRAL, to find ourselves in the ETERNAL GRACE
OF OUR SPIRIT.

The SACRED SYMBOL OF THE VIRYA, represented in the world by the
3


24


sacred SWASTIC.


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


25


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


She is the support in the world of the GRAL and of the SIGN OF ORIGIN
presented before our EYES, uncreated sign leading to the ETERNAL
WISDOM, through her is perceptible and semantically apprehensible the
SIGN OF ORIGIN and the GOLDEN RUNE, through her we are charismatically
linked and we can recognize the CAPTAIN and his SHIP, we have the real
possibility of SAILING in his BOAT, in the BOAT OF ODIN, in it is our highest
HONOR. Without hesitating, but without knowing well wherewould leadus
his"boat", what
we would find ahead, where we would anchor, what PORT would be our
"destination", we JOINED his JOURNEY, and we sailed together with the
great NIMROD OF ROSARIO, all together we crossed the unfathomable
labyrinthine oceans of Maya, we arrived to the LAND OF THE
HYPERBOREANS, to the territories of the SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA.

Comrades of AMERICA AND SPAIN, of the WORLD, the viryas of OCTRA
were PURE VALUE, in that strategy they entered the ORDER without having
incorporated to the conscious understanding all the WISDOM; comrades: the
magic novel was not even written! Only a note and a synthesis of the
Fundamentals! (subject that | will develop in the next points), moreover, suffering
from the innocence of youth they joined their BATTLE FRONT. All of them, mostly
young, coming from esoteric or exoteric languages that are not worth naming, that
imprint of the youth of the PURITY OF THE ASTRAL BLOOD was their value, and
it is the VALUE OF THE VIRYA the engine that led them to UNCONDITIONALLY
FOLLOW the PONTIPHIC, NIMROD OF ROSARY and his LADY MOTHER
ROSALIA; without SEEING, without KNOWING the
They followed the CALL OF THE HYPERBORNE BLOOD; but PURE BLOOD is
STRONGER than REASON! and, "almost" unconsciously, we could say without
"thinking", we joined the ORDER and the STRATEGY that LUIS FELIPE MOYANO
would unleash.

Therefore, today after SOQ MUCH WATER HAS PASSED UNDER THE
BRIDGE, everything is easier for the new comrades, and ROSALIA always said:
"The young “boys” have everything served, in the Web is the HYPERBORNE
WISDOM available to all, and so many more pages that have uploaded the
texts"; and | know it is true, because those who lived that History know well
that nothing was easy, do you understand? What was proposed to us in that
AWAKENING was a risk, because at the beginning everything was "hidden",
the Wisdom of Nimrod would be revealed step by step, strategically, as we
were awakening. Rosalia reminded me of those first meetings, she told me:
"all those "kids" summoned by RICARDO CENTENO, mostly young people,
were there, without hesitation, firm in the search for the truth".

After so much time elapsed | remember that past of the Order, always present in

my memory that magnificent history, it is for the same reason that we are still on

WAR foot, resisting to that "future" that is nonexistent, pure dream for the lost
Virya, where the illusion of the labyrinth determines every possibility of BEING,
establishes the cognitive limits of the BEING, only by freeing ourselves from the
internal and external PAIN, the FUTURE FADES AWAY and only the ETERNAL
PRESENT of his WILL remains in the BERSERKR WARRIOR.

UNCREATED. Still alive in my memory is that sentence that was transmitted to me by the


5


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


eternal comrade RICARDO CENTENO when he gave me the first note and told
me: "Brondino, if you accept, prepare for war". As | am not allowed to give
names, nor to open the ontic records of the comrades, | am only AUTHORIZED
TO OPEN certain CULTURAL RECORDS that were significant for the
HISTORY OF THE ORDER, cultural objects such as the ARCHITECTURE OF
A CASTLE, the meaning of a STONED WAY, the mystery of a DAGA, of a
RING, of a STONE, etc. These cultural registers | open them for strategic reasons,
it has only one purpose: TO SCARIFY THE SHADOW SPHERE OF THE ORDER;
which is

composed of MYTHICAL ARGUMENTS _ containing a HISTORICAL
BACKGROUND that have STOLEN the TACICAL DISPLACEMENT OF THE
ORDER.

The SHADOW SPHERE OF THE ORDER was generated after the retirement of
NIMROD, this left the ORDER at a strategic disadvantage, as it was left without a
leader, his HEIRS should continue his work, for some reason they did not have the
Courage to assume the leadership, these comrades of the CIRCLE that had the
ETHICAL responsibility to remain firm by the side of the eternal comrade and his
mother until the LAST CONSEQUENCES failed to take their OATH and fell into
STRATEGIC DISORIENTATION.

Upon NIMROD'S WITHDRAWAL FROM CREATION, the comrades who AGREED
TO STAND BY THE COMrade'S SIDE TO THE END AND FOLLOW HIS
STRATEGY will not

They knew how to continue, but | must recognize that being without the REGIO
LEADER is not easy, it is as if one were paralyzed, without legs, lost and wounded
and in the face of such a destiny the virya becomes INCREDIBLE, falls into the
skepticism of reason and doubt, and the DOUBT KILLS, it puts us to SLEEP IN
THE WARM LIFE.

This strategic failure suffered by the retired NIMROD ORDER was replaced by the
WILL AND Courage of three comrades who took over the strategy and continued
with the tactics implemented by NIMROD on the Web, continuing with the
STRATEGY OF QUINTA DOMINICA.

At that time ROSALIA was leading but for these comrades the VRAYA WAS NOT
ENOUGH and NECESSITY AND DISCORDION entered in them and they
abandoned the VRAYA leaving it alone, and as there is NO VACUUM IN
CREATION, the one that they should have occupied was occupied by the ENEMY,
thus QUINTA DOMINICA was losing VITALITY in the Web, until it was "almost"
paralyzed, the first thing that fell is its FORUM was outdated and if QUINTA
DOMINICA is still maintained on the INTERNET is by a comrade who was left
ALONE ALONE BY THE SIDE OF ROSALIA and even when the VRAYA withdrew
this comrade took charge of QUINTA DOMINICA, GREAT IS HIS VALUE! GREAT
IS HIS VALUE! Those who remained STRONG with LOYALTY and HONOR by the
side of NIMROD and his mother ROSALIA after the closure of the PLAZA IN
CORDOBA deserve our greatest respect, and it is understandable that after
NIMROD's retirement all that he built is difficult to REVITALIZE, and the comrades
who remained by his side until his physical disappearance, beyond the mistakes
that always exist, they gave everything to follow what FELIPE ordered, but there is
no SUFFICIENT SACRIFICE for the IDEAL that allowed us to AWAKEN TO


6


27


GUSTAVO BRONDINO
AWAKENING, but, the soul is clever and if it is not dominated it leads us to error
and TO ERRER IS HUMAN, TO RIGHT IS OF GODS and they erred in not


28


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


to continue with what was ordered and were left in absolute SOLITUDE, at a
STRATEGIC DISADVANTAGE.

Comrades, this is a WAR and there is NO MERCY FOR ANYONE, few were
left standing after the closure of the PLAZA LIBERADA in CORDOBA (NOT
the ORDER, it is always present), those who remained and remain on WAR
STANDING carry the WISE SWORD, they are BERSERKR VIRYAS, MEN OF
STONE who are not afraid of DEATH, NOR OF MISERY, NOR OF THE MISERY,
NOR OF THE DEATH, NOR OF THE FIGHTING.

TO THE WORST OF EVILS, these OCTRA comrades who still remain
STRONG deserve our greatest HONOR.

| remember when Ricardo Centeno, before retiring from creation, gathered a
group of comrades in the bookstore and explained to us what it meant to accept
this IDEAL and its doctrine based on the Hyperborean Wisdom, he affirmed:
“Comrades, keep in mind that if you accept what the Hyperborean Wisdom
proposes to you, it will have two consequences: it will be the end for your
SOULS and the beginning for your SPIRITS: it will be the end for your SOULS
and the beginning for your SPIRITS, you will enter an internal BATTLE and
what is worse EXTERNAL, you will be left alone, nothing will exist for you,
only your CAMARADES, IF ANYONE STILL HAS THE WILL TO FIGHT.

This wisdom is the highest science of liberation but it requires a WILL
unimaginable to reason and only the CRAZY and PUREST will survive the
MADNESS, only the STRONGEST, those who are determined to overcome
PAIN AND DEATH will achieve VICTORY" He continued: "Comrades: !be
prepared for the war, it is better to remain SLEEPING than to be AWAKE
without having the Courage to assume with HONOR what this WAR has in
store for us, which will bring about the END OF HISTORY". GREAT RICARDO
CENTENO!
| want to mean that what | describe and narrate about that past that always
participates of this present, related to what happened after the retirement of
NIMROD and the VRAYA has the purpose of SHADOWING THE SHADOWS
that create the SHADOW SPHERE OF THE ORDER; it is simply for us to
understand how hard the battle we fight is, even more if one fights it alone,
individually, from now on one is always ALONE, but if today we are hundreds
and tomorrow thousands, comrades, what sense does it make to fight alone,
let us unite, UNION MAKES FORCE, let us build so that always the
HYPERBORNE WISDOM be the UNCREATED LIGHT that guides the
comrades to the SELBST, to the VRIL and to the ORIGIN.

COMRADES: GREAT IS THE HONOR AND COURAGE OF THE VIRYA
KNIGHT TIRADAL! GREAT IS HIS STORY!
| make a plea about that past to keep it in mind and not to forget its history, so that
we do not make "mistakes" (if they existed) and ROSALIA was always clear about
it, she said: "to live from the past, trapped in that nostalgia, is to run the risk
of being trapped forever in that past, to be immobilized, tied to it, victims of
that time, unable to act in this time, and that is a mistake".
Today, after the retirement of NIMROD, and his mother ROSALIA, then knowing of
his incorporation to the sphere of the INCOGNOSCIBLE, | write about this story,
trying to be fair with it,


29


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


| bring to the attention of all the viryas of OCTIRODAE: THE HISTORY OF THE
ORDER OF THIRODAL KNIGHTS OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC.


THE ORDER: THE CAUSE OF ITS EMERGENCE IN CORDOBA.


IN CORDOBA. ARGENTINA AFTER A VERY DARK AND TRAGIC HISTORICAL
PERIOD, AFTER THE FALL OF THE MILITARY GOVERNMENT FOLLOWING
THE BLOODY MALVINAS WAR, DEMOCRACY RETURNED.

THE MILITARY DICTATORSHIP AND THE MALVINAS WAR SPECIFICALLY
THIS LAST HISTORICAL EVENT AFFIRMED AS NEVER BEFORE THE SIGN OF
PAIN NOT ONLY IN ARGENTINA BUT IN ALL AMERICA.

THE SINARCHY AND ITS LACKEY COUNTRIES, PLANNED TO CARRY OUT
THE ANDIMIA PLAN, (APPROPRIATION OF ARGENTINE PATAGONIA,
ACHIEVED THIS OBJECTIVE THEY WOULD ADVANCE OVER THE ENTIRE
AMERICAN GEOGRAPHY, (HISTORICAL RECORD THAT | OPEN IN THE TEXT:
THE GENERAL BLOOD OF VIRYA BERSERKR), BUT THEIR PLANS WOULD
FAIL, THANKS TO THE SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA THAT WOULD ENTER THE
WORLD OF TERROR TO THE ETERNAL COMRADE NIMROD OF ROSARIO,
FOREVER, MY ETERNAL GUIDE AND COMRADE. FELIPE.

NIMROD CALLED HIMSELF FELIPE, AND NEVER LUIS, WHY FELIPE AND
NOT LUIS, WELL | LEAVE THAT QUESTION TO THE CAMERAMEN, THERE IS
A MYSTERY IN THE TOPONYMY, IN THE MEANING OF THE NAME THAT OUR
FATHERS DESIGNATE US, SO ADOLFO, CESAR, FELIPE ARE ABSOLUTE
NAMES, BUT COMRADE THIS IS NOT ALLOWED ME TO REVEAL IN THIS
TEXT, A MYSTERY THAT PARTICIPATES OF THE DESIGN THAT IS ON THE
NAME AND THE SURNAME OF THE VIRYA AND THAT ONLY A VIRYA
BERSERKR CAN UNDERSTAND.

BUT THIS TEXT DOES NOT HAVE THE MISSION OF REVEALING THE
SECRET OF THE TOPONYMY OF THE VIRYA, THE NAME THAT A VIRYA
CARRIES ON HIMSELF, IT IS NOT THE SAME TO BE CALLED DAVID AS
ADOLF, ON THIS DESIGNATION THERE IS A KEY (NAME AND SURNAME), A
SUBJECT THAT | WILL DESCRIBE IN ANOTHER POINT.


RETURNING TO WHAT CONCERNS THIS TEXT, ALL PAIN HAS A LIMIT, THE
PAIN, SON OF NECESSITY, TRIED TO ERASE THE HYPERBOREAN LINEAGE
OF THE ARGENTINE PEOPLE. BUT THIS PEOPLE, TIRED OF SUFFERING
FROM THAT DAMNED SUFFERING THAT IS PAIN, REVEALED ITSELF, AND
AFTER MALVINAS IN ARGENTINA A SOCIAL AND CULTURAL MOVEMENT
EMERGED THAT GENERATED THE NECESSARY CONDITIONS FOR THE
ADVENT OF DEMOCRACY (DEMOCRACY IS NOT AN IDEAL SYSTEM, BUT
COMRADES IT IS IN THIS PRESENT TIME THE ONLY WAY TO ACCESS TO
POWER.


30


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


WOTAN IN GERMANY (ADOLF HITLER) SEIZED POWER BY USING THE
MATRIXES ONTICS FROMDESIGN SNAIL, WITH
WITH IT HE BUILT THE SPIRAL STAIRCASE WITH WHICH HE ACCEDED
TO POWER). AFTER THE MILITARY DICTATORSHIP, THE SIGN OF THE
ORIGIN WOULD EMERGE FROM THE SHADOWS, (NIMROD OF ROSARIO)
AND WITH THE EMERGING NATIONALISM (ALTHOUGH THE PARTY THAT
ACCEDED TO POWER WAS THE RADICALISM) THE ORDER OF TIRODAL
KNIGHTS OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC (OCTRA) WOULD EMERGE.
THIS WOULD PUT A LIMIT TO THE SIGN OF PAIN, THIS WAS POSSIBLE
BECAUSE NIMROD WOULD MAKE VISIBLE THE GRAL, THE SIGN OF THE
ORIGIN. NIMROD SAYS: "THE VIRYA WITH THE SIGN OF ORIGIN
UNDERSTANDS THE SERPENT AND IS FREE IN THE ORIGIN".


ALTHOUGH DEMOCRACY IS A SYSTEM OF GOVERNMENT EQUALLY OR
WORSE CORRUPT THAN THE NEOLIBERAL AND - CAPITALIST
DICTATORSHIPS, THE LIBERAL FOOLS OF THE MILITARY TYRANNY DID
NOT KNOW HOW TO FEEL THE CALL OF BLOOD AND AFTER THE MALVINAS
THE BLOOD OF THE GODS WAS FELT, EMERGING DEMOCRACY, WITH IT
OPENED A HORIZON WHERE THE PAIN COULD BE RELIEVED WITH THE
SIGN OF THE ORIGIN.

THE LORDS OF THE LABYRINTH: POLITICAL, RELIGIOUS AND SCIENTIFIC,
MASTERS OF THE LABYRINTH INTENDED THROUGH DEMOCRACY TO
ESTABLISH THE WORLD GOVERNMENT IN ARGENTINA, OBEYING THE
INTERNATIONAL SYNARCHY AND REMOVING THE MILITARY REGIME FROM
POWER, REPLACING DICTATORSHIP WITH NEOLIBERAL DEMOCRACY.

THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC AND ALL OF AMERICA WAS ENTERING A NEW
POLITICAL HORIZON, (FALL OF THE MILITARY REGIMES REPLACED BY
LIBERAL DEMOCRACIES) THE DEMOCRACIES WIELDED THEIR PSEUDO
LIES: "FREEDOM, PEACE AND SOCIAL JUSTICE".

THE EMERGING "FREEDOMS" INHERENT TO THE DEMOCRATIC SYSTEM
GRANTED A DIFFERENT SPACE TO THE INTERNATIONAL POWER THAT
THEY DID NOT HAVE DURING THE MILITARY REGIMES (CHILE, ARGENTINA,
URUGUAY SUFFERED FROM THIS’ MILITARY DESPOTISM). THUS,
DEMOCRACY WOULD BE THE "IDEAL" FRAMEWORK FOR NEOLIBERAL
CAPITALISM, THROUGH THIS "SYSTEM" THEY INTENDED TO TAKE POWER
DEFINITIVELY.

CORRUPT POLITICIANS AND DEMOCRATIC PARTIES (AS HAS ALWAYS
HAPPENED IN HISTORY) WOULD FALL BEFORE THE FINANCIAL AND
ECONOMIC POWER OF INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL (A MIGHTY GENTLEMAN
IS MONEY) AND LIKE SHEEP WOULD TRY TO BRING INTERNATIONAL
ZIONISM TO POWER, THEY FAILED IN ARGENTINA THANKS TO THE LIVING
MYTH OF EVA PERON AND THE ACTION OF THE LOYAL SIDDHAS WHO
WOULD SEND THANKS TO NIMROD OF ROSARIO AND WITH HIM WOULD
EMERGE A SUBTERRANEAN POLITICAL STRATEGY THAT WOULD PUT
LIMITS TO THE PLANS OF THE GLOBAL SYNARCHY, THEME: "THE POLITICAL
STRATEGY OF THE INTERNATIONAL ZIONISM".


10


31


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


VERY COMPLEX THAT | WILL DEVELOP IN THE TEXT. THE GENERAL BLOOD
OF THE VIRYA BERSERKR.


THE LIES OF THE LIBERAL GOVERNMENTS THAT WE KNOW SO WELL,
COVERED WITH THE GARMENTS OF DEMOCRATIC "TRUTHS", ARE
BASED ON PURE UTOPIAS AND LIES (LIES AND TRUTH ARE DAUGHTERS
OF NECESSITY, THEY ARE THERE FROM THE BEGINNING OF CREATION,
OF THE WAR THAT CAUSES THE DIVISION OF THE SIDDHAS). ARE TWO
GREAT MACROCOSMIC ARCHETYPES THAT AFFIRM THE DEMIURGIC
DESIGNS WHICH KEEP ENSLAVED AND IMPRISONED THE VIRYA LOST IN
CREATION.

POLITICAL POWER, WHETHER DIRECTED BY CAPITALIST OR MARXIST
GOVERNMENTS, EXTREME RIGHT OR LEFT, ARE SIGNS OF THE IDEAL
STATE THAT ONCE MADE POSSIBLE IN ARGENTINA THE GOVERNMENT
OF JUAN DOMINGO PERON: JUSTICIALISM. IN AN IDEAL STATE THE
GOVERNMENT LIBERATES OR TRIES TO LIBERATE THE PEOPLE FROM
THE SIGN OF PAIN, FREE FROM ITS DESIGNS IT IS POSSIBLE TO MAKE
THE SIGN OF ORIGIN EVIDENT.

BUT THESE DEMOCRATIC POLITICAL UTOPIAS IN THEIR BEGINNINGS
OPEN THIS POSSIBILITY, EVERY DEMOCRACY WHEN IT ENTERS EMERGES
A NEW HOPE, THEY CREATE A RECHARGED TIME WHERE THE EMERGENT
CULTURAL SPACE CARRIES THE FORMATIVE MATRIXES OF THE
ONTICULTURAL EXTREMES OF THE SERPENT.

ALL DEMOCRATIC TIME OPENS THE ONTIC MATRICES THAT ARE PRESENT
ON TIME AS A REVERSED ARCHETYPE CONTAINING IN ITSELF TWO TIMES.
AT ONE END OF THE ARCHETYPAL TIME PAST AND FUTURE, THE
TRANSCENDENT TIME OF THE GOD OF CREATION, THE DEMIURGE:
CHRONOS AND BY THE INFINITE PRESENT (INFINITE POLE) THE
TIMELESSNESS OF THE TIME OF THE KAIROS OF VENUS, KAIROS IS
ABSOLUTE MOMENT, TIMELESS, A "TIME" THAT SWIFTLY ENTERS UPON
CHRONOS OPENING A CRACK IN THE TRANSCENDENT TIME IMMANENT
CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE DEMIURGE, KAIROS IS A TIMELESS RAPTURE
THAT COMES FROM THE UNCREATED WHERE IT IS POSSIBLE TO SEE THE
UNCREATED LIGHT OF THE GRAL, OF THE SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA,
KAIROS IS THE UNCREATED LIGHT OF THE ORIGIN THAT MAKES VISIBLE
THE SIGN OF THE ORIGIN AND THE GOLDEN RUNE, THE SWASTICA AND
THE UNCREATED RUNES, WITH THEM THE CREATED LIGHT OF THE
HEBREW GOLDEN CANDELABRUM DISINTEGRATES, THE LABYRINTH OF
MAYA IS DARKENED, OF THE SIDDHAS OF CHANG SHAMBALLA, IT MAKES
PERCEPTIBLE THE LABYRINTH OF WOTAN.

DEMOCRACY" ACTUALIZES THE FINAL END OF THE ONTIC-CULTURAL
MATRICES OF TIME, THE FUTURE, THE TEMPORALITY OF THE DEMIURGE,
OF CHRONOS REPRESENTED IN THAT PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE THAT
IS SUSTAINED BY THE ASPECTS LOVE, BEAUTY AND CONSCIOUSNESS,
ARCHETYPES THAT PROJECT BY CHRONOS THE MACROSTRUCTURES TO
THE ENTELECHY MANU.


11


32


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


CHRONOS, THE TIME OF THE DEMIURGE WITH THESE MATRICES MAKES
PRESENT, THE DEMOCRATIC TIME, GRANTS THE MAXIMUM POWER TO
THE A.R.S.E.E.PE. AND IN ARGENTINA CRONOS ENTERED WITH ALL HIS
POWER AND THE DEMIURGE AND HIS CHOSEN RACE ASPECT
(A.R.S.E.E.P.E) WOULD RULE EVERYTHING.

BUT BY UPDATING ALL THE ONTIC MATRICES OF THE EXTREMES OF
TIME, CHRONOS, WHICH BELIEVES ITSELF TO BE OMNIPOTENT AND IS
NOT, STEALTHILY ALLOWS THE ENTRANCE OF KAIROS, THE TIMELESS
TIME OF THE SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA. STEALTHILY ALLOWS THE
ENTRANCE OF KAIROS, THE TIMELESS TIME OF THE SIDDHAS OF
AGARTHA.

THE TIME OF CHRONOS WHICH IS NOT, ALTHOUGH PARADOXICALLY "IF
IT IS" IS SUSTAINED ON THE ATEMPORALITY OF KAIROS WHICH IS, BUT
"IS NOT" IN THE TEMPORALITY OF CHRONOS.

AFTER PARAPHRASING PARMENIDES ON THE BEING OF TIME, IT IS
FUNDAMENTAL TO UNDERSTAND THAT THE TEMPORALITY OF CHRONOS
IS FOR THE ETERNITY OF KAIROS AND THE DEMOCRACIES THAT ARE
GOVERNED BY THE TIME OF CHRONOS, THE DEMIURGE, IT IS ALWAYS
POSSIBLE WITH GREAT EFFORT FOR THE AWAKENED VIRYA TO SEE THE
TIMELESSNESS OF KAIROS.

THE ETERNAL, THAT UNCREATED, INFINITE TIME IS ALWAYS PRESENT ON
CHRONOS BECAUSE THE ILLUSION OF THE LABYRINTH IS FOR THE
ETERNITY OF KAIROS, AND THE INFINITUDE OF THE ORIGIN THROUGH
THE GRAIL ALLOWS US TO REMEMBER THE TIMELESSNESS OF THE
ETERNAL SPIRIT, THE HEROIC MYSTICISM OF THE INFINITE SELF COMING
FROM THE HYPERBOREAN PARACLITUS.

AN ETERNAL COMRADE AFFIRMED: "IN THE "DEMOCRATIC" TIMES
WHERE CHRONOS IS PRESENT WITH ALL HIS POWER, BUT ALWAYS
KAIROS IS PRESENT, HE IS AN ABSOLUTE MOMENT, THAT QUICKLY
PASSES OVER CHRONOS, KAIROS THE GOD OF HYPERBOREAN TIME, IS
LIKE AN EAGLE FLYING OVER THE ARCHETYPAL SKIES OF CHRONOS,
STANDING ON A ROCK IN THE HIGHEST MOUNTAINS SEARCHING WITH
HIS RUNIC GAZE FOR THE CHOSEN ONES, TO TAKE THEM BACK TO THE
ORIGIN, TO TRANSFER THEM QUICKLY TO THE ETERNITY OF THE
ORIGIN".

AS THIS SUBJECT OF TIME IS VERY COMPLEX AND IS WELL
UNDERSTOOD BY THE VIRYA BERSERKR | SIMPLY WANT TO INDICATE
THAT DEMOCRACY GENERATES A CULTURALLY CHARGED TIME THAT
ALLOWS THE ACTUALIZATION OF THE ONTIC EXTREMES OF THE
SERPENT AND IT IS THE TIME WHERE THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE
SERPENT'S VERB IS ACTUALIZED BUT IT IS ALSO POSSIBLE TO SEE THE
WISDOM OF THE EAGLE'S VERB.


THE SIDDHA TYR AFFIRMS: IN ALL THE EXTENSION OF THE
ONTICOCHRONOLOGICAL MATRICES OF TIME OF THE DEMIURGE, THE
MACROCOSMIC TELLURIC SERPENT AFFIRMS THE EXTREMES OF THE


12


33


GUSTAVO BRONDINO
ONTICOTEMPORAL MATRICES OF TIME THAT PROJECT THE MACRO
STRUCTURES TO THE ENTELECHY, TRYING TO RECREATE THE


13


34


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


UNCREATED IN THE CREATED, THE PLAN OF THE DEMIURGE AND THE
SIDDHAS OF CHANG SHAMBALA AND KALACHACRA.

THE TEMPORALITY OF RECHARGED TIME IS A REVERSED
MACROCOSMIC ARCHETYPE THAT CARRIES AT THE BEGINNING THE
ETERNITY OF KAIROS, (THE VASE AND THE HAGAL RUNE) AND AT THE
END THE ENTELECHY OF THE THREE EXTREMES OF RECHARGED TIME
(PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE), BY THE PRINCIPLE THAT IS ALWAYS
PRESENT, THE "MOMENT" THAT MAKES VISIBLE TO THE INFINITE TIME
OF THE LOYAL SIDDHAS, THE ETERNITY OF THE GRAL, IS ALWAYS
PRESENT, AND IT IS THE GRAL, THE EMERALD STONE FALLEN FROM THE
CROWN OF LUCIFER CHRISTS (CLA-MORT) THAT AFFIRMS OVER THE
DARK TEMPORALITY OF THE DEMIURGE, THE UNCREATED LIGHT OF THE
GRAL, A TIMELESS, ETERNAL "IMAGE" THAT ALLOWS THE VIRYAS TO
REMEMBER; BEYOND THE DECEPTION OF TIME THE VIRYAS CAN SEE
AND FEEL IN THEIR BLOOD THE HEROIC MYSTICISM AND IDEALS OF THE
LOYAL SIDDHAS; THE GRAL, THE SIGN OF ORIGIN AND THE GOLDEN
RUNE ARE ALWAYS PRESENT AFFIRMING UPON THE VIRYA THE WILL
AND THE COURAGE TO AWAKEN TO THE AWAKENING AND TO ACHIEVE
VICTORY.


WILLPOWER COURAGE VRIL AND VICTORY
WORDS OF THE SIDDHA TYR, ABSOLUTE TRUTH. VVV


IN CORDOBA THE NEED TO COME OUT OF PAIN ALLOWED A SIGNIFICANT
NUMBER OF VIRYAS TO STOP FEELING WITH THE FLESH THE SIGN OF
PAIN AND TO START FEELING WITH THE BLOOD THE SIGN OF ORIGIN,
AND SUCH NEED OF THE SIGN OF ORIGIN ALLOWED THESE COMRADES
TO FEEL IN THEIR BLOOD THE CHANT OF THE LOYAL SIDDHAS, TO LINK
CHARISMATICALLY WITH THE PONTIFF NIMROD OF ROSARIO.

THESE COMRADES RESPONDED AND RESPONDED TO THE SUMMONS OF
THE KAIROS OF THE LOYAL SIDDHAS AND THE PONTIFF. THE VIRYAS
RESPONDED TO THE CALL OF THE GODS AND, FEELING WITH THEIR
BLOOD THE MYSTICISM OF THE INITIATORY KAIROS, THEY RECOGNIZED
(EVEN WHILE SUFFERING FROM THE FLESH AND ILLUSION) THE LEADER
OF THAT KAIROS, THE MAXIMUM PONTIFF TIRODAL: NIMROD OF ROSARY.
THESE COMRADES, SELF-SELECTED BY THEIR EGOIC WILLS, ACCEPTED
THE HEROIC MYSTIQUE AND THE IDEAL OF WAR TRANSMITTED BY THE
CHARISMATIC LEADER. THUS, THE PONTIFF GATHERED A GROUP OF
COMRADES AROUND HIS CHARISMA, AND THEY ACCEPTED THE ETHICAL
GUIDELINES AND SWORE LOYALTY TO THE CHARISMATIC LEADER AND
COMMITTED THEMSELVES TO CARRY OUT THE MISSION ASSIGNED BY
THE PONTIFF AND THE LIBERATING GODS, AND IN EXCHANGE THEY
WOULD BE INSTRUCTED IN THE HIGHEST INITIATORY WISDOM OF THE
SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA.

THE KAIROS WAS PRESENT AND THE VIRYAS OF CORDOBA CAME IN
GREAT NUMBERS, WHICH GENERATED THE TACTICAL NEED FOR


14


35


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


TO IMPLEMENT AN "ESOTERIC" ORGANIZATION UNDER THE STRATEGIC
PRINCIPLES OF THE HYPERBOREAN WISDOM.

TO CARRY OUT THIS STRATEGY AND TO BE ABLE TO FULFILL THE
MISSION ASSIGNED TO THE CHARIMATIC LEADER OR PONTIFF; IT
BECOMES OBVIOUS AND UNDERSTANDABLE THAT IN ORDER TO ACHIEVE
SUCH OBJECTIVES, THE COMRADES HAD TO BE ORGANIZED WITHIN A
REAL STRUCTURE, WHICH WAS BUILT ON CERTAIN OPERATIVE
PRINCIPLES BASED ON THE LAW OF ENCIRCLEMENT.

NIMROD FOUNDED THE ORDER BY MEANS OF THE ARCHEMONIC
PRINCIPLES OF THE HYPERBOREAN WISDOM. THIS ONE EMERGED TO
THE "SPHERE OF LIGHT" OF THE WORLD IN THE CITY OF CORDOBA:
PSYCHOREGION THAT IS A NATURAL OPIDIOUM, ARCHEMONA
TIRODAL ROMAN HEAD BEING DENOMINATED ITS CONSTRUCTION:
ORDER OF TIRODAL KNIGHTS OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC.


THE VIRYAS OF THE ORDER: THEIR ORIGINS.


| want to emphatically affirm and recognize that the UNBREAKABLE WILLS OF
THE VIRYAS are the VITAL support of a HYPERBORNE ORDER, with them the
CARACOL STAIRS are constructed, the same is ordered CHARISMATICALLY
according to an order previously established by the SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA and
the MAXIMUM PONTIPHICE, The emerging viryas in an Order when entering it
are all characterized by having GNOSTIC PREDISPOSITION, that symbol is the
one that enters them to the SEARCH OF ORIENTATION, of the TRUTH OF THE
SPIRIT, but given the GRADE OF
The objective loss that the virya suffered in that past was LOST, both in the
OUTER LABYRINTH and in the INNER LABYRINTH and the comrades of that
dramatic time had that noological quality that is characteristic of those times where
after a period of such dark darkness a KAIROS OF VALOR emerged. When the
KAIROS emerged in the psychoregion of CORDOBA, the chosen viryas turned
their faces looking for the origin of the INITIATIVE KAIROS.

Moved by an inner force, all in unison felt the call of the gods, coinciding their wills
with the CHARISMA OF THE PONTIPH, WISE WARRIOR LEADER OF THE
HYPERBORNE REGIONAL BLOODS. Thus in
CORDOBA the viryas of this space of significance by some _ mystery
incomprehensible to reason, coincided a set of Viryas from different cultural
records with the call of the liberating gods, going to the CHARISMATIC
CENTER....

According to that degree of GNOSTIC PREDISPOSITION and suffering that
OBJECTIVE EXTRAVISION, something was AWAKENED in them and beyond
their situation of the LOST SELF in the multiple masks of the aberrant typologies:
ludic or sacralizing, they felt in their blood the SONG OF THE LOYAL SIDDHAS.
This unconscious force coming from the EGO, prevailed over the psychological,
over the designated created soul and the spirit of the comrades imposed them to
join in the


15


36


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


call of the heroic mysticism, making all these wills coincide in the KAIROS
PROVING FROM THE CHARISMATIC CENTER.

The CHARISMATIC CENTER in CORDOBA was affirmed in the CHARISMATIC
BOND of the LEADER OF THE ROYAL BLOOD represented in the comrade
RICARDO CENTENO and this virya and his bookstore was at that beginning a
VORTICE RUNICO, a cultural reference where the MAJORITY OF THE
CAMARADES WHO ENTERED THE ORDER coincided.

Comrade RICARDO CENTENO moved on a "magical" archemonized space
(artificial real system: bookstore) the CHARISMA of this comrade and his space
was a Strategic point, where comrades coincided by a BOND (FRIENDSHIP,
PHILOSOPHICAL IDEAL, POLITICAL, RELIGIOUS ETC).

RICARDO CENTENO was the first image of the SACRED SYMBOL OF THE
VIRYA and it is that INCREATED SIGN that brought together all the comrades
under the MYSTIC OF NIMROD OF ROSARIO.

The first viryas that entered the Order did it through Ricardo Centeno, this
comrade was the CHARISMATIC LINK leading NIMROD DE ROSARIO to the
CHARISMATIC CENTER of the SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA.

After coinciding under Ricardo's charisma, they were OBSERVED and

ELECTED, as Ricardo joined, they became charismatically linked to each other, in
this beginning the first meetings were organized either in the bookstore or in
Ricardo's house. The number of comrades increased. The call of the blood was felt
and Ricardo, always guided by Nimrod, as they entered the mysticism, formed
different "groups". These groups were created by that archetypal, unconscious
force that acts as an egregore unifying the viryas lost in certain ARCHETYPES that
participate of their race, sex, culture, etc. These GROUPS would be the prelude to
the CIRCLES as we will see later.
As the lost EGO was lost in those first meetings, the bonding between the
comrades obeyed the unconscious tendencies that determine their psychological
typology ABERRO. The viryas were relating to each other according to their
psychological preeminences (PSYCHOLOGICAL EGO) which are at the beginning
AFFECTIVE BONDING or proper of the DOGMA that has them sacralized. At the
beginning of this construction, the first meetings directed by Ricardo began, the
purpose of which was to pave the way for NIMROD DE ROSARIO AND HIS LADY
MOTHER ROSALIA to enter Cordoba.

In those meetings a CONVOCATION was held where NIMROD DE ROSARIO

would be present, so in that great meeting where all the elected members
attended, NIMROD could see the RASGO DE LOS ELEGIDOS.
NIMROD WITH RICARDO CENTENO WAS ORDERING THE VIRYAS_ IN
GROUPS. THOSE INITIAL "GROUPS" THAT WERE FORMED FIRST BY
FRIENDSHIP OR BY DOGMA WERE ESTABLISHED ACCORDING TO THE
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TRAITS THAT DETERMINE THE NOOLOGICAL
BEING OF THE VIRYA, LATER NIMROD WOULD FORM THE CIRCLES OF THE
ORDER WHICH WERE DETERMINED BY THE TRAIT OF THE CHOSEN ONE
COINCIDING WITH THE DIFFERENT TACTICAL FUNCTIONS OF THE
ORDER....


16


37


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


The comrades beyond their origin, RACIAL ORIGIN, CULTURAL GRADE, SOCIAL
POSITION or FRIENDSHIP AMONG THEM, were ordained
according to the CHOSEN'S CHARACTER and their trait determined which
"GROUP" they would join.
| want to emphasize that the ORDER was being gestated, and NIMROD was
strategically giving birth to it from his SECRET CRYPT, but it is interesting to note
that the groups assumed certain strategic responsibilities, without having entered
into the studies of the 13 volumes of the Fundamentals, nor having the magical
novel. | want to distinguish that action ordered by Philip because it had a specific
purpose, it was structured in two well-defined MOVEMENTS: one EXTERNAL and
the other INTERNAL. The first EXTERNAL: consisted of a cultural deployment that
had as its epicenter a CULTURAL tactic which broadened the living space and
moved around holding political conferences, philosophical conferences, etc. For
example, nationalist films were shown in cinemas, lectures were given on
nationalist Germany, on the Second World War, on Peronism and the life of Eva
Peron.
The second INTERNAL: a group of comrades was deployed with the mission of
obtaining material resources to finance the definitive entrance of Nimrod to
Cordoba, and to find the physical spaces where the PLAZA LIBERADA would be
opened and where the future CIRCLES of the ORDER would move.
| must emphasize the EXTERNAL movement since it created a PROPRIOUS
CLIMATE to ADD VIRYAS TO THE MYSTIC, on the other hand the INTERNAL
movement was more hidden, and allowed to organize the functional structure, the
physical space where the Order would be established.
The emerging democracy admitted all kinds of social phenomena, in such a way
that this cultural and political opening allowed the re-emergence of all kinds of
esoteric synarchic lines of Cordoba into the light sphere. Democratic "freedoms"
and their diverse cultural manifestations emerged with an archetypal outburst
never seen before in this country. All that which was repressed emerged in all
areas of national culture, but it was totally strange and it called my attention,
coming from a political line and from a martial art, that all these nationalist cultural
"images" projected by the different "groups" of the future Order were in the
CULTURAL LIGHT SPHERE of CORDOBA.

| must recognize that Felipe from the shadows directed all this cultural movement,
this lasted a short period, it was highly strategic, allowing this action to enter a
greater number of comrades to the mystique of the KAIROS INICIATICO. After this
cultural period and after obtaining what was necessary to establish the PLAZA, we
received the order from RICARDO CENTENO to cease these tasks because we
had already achieved what NIMROD required. | want to emphasize that all this was
achieved without having in our hands the texts of the Hyperborean Wisdom, as |
said before, we only had at that time some notes, | emphasize this to measure the
power of the comrade.

In that period where these two MOVEMENTS took shape, we met once a week,
maybe twice a week to study the first volume of the Fundamentals in Ricardo
Centeno's house. His house served as a PLAZA LIBERADA where the different
groups met every day (at that time three groups of approximately 13 comrades).
So after finishing these two missions


17


38


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


In this period, we entered another space of action which was no longer emergent;
on the contrary, this period was characterized by the viryas moving below the
THRESHOLD OF THE WORLD'S SENSE.

During this "hidden" period, the PLAZA LIBERADA was OPENED and its
TAPASIGNO would be built as a PLAZA/INSTITUTO, and the PLAZA/GYMNASIO
was also opened, and a purely INITIATIVE space would be entered.

| emphasize this in order to understand the POWER of a KAIROS that allows to
SEE through the SYMBOL OF THE ORIGIN the SIGN OF THE ORIGIN, BEYOND.
We were synchronistically coincided by the representative of the SIGN OF ORIGIN
and of the Loyal SIDDHAS in that history: FELIPE MOYANO. | must also highlight
the comrade who was the main charismatic link with Nimrod: RICARDO
CENTENO, this comrade whom | have already named OPENED THE DOORS OF
"HELL" SO THAT THE PONTIFICE, NIMROD OF ROSARIO, COULD ENTER.
WHEN | AFFIRM HELL, IT IS BECAUSE WE ARE FOR THIS "CELESTIAL"
PARADISE THE COLD, IGNEOUS, OVERWHELMING FIRE THAT BURNS THE
ILLUSION OF WARM LIFE.

Beyond the fact that the viryas came from different esoteric, religious, political
dogmas and many were related among them because they came from the same
dogma, for example from the GNOSIS OF SAMAEL, from PERONISM, from the
MARTIAL ARTS and from so many other sacralizing dogmas, which it is not the
case to analyze since it is incumbent to open these ontic-cultural registers and it is
not necessary to do so, | want to say that all of them suffered from a high degree of
OBJECTIVE EXTRAVIOUSNESS but they also had a_ strong Gnostic
predisposition and that characteristic of the SELECTED SELF participated of their
NOOLOGICAL CHARACTER which would determine their entrance to a certain
CIRCLE in particular.

Undoubtedly and with the certainty of the RUNE having the LETTER TO THE
ELECTED, the eternal comrade outlined the natural bond of the Order: the
CHAMARADERIE.


THE FOUNDATION OF THE ORDER BY MEANS OF A
HYPERBOREAN INITIATION, TAKING AS AN ANALOGICAL
MODEL: THE "ROYAL SYSTEM" OF A MEDIEVAL CASTLE.


Before entering to narrate this history of the foundation of the ORDER | want
to emphasize an essential principle that makes every HYPERBOREA ORDER:
its MARTIAL ETHICS, which is sustained in certain "MAGICAL WARRIOR"
norms which are an ESSENTIAL part of all the MARTIAL or MILITARY ethical
codes, these MARTIAL ethical premises adjust every HYPERBOREA ORDER
and mainly the Virya to the RULING FUNCTION. Sooner or later, every
HYPERBORNEOUS INITIATE will have to adjust to the form that
predetermines the BEING of every HYPERBORNEOUS ORDER, to its REGIA
function if he intends to free himself from the yoke of pain of the prison of
Maya, of the LABYRINTH OF THE SIDDHAS OF CHANG SHAMBALLA....


18


She)


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


Comrades, the ORDER OF TIRODAL KNIGHTS was an Order that participated in
that ETHICAL norm but | must recognize that a certain time was given to the
VIRYA to adjust to that UNCREATED POWER that is beyond all MYTH, the
reason for being is very simple, the multiplicity of different ontic characteristics that
were part of the Virya, the different TYPOLOGIES ABERROS: LUDIC AND
SACRALIZING that compose the VIRYA, the different TYPOLOGIES of the VIRYA
that were part of the VIRYA.
ontologically to the psychological "I" (body, soul and spirit) of the lost Viryas were
re-assigned in those beginnings by the HYPERBORIC MYTH CONSTELLED BY
NIMROD.

IN THIS INITIATION THE VIRYAS WERE ANCHORED TO THE HEAVENS OF
AGARTHA, TO THE HYPERBOREAN MYTH, TO THE FIRST STEP OF THE
SPIRAL STAIRCASE OF THE GENERAL STRATEGY OF THE ORDER.

NIMROD IN THAT INITIATION OR FOUNDATION WOULD PUT THE DISCIPLE
IN DIRECT CONTACT WITH THE HYPERBOREAN MYTH.


The HYPERBorean WISDOM affirms: in every synarchic_ or
hyperborean initiatory path, the Instructor puts the student in direct
contact with the MYTH, without doubt in a path of the Synarchy of the
White Fraternity the myth subordinates the disciple to the GOD OF
THE MYTH and to the regents of the Myth in the world, that is, its
representatives, the Golen Priests, In this way the contextual argument
of the myth directly enters the disciple to be part of the Myth, being his
| and WILL phagocytized by the Myth and its Sacred Symbols. In a
Hyperborean initiatory path the Pontiff puts the student in contact with
the argumentative context of the myth, and this is inevitable in any
initiatory path, since MYTH IS THE GATE OF ENTRANCE TO EVERY
INITIATIVE PATH, but the great difference is that in a Hyperborean
path the Pontiff tries to prevent the Virya in the process of awakening
from suffering from the numinous force of MYTH, although it is the
HYPERBORNEAN MYTH that insufflates his gnostic will, it is the same
that leads to WISDOM and it enters him to another instance, it allows
him to make a "gnostic leap" to the virya that affirms him in the
MYTHICS OF THE UNCREATED RUNES, such power allows him to
COGNITIVELY UNDERSTAND every MYTH and TO TRANSFER
WITHOUT RISK HIS METAPHYSICAL "TRUTH", to dominate his
UNCREATED TRUTH. The
HYPERBOREA WISDOM endows the virya with a wisdom, a POWER
to transcend the cultural limits of all myths, so that the virya can pass
through its content without suffering from its forces, a risk that one runs
if one Is a victim of the underlying metaphysical forces behind the
myth, even if it is a HYPERBOREA MYTH, therefore, in this case,
WISDOM. HYPERBOREA is an INCREATED SCIENCE that strips all
MYTHS and their SACRED SYMBOLS, demonstrates by means of
19


40


GUSTAVO BRONDINO
theories and rational explanations its symbolic and allegorical truth, it is


20


41


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


to say, with concepts determined by the logic of language, the existing
truth beyond all myth.

Of course these concepts determine the power of a myth and of the noological
force that is incorporated to the VIRYA’'S BLOOD when entering a Hyperborean
Myth, the myth is the GATE of entrance to a HYPERBORNE ORDER, this is very
clear and understood for every initiated Tyrodal Knight.

NIMROD IN THE INITIATION OF THE FOUNDATION OF THE ORDER
AFFIRMED IN THAT INITIATORY ACT THE HEROIC ETHICS OF THE
HYPERBOREAN MYTHS AND THEIR STRATEGIES OF _ SPIRITUAL
LIBERATION, BUT IT SHOULD BE THE VIRYA THE ONE WHO BY HIS WILL
AND COURAGE AND SACRIFICE COULD ACQUIRE THE UNCREATED FORCE
WHICH IS BEYOND THE MYTH.

NIMROD summoned ALL THE CAMARADES to a meeting that took place in a
specific space, (it is not necessary to detail the physical place) and in that space
the Pontiff magically unfolded a space that participated in the INFINITE ACTUAL,
he opened the DOORS through which the INCREATED LIGHT OF GRAL.

THE COMRADE TRIGGERED TWO SPACES: A GENERAL ONE AND A

PARTICULAR ONE.

THE FIRST ONE WAS ATTENDED BY ALL THE COMRADES WHO
EXPERIENCED A RUNIC ECSTASY COMING FROM THE HEROIC MYSTICISM
THAT THE PONTIFF BROUGHT DOWN. THIS ECSTASY EMBRACED ALL THE
COMRADES PRESENT AT THIS INITIATION.

THE PARTICULAR AND THE MOST SIGNIFICANT, WAS INDIVIDUAL, THE
PONTIFF DEPOSITED IN EACH COMRADE THE RUNE OF HIS BLOOD, OF HIS
LINEAGE, A PARTICIPANT OF THE SYMBOL OF ORIGIN.

BY THE WISDOM OF THE PONTIFF IN THAT FOUNDATIONAL ACT THE
ETERNAL COMRADE AFFIRMED IN THE CONSCIOUS SUBJECT OF THE
VIRYA THE HYPERBOREAN MYTH AND ENDOWED THE VIRYA SELF WITH
THE HIGHEST ETHICAL CONDITION WHICH PARTAKES OF THE ORIGIN AND
SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA: MARTIAL AND VRIL.


Nimrod affirmed that martiality as the fundamental and argumentative principle of
all HYPERBorean MYTH, AXIAL AXIS where the ORDER, CIRCLES, THE PLAZA
AND THE VIRYAS revolved, the ethical foundation preached by the pontiff, for that
reason | adjust in that "initiation" the "being in itself", of the Virya, its conscious
subject to that ethics, even to the microcosm, biological body of the Viryas (its
noological, astral, psychic and vital ontic potency) to the BEING OF THE
WARRIOR, as KNIGHTS or as LADIES. But comrades, | must recognize that the
ORDER had two degrees of ANCHORAGE, and that ETHICAL POSITION OF THE
VIRYA would define the tactical locations of each comrade within a SPECIFIC
CIRCLE.

As the AWAKENED VIRYA knows ALL HYPERBORROUS ORDER is determined
by concentric circles which carry each one of them a SPECIFIC MISSION and that
was the "being in itself" of the Circle, but every Virya enters the SLEEPING Order
and its purpose is to AWAKEN, existing two INITIATIONS, one transmutes him into
a WARRIOR MONK, the other into a WISE WARRIOR, the other one into a WISE
WARRIOR, the "being in itself" of the Circle, the "being in itself" of the Circle.


21


42


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


difference between both is that the second is trained in the ART OF FORGING
WEAPONS OF WAR, they were Viryas of the WAR, on the other hand the first
ones participate of other activities, of other operative functions, for NOT being
warriors, they were not less important for the ESSENTIAL MISSION that has all
HYPERBORIC ORDER. Every HYPERBORIC ORDER is in itself, MARTIAL.
Beyond the particular, every Hyperborean initiate, as he AWAKENS, adjusts
himself to this WAY OF LIFE, and when the THYRODAL KNIGHT VIRYA receives
his SECOND HYPERBORNE INITIATION, it is

considered a WISE WARRIOR. The ORDER imparted this ethical condition,
although the ORDER did not oblige normatively to affirm the second
ANCHORAGE, (ANCHOR, AS TRIDENT), if the WISDOM THAT FROM IT
EMANATES, because all HYPERBORN ORDER is an ORDER OF WISE
WARRIORS, and only the

The second initiation affirms upon the SELF the absolute understanding of the
SYMBOL OF ORIGIN and the GOLDEN RUNE.


Nimrod (LUIS FELIPE MOYANO) for me eternally FELIPE, charismatic leader
Hyperborean wise warrior honors the great warrior Casita and he is the best
example to follow, as he was in life as today enthroned in the ORIGIN. Already in
FELIPE as NIMROD, we can distinguish the WAY OF LIFE that predetermines his
being: that of a WISE WARRIOR.

NIMROD FORMALIZED THE ORDER IN A SYSTEM OF CONCENTRIC
CIRCLES, AND STRUCTURED IT ACCORDING TO THE PRINCIPLES OF
A MEDIEVAL ORDER OF CHIVALRY. In such a way that each PART OF THE
WHOLE was ordered normatively and structurally according to the ethical
principles that correspond to the "images" of a MEDIEVAL ORDER, in fact, we
know perfectly well that HYPERBORN WISDOM always manifested itself within the
bosom of the WARRIOR CASTE.


That's the way it was always done, and that's the way it will always be


done!

But in these PRESENT TIMES of the Kali Yuga we must recognize that the
WARRIOR MYTHS have been deformed and today the MYTH OF THE HERO
represents its mythical arguments to the SINARCH HERO, to the military Virya of
the World Sinarchy, to the Virya martially trained in the ARTS of the RACES OF
WHITE TRAIT.

Therefore, FELIPE tried to affirm this ethical condition, assimilating the
LIBERATED PLAZA to a formidable MEDIEVAL CASTLE, the comrades to the
rank of SHIELDS and later of KNIGHTS, and finally the ultimate goal of initiating
them as WISE WARRIORS, WISE BUILDERS, HYPERBORROUS PONTIFICES.
Therefore NIMROD, the PONTIPH of the ORDER, ODAL center of all the
CIRCLES, and of the ORDER bore the HIGHEST WISDOM, DUE TO THE LORD
OF ABSOLUTE ORIENTATION; THE CIRCLES AND THE

Comrades wielded ABSOLUTE LOYALTY to the Pontiff; these two noological
ethical conditions allowed the construction of OCTRA'’s CARACOL STAIRWAY; all
the comrades were instructed by the comrade in the HIGHEST WISDOM which by
the HONOR of OCTRA's comrades today is present all over the WORLD.


22


43


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


Therefore, the comrades admitted to the ORDER, once accepted, were called in a
SPECIFIC ROLE PARTICIPANT OF A MILITARY ORDER, which affirmed the
VIRYA in the HYPERBorean MYTH.

In this magical action Nimrod unleashed on all viryas a Cultural Register whose
ontic matrices coincide their languages with the heroic mysticism of a MEDIEVAL
HYPERBorean ORDER.

ORDEN designated each comrade with a defined position, using a symbolic,
allegorical analogy comparing the PLAZA LIBERADA with a MEDIEVAL CASTLE,
and invested each comrade with a form that participates in a MEDIEVAL
MILITARY ORDER and the architectural structure of a CASTLE.

|! am not going to relate the "ritual" formality of the FOUNDATION OF THE
ORDER, but | do affirm that every HYPERBORN ORDER was founded on an
ANGULAR STONE that in this case was represented by a STONE MAN: NIMROD
OF ROSARY, this initiation FOUNDED THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE ORDER.
ORDER unleashing on the act of FOUNDATION the ACTUAL INFINITY, creating
the CHARISMATIC LINK between the VIRYAS, the PONTIFICE and the SIDDHAS
OF AGARTHA, for which FELIPE relied on a real hyperborean ARCHITECTURAL
system: a MEDIEVAL CASTLE.

Because it is not meaningful to describe what FELIPE "magically" developed and
how he operated on the comrades, | simply answer that | describe what |
understand of that foundational initiation, since such an initiative action is terribly
oblique and will be revealed later. In that act of FOUNDATION of the ORDER,
"magically" the comrade OPENED the doors of the HYPERBORNE WISDOM TO
THE WORLD, the vagueness of reason and language does not allow me to
describe correctly such operative function which was based on the INCREATED
RUNES, ONLY THE VIRYA BERSERKR- PONTIFICE TIRODAL CAN
UNDERSTAND WHAT THE COMRADE UNLOCKED IN
| will try to describe this foundational act, to bring closer to the OCTIRODAE virya
what this "initiation" meant for the ORDER. | want to point out that there are
magical, runic issues that are difficult to describe semantically, in a literal language,
for example, many comrades ask me why | do not describe textually how the
RUNE MARTIAL YOGAis performed, tothose comrades | answer because it is
the same RUNIC and all that is in RUNES its literary description falls within the
limit of semiotics and as all semiotics even if runic is archetypal, to describe RUNIC
YOGA, its runic execution in semantic form is simply a mistake is like learning
MARTIAL ARTS through a book.

| describe this foundational "rite" trying to be as truthful as possible, it is to
understand how NIMROD placed each comrade on a MYTH which is part of an
ORDER OF CABALLERY, it is to understand how fundamental is the TACTICAL
FUNCTION of the virya within a CIRCLE and a LIBERATED PLAZA (subject that |
develop in another section).

NIMROD IN THAT INITIATIVE FOUNDATION, put every Virya in DIRECT
CONTACT WITH THE HYPERBorean MYTH, MAGICALLY AFFIRMING THE
PRINCIPLE OF HOMERIC ETHICS OVER ALL CAMARADES,

(SECRET of the HORSE, of the TOWER and of the WALLS) | affirm this MYTH


23


44


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


which is the historical reference of all HYPERBORN ETHICS, but such magical
action was difficult to understand in the state of "reverie" in which we were all
comrades in that historical present, which is why today it can reveal how the
ORDER was FOUNDED, SINCE THE CAMARADES OF OCTIRODAE have in
their hands all the HIGHEST WISDOM.


THE FOUNDING ACT OF THE ORDER, THE TACTICAL
DESIGNATIONS.


This FOUNDATIONAL act was concretized in a meeting that was held specifically
to perform this "initiation" (hyperborean "rite") which is the antechamber to the first
hyperborean initiation. It was attended by the majority of the comrades, who were
designated in a very specific way, affirming the Virya in the "image" of the "being in
itself" of a MEDIEVAL ORDER OF CABALLERY.

Thus NIMROD designated the comrades in a COMBAT POSITION, such

designation coincided the RASTE OF THE CHOSEN with a structure participating
of a MILITARY ORDER OF CABALLERY, or of a concrete aspect of the
ARCHEMON of a MEDIEVAL HYPERBORN ORDER: its CASTLE.
Thus in that foundational act certain comrades were designated as "FOSOS",
others as "GUARNITION", others as "BLOCK", the majority of the comrades as
"WALL" and others, the minority carried the condition of "TOWER", the function of
BRIDGES was also designated, but this was not granted in that Foundation, it was
granted later, orally to certain Viryas, since the designation of BRIDGES is made
with the participation of the SIDDHAS, a topic that | will develop in the second part.
According to the CHARACTER of the chosen one, these ALLEGORIC IMAGES
that NIMROD projected on the comrades had a highly INITIATIVE purpose and |
must emphasize that only the THYRODAL PONTIFICE could distinguish at that
time that trait that characterizes the hyperborean virya. That "ALLEGORIC IMAGE"
that was assigned to each virya was a specific function of a transmuted RUNE that
unified the WILLS OF ALL THE CAMERADES in the THYRODAL ARCHEMON OF
THE ORDER.


THE TIRODAL CASTLE, ITS ALLEGORICAL IMAGES SUCH AS:

MOAT: WATER WILLS

BLOCKS: STONE WILLS WALLS: STONE

WILLS GARRISON: FIRE WILLS TOWERS:

FIRE WILLS BRIDGES: ICE WILLS

-REPRESENTED THESE IMAGES" ALLEGORICAL, RUNIC: THE HEROIC
SPIRIT THAT UNLEASHED "ON THE VIRYA KNIGHT TIRODAL.


24


45


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


| will describe later the meaning of the NOOOGICAL DESIGN projected by the
Pontiff on each comrade, but simplifying at this point | will try to define synthetically
this initiatory action trying to bring the Virya closer to the uncreated truth of this
"initiatory" act.


Question: What triggered Nimrod in this pontifical initiatory action?


Answer: NIMROD, in this "initiation" | affirm certain RUNES on the | and the
CONSCIOUS SUBJECT of the comrades, even on the Conscious Subject of
FELIPE MOYANO.

Upon Himself, his Conscious Subject, the comrade affirmed the MYTH OF THE
LEADER OF THE ROYAL BLOOD, of the EMPEROR OF THE PURE BLOOD, and
upon his SELF NIMROD, the WISE WARRIOR; the THYRODAL PONTIFICE OF
OCTRA,

| deposit upon its | the noological immanence of the GOLDEN RUNE and upon
Itself | affirm the SIGN OF ORIGIN.

As this subject is highly significant and participates in the ontic register of the
comrade | will not affirm anything else because | never open ontic registers, it is
NOT PERMITTED TO DO SO, unless it is strictly necessary, it is so ordered; |
simply affirm that in that foundational act Philip was constituted as NIMROD, in
MAXIMUM PONTIFICE OF THE ORDER OF THYRODAL KNIGHTS.

In the Viryas who participated in that "initiation" the Pontiff Tirodal deployed the
MYTHICAL argument of the ORDER in the SPHERE OF LIGHT OF THE
CONSCIOUS SUBJECT OF ALL THE CAMARADES: the ARTURIAN MYTH OF
PARSIFAL, and of the WAR OF TROY, WHICH CORRESPONDS TO THE
ESSENTIAL WAR, WITH THE MYTH OF THE ATLANTY, ENTERING THE
CAMARADES INTO THE MYTHIC HEROIC PARTICIPATION OF THOSE TWO
GREAT

HYPERBOREAN MYTHS. On the EGO of each comrade | project the RUNE
GUIBUR, for which | use a TRIDENT, with the same | MARK A RUNE SIGN on the
EGO of the virya affirming on the RASGO OF THE CHOSEN ONE an ALLEGORIC
IMAGE which carried the INITIATIVE RUNE corresponding to its designated
tactical function.


IN SHORT, THIS INITIATORY MEETING AFFIRMED PHILIP AS THE LEADER
OF THE ROYAL FUNCTION, AND THE VIRYAS AS KNIGHTS AND LADIES;
THUS, IN THIS INITIATORY ACT, THE PONTIFF AND THE KNIGHTS,
TOGETHER WITH THE LOYAL SIDDHAS, FOUNDED THE ORDER OF
KNIGHTS TIRODAL OF THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC.


The particular tactical functions such as: FOSO, GARRITION, BLOCK, WALL,
TOWER and BRIDGE, the ontic matrices ("being-in-itself") of these entities,
cultural objects BECOME PART OF THE CARACOL STAIRS of all ORDER. The
forms or Real Systems: "garrison", "block", "wall", "tower", "bridge", their designs
are linked as O.C.E or O.C.R (Emergent Cultural Object or Referent) to the "being
in itself" of a HYPERBORNE AXIOLOGICAL SUPER OBJECT such as: a
MEDIEVAL CASTLE; the connection of sense between these entities creates an


25


46


GUSTAVO BRONDINO
ARTIFICIAL REAL SYSTEM, a CULTURAL RECORD of


26


47


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


great EXTENSION AND COMPLEXION on which THE FOUNDATIONS OF THE
ORDER OF THE KNIGHTS ORDER OF THE TIRODAL KNIGHTS OF THE
ARGENTINE REPUBLIC WERE FOUNDED.

Using as an analogical model the ALLEGORICAL "IMAGE" of a CASTLE and of a
MEDIEVAL ORDER OF KNIGHTS, NIMROD IN THAT MAGICAL INITIATION
CONSTELLED THE HEROIC MYSTIC OF THE PARACLITE WHICH
DESCENDED UPON THE WILLS OF ALL THE CAMARADES WHO
INTEGRATED THAT FOUNDING ACT OF THE ORDER OF KNIGHTS TIRODAL.


This founding act ANCHORED the ORDER in the ODAL RUNE and set it in
MOTION (under the runic potency of the HOLY HYPERBORNE SWASTIC). In that
pontifical action NIMROD stopped the TRASCENDENT TIME AND UNLOCKED
THE ACTUAL INFINITY, the INGRESS INTO THE
MYTH, investing each comrade with the strength of the MYTH CORRESPONDING
TO HIS TACTICAL FUNCTION. Magically NIMROD in that
initiatory act, he affirmed over the body and soul of the comrade who was still
asleep a LIBERATING POWER, he sowed in each VIRYA a STONE SEED where
the STONE MAN would germinate and emerge.
In addition, in that meeting as in several subsequent ones, for example, where
NIMROD did not read the MAGIC NOVEL, (a subject that | will narrate later,
because it responds to another strategic magical action that FELIPE developed in
those meetings where he did not personally read the novel) the eternal comrade
affirmed among all the ARQUEMONA and surrounded the PLAZA LIBERADA.

Nimrod, Pontiff Maximus, AFFIRMED in that initiation the THYRODAL
ARCHEMON, and its manifestation on two Artificial Real Systems: the
PLAZA/INSTITUTE and the PLAZA/GYMNASIUM. This INITIATION gave ORIGIN
to the ORDER and affirmed an OATH OF HONOR AND LOYALTY between the
PONTIFICE, THE VRAYA AND THE VIRYAS.


NIMROD in that initiation re-signified with the RUNE GUIBUR as TRIDENT OF
NEPTUNE, (in fact he operated magically with a TRIDENT) the archetypal powers
of the CARACOL design (Astral and Psychic power) and of the SERPENT design
(Vital power) of the "being in itself" of each TACTICAL FUNCTION and integrated it
to the "being in itself" of the Real System of a MEDIEVAL CASTLE.
| WANT TO TRY TO PLACE THE VIRYA IN THAT CONTEXT, IT IS AS IF THE
VIRYAS HAD MOVED TO MEDIEVAL TIMES, THAT WAS THE PREVAILING
ATMOSPHERE, ALTHOUGH IN TRUTH, THAT MYSTICISM WAS FELT
THROUGH THE BLOOD, IT WAS THE UNCREATED PRESENCE OF THE
ACTUAL INFINITE CONSTELLATED BY THE PONTIFF IN THAT INITIATORY
ACT.


We could say that this pontifical action MAGICALLY TRANSITTED US into the
"PAST" of the MIDDLE AGES, in truth NIMROD actualized the HEROIC MYSTICS
OF THAT PAST, its INFINITE POLE in the INFINITE.

ACTUAL, at that meeting "initiative.

It is fundamental to understand that NIMROD updated the ontic matrices of these
stories, specifically that of a HYPERBORNE CASTLE by deploying the


Zt


48


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


MYTH CORRESPONDING TO THIS ARCHITECTURAL STRUCTURE
HYPERBOREAL, putting the comrade in direct contact with the Myth, but we must
understand that it is not the PAST what he actualized but the PRESENT INFINITY
that participates by its HEROIC MYSTIC of that past that as such no longer exists,
if it exists as MYTH and as uncreated force that is beyond the myth. It is
fundamental to understand this difference, NIMROD updated the MYTH that exists
on every MEDIEVAL CASTLE and it is the MYTH the one that transits us to that
history, thus that PAST that participates of every MEDIEVAL ORDER was
UPDATED by the MYTH that opened the HISTORICAL CULTURAL RECORD of a
MEDIEVAL HYPERBOREA ORDER, ALL VIRYAS ENTERED THAT HISTORICAL
RECORD BY LIVING THE MYSTICISM THAT CARRIED THOSE
HYPERBOREAN HISTORICAL CULTURAL RECORDS OF WHICH IT IS A PART
FOR EXAMPLE: A MEDIEVAL CASTLE, A GRECO-ROMAN PAGAN TEMPLE, A
WEAPON OF WAR SUCH AS A SWORD OR A TRIDENT, ETC.

| want to clarify this subject because if it is not understood, which is very common,
even more so at that time, one runs the risk of being trapped in the axiological
arguments of the myth that participates in the tactical function, which | want to
emphasize because such a gnoseological error phagocytized certain Viryas that
considered their tactical function as BLOCKS or WALLS, for example,
undeserved, but that is another subject that | will describe later, which today when
remembering makes me emerge with a certain LUCIFERIC SMILE.


By affirming in the ELIX path of the CONSCIOUS SUBJECT of each Virya the
CONTEXTUAL ARGUMENT of the Myth, NIMROD adjusted or anchored the
Virya by then well "asleep" to the TACTICAL FUNCTION, the comrade
affirmed an ethical responsibility that remained engraved forever in the
archetypal memory of the Virya, and by the MYTH AFFIRMED in that
allegorical image he entered the Virya to a MONARCH of the LABRELIX path,
which placed him in a certain CIRCLE.

That is to say, the TACTICAL FUNCTION was the form that predetermined the
charismatic conjunction of certain Viryas in the CIRCLES that were later
formed. Thus the TACTICAL FUNCTION and the rune GUIBUR deposited on
the EGO of the Virya affirmed his search, option and choice (rune GUIBUR),
the Virya would have the volitional force of the RUNE to INSTRUCT himself in
the mysteries of the Hyperborean Wisdom.

This is noteworthy, because this initiatory action was performed without
having the instruction of the 13 volumes of the FUNDAMENTALS, NOR THE
NOVEL, it was performed when the virya was beginning his AWAKENING,
thus the lost Virya, who was looking for GUIDANCE accepted to be
instructed by Nimrod, boarded the BOAT OF ODIN to sail the oceans of
MAYA, in search of the ORIGIN, OF THE UNCREATED PATTERN. The power
of the myth constellated in the conscious Subject and of the RUNE affirmed
in his SELF participating in the myth and its tactical function gave a
VOLITIVE FORCE to the Virya that would allow him to enter the HIGHEST
WISDOM, THAT OF THE SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA.


28


49


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


It is necessary to understand that most of the comrades had not yet been
instructed in the FUNDAMENTALS and only some had the NOVEL, that is to say,
we got ON ODIN'S BOAT for that mystery that can never be rationally understood
and that transcends the semantic limits of human logic.

Each Virya according to his INNER SITUATION, (this was determined by
the degree of orientation of the EGO and the deviation of his rational, cultural
and conscious subject) was SITUATED ON A TACTICAL FUNCTION. The
eternal comrade according to his RUNE VIEW visualized the ontic
characteristics of each comrade and according to them ASSIGNED him his
TACTICAL FUNCTION, reaffirmed on the | of the Virya the RUNE
corresponding to that function, entered the Virya to the DOORS of the
ORDER, thus the comrade without being awake (his | was not yet isolated)
was insufflated his WILL by the power of a HYPERBORNE MYTH affirmed in
the Conscious Subject and his VALUE by the power of the RUNE
corresponding to the myth actualized on his SPIRIT, | INFINITE.

THE MYTH ACTED ON THE CONSCIOUS SUBJECT AND THE RUNE ON THE
SLEEPING SELF, WHEN THE VIRYA DISCOVERED HIS SACRED SYMBOL
AND ENTERED THE POWER OF THE RUNE HE HAD THE VOLITIONAL
FORCE PROVIDED BY THE RUNE TO ISOLATE THE SELF FROM THE
CONSCIOUS SUBJECT, TRANSMUTING INTO AN AWAKENED VIRYA.

Nimrod in that action re-signified on these functions, (allegorical images: moat,
garrison, block, wall, tower or bridge) the designating Vox of the Demiurgic Logos,
re-signified their archetypal designs, the same lost their capacities as CULTURAL
OBJECTS, in such a way that these entities, their "archetypal forms" disintegrated
as designated entities and their "images" were integrated into the ARTIFICIAL
REAL SYSTEM of a HYPERBORN CASTLE, therefore they lost their HABITUAL
ontic significations, that is to say, their universal design remained FIXED, but their
CULTURAL, PARTICULAR design, either as entities with cultural forms, lost their
ontic-cultural purpose and supra-purpose, being suppressed the "being for man";
by the VOX OF THE PONTIFICE and the LOYAL SIDDHAS. When being
reassigned by the Pontiff and the Loyal Siddhas "the being for man" of these
Symbols, the VOX OF THE ONE was resigned in this FOUNDATIONAL act and
deposited on these forms the VOX OF THE Loyal SIDDHAS. From this RUNE
MAGIC action these "images" components of a CASTLE of its "being in itself"
would be DEPRESSED OF ITS ARCHETYPICAL DESIGN by being incorporated
to the RUNE LITICAL CONSTRUCTION on which every HYPERBORIC CASTLE
is based.


THE HYPERBOREAN CASTLE.


We must understand that a MEDIEVAL CASTLE of a HYPERBORN ORDER
does not constitute AN AN ANCHORAGE TO AN ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN.
DEMIURGO, his "BEING IN ITSELF" has been projected to the world by
PONTIFICES BUILDERS who had mastery over the SECRET OF THE CARVED
STONE.


29


50


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


These medieval constructions were part of the strategy developed during the
Middle Ages by the KINGS AND EMPERORS OF THE HYPERBORIC
REGIONAL SANCTIONS, likewise the HYPERBORIC TEMPLES of the Ancient
Age built by the ROMAN EMPERORS, both LITICAL CONSTRUCTIONS,
represent the actions of STRATEGIC OPPOSITION unleashed in those
periods of history by the Maximum Pontiffs of the BLOOD COVENANT. These
constructions are architectures that were built as INITIATIVE ARCHEMONS,
they participate their BEING FOR MAN of a NOOLOGICAL SIGN whose
architectural meaning represents its image the power of the UNCREATED
SPIRIT OVER THE CREATED SOUL, the dominion of the VIRYA BERSERK
over the created matter with the sole purpose of CONSTRUCTING with the
extreme matrices of the Snail design "ARTIFICIAL REAL SYSTEMS" as
CULTURAL OBJECTS that allow to reflect its CULTURAL RECORDS an
"IMAGE" of the ORIGIN, of the POWER OF THE

SPIRIT when the AWAKENED SELF prevails over all the ARCHETYPES OF
THE MATERIAL ORDER.

The transforming power of the Virya is represented in these constructions
whose DESIGNS AND MEANINGS have no archetypal determination
whatsoever as they are built on archemonic architectural principles based on
the science of LITICAL ENGINEERING of HYPERBORN WISDOM.

In the Stone Age the WHITE ATLANTS, INSTRUCTED THIS LITICAL SCIENCE
TO THE PEOPLES OF THE BLOOD COVENANT (Menhirs,

Dolmens). These LITICAL structures of that period gave birth to a RUNIC
LANGUAGE that is expressed by means of ARCHITECTURES IN STONE, this
strategy allowed to deposit in the STONE an "image" that represents the
ETERNAL STONE or the ETERNITY.

This "image" of the GRAL reflected in the ARCHITECTURES OF THE
TEMPLES AND CASTLES HYPERBOREOS, in these real systems or cultural
objects were built in STONE because this natural entity its "being for the
man" participates of a design and meaning whose expression of sense
contains an onticatemporal image that connotes with oblique meanings like:
HARD, SOLIDO, etc. The STONE is a cultural entity that although it is
designated by the VOX OF THE DEMIURGICAL LOGOS reflects its "being in
itself, the UNIVERSAL to a NATURAL ENTITY foundation of the MINERAL
KINGDOM, but we can by ordinal inference understand that in its ontic
register there is an "image" of TIME. In the STONE is found an ontic image of
CHRONOS which participates in the ESSENTIAL MATRIX of its natural
structure. Thus the STONE reflects TIME and the EXTREME ontic matrices of
time, at one end of time CRONOS, the demiurge and his TRANSCENDENT
TIME, and at the other end of time we can situate KAIROS, THE
ATEMPORALITY OF ETERNITY.

IN THE STONE IS AN ONTICANOOLOGICAL IMAGE THAT REFLECTS THE
ETERNAL AND THE CASTLE IS A CONSTRUCTION CARVED IN STONE THAT
REFLECTS THE ETERNITY OF THE UNCREATED SPIRIT OVER THE
TEMPORALITY OF THE CREATED MATTER.


30


51


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


The Sinarchy deployed hundreds of cultural arguments on the CASTLES
building thousands of TAPASIGNOS, (MYTHS AND FANTASIES), that divert
the look of the virya, cover that NOOLOGICAL SIGN that underlies in every
CASTLE, and affirms it in a CULTURAL DESIGN whose meaning affirms
every CASTLE in a usual context as an architectural cultural object that does
not represent more than its demiurgic design (a fortress, a dwelling of
nobles, etc.).

Every AWAKENED VIRYA by means of his capacity of ANAMNESIA can

quickly reduce these tapasignos with his RUNIC LOOK, to understand that
every HYPERBORNE CASTLE carries a LITICAL image of the GRAL made
stone.
The Virya can deepen this concept, but to do so he must explore the
CULTURAL RECORD of a MEDIEVAL CASTLE; if he does so he will be able
to verify that in reality what NIMROD affirmed in his foundational initiation
INTERNALLY in the INNER LABYRINTH of the Virya is the ODAL RUNE, rune
corresponding to the "image" of a HYPERBorean CASTLE.

ALL CASTLE ITS NOOLOGICAL IMAGE CORRESPONDS TO THE
PROTECTIVE RUNE ODAL, ITS FOUR TOWERS TO THE SWASTIKA
LEVOGIRO TURN, THE SPIRAL STAIRCASE IN ITS TOWERS TO THE
DOUBLE RUNE SIEG, ITS MAXIMUM SCALE CORRESPONDS TO THE RUNE
TYR.

A HYPERBOREAN CASTLE IS BUILT WITH TIRODINGUIBUR AND IS
CONDUCIVE TO ODAL, TIRODAL FENCE AND THE THREE UNCREATED
RUNES SIEG, TYR, HAGAL: TIRODALHAGAL TO THE OCTAGON TAU
HAGAL.

WITH GUIBUR WE ENTER THE RUNE ODAL FROM ODAL TO THE RUNE
SIEG, WITH ODAL AND SIEG WE AFFIRM OURSELVES IN THE RUNE TYR
AND FROM THERE WE MAKE THE RUNIC LEAP THAT ALLOWS US TO
ENTER THE TAU OCTAGON OF THE ETERNAL RUNE HAGAL; THE VIRYA IS
A SIDDHA.


THE LIBERATED SQUARE, THE CIRCLES, IN THE OCTRA
STRATEGY.


Before studying this point | must mention that the designation of BRIDGES was
"hidden", and that assignment is linked to the WALLED ROADS, pontifical action
that allows to BUILD ARCHEMONAS TIRODAL, LITICAL FENCES. The SECRET
CRIPTA of the Viryas that would have that ethical responsibility in times to come,
would be that tactical function that would open the CONDUCTIVE WAYS that
would allow to extend the VITAL SPACE OF THE ORDER which today is present
in all AMERICA and SPAIN.

The designations (affirmation of a SPECIFIC RUNE according to the "being in
itself" of the Virya) of the tactical functions corresponding to each Virya, either as:
"FOZO", "BLOCK", "WALL", "GUARNITION" or "TOWER" ( initiation that

The anchors were MOBILE, not FIXED ANCHORAGE, although this anchorage
affirmed the comrade in that mythical argument, a condition that incorporated the


ail


52


GUSTAVO BRONDINO
comrade to a tactical position, which should


a2


53


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


The AWAKENED VIRYA could move from one function to another, that
MOVEMENT depended on the AWAKENING OF THE VIRYA, on his noological
transmutation, in short, on the degree of purification of his BLOOD.

Although each Virya was tactically placed in this function, this assignment was an
ethical responsibility, the ROYAL ANCHORAGE of the SELF and should be
assumed with all honor, this assigned disposition that was "allegorical", symbolic,
COULD BE MOVED TO ANOTHER ROYAL ANCHORAGE, tactically the
AWAKENED VIRYA AVAILED THAT FACULTY AFTER THE FIRST INITIATION.
HYPERBOREAL, i.e. the comrade had the eternal right to move gnostically from
one function to another.

THE TACTICAL FUNCTIONS ARE RUNIC ANCHORS THAT ANCHOR THE
ORDER OF TIRODAL KNIGHTS TO HEROIC MYSTICISM AND TO THE SKIES
OF AGARTHA, BEYOND THE PARTICULAR ANCHOR, EACH VIRYA IS A
LADDER OF THE SPIRAL AND INFINITE STAIRCASE LEADING TO THE
ORIGIN.

The ORDER itself is ANCHORED upon the RUNE OF ORIGIN, and such
UNCREATED RUNE is reflected in the SWASTIC and ODAL RUNE, protective
runes which made us INVISIBLE and INVINCIBLE.

The mythical argument that affirmed the comrades in a certain "image" either as
"BLOCKS" or in any of them could be modified, since the VIRYA, for his VALUE
could enter another monarch, place himself in another specific function, for
example transmute himself in TOWER, or in "BRIDGE"; these were a property of
the Knight, his AWAKENING depended on it. If the strategy required it, it was
Nimrod himself who modified the "pieces" or tactical functions of the comrades, (as
if it were a game of Chess), an example of this were certain comrades who moved
to other tactical functions, generally the Virya in those instances could be or not
conscious of his function, it depended on the degree of awakening of the comrade,
And | can assert that at that specific moment of the ORDER of OCTRA few had the
gnostic capacities to understand what they carried on them, in reality the majority
was tied to the MYTH and the MYSTICS of the myth was their support (if by then
we just had the "old" novel that Nimrod instructed us in it and only the first
volumes, which in truth few understood, the Order by then had almost or
approximately one year of existence, maybe less). Nimrod executed that initiation
because it is part of the FOUNDATION OF A HYPERBORROUS ORDER, he even
gave an "initiation" in the CIRCLE OF STONE which responded to the strategic
needs of LEADER, because the "times" were accelerating, that is why he admitted
certain comrades to another Gnostic "space", | will NOT analyze this action where
Nimrod initiated a group of comrades, because this point does not correspond to
me, but ROSALIA describes such action in her WRITINGS.

If | emphasize that initiation in which the ORDER was FOUNDED, in it the
eternal comrade took the analogy of a CASTLE, because that construction was the
best figure or "image" that is assimilated to a HYPERBORN ORDER.

By way of anecdote, | recall the discouragement of some comrades for being
"block" or "wall" and the pride of others for being "garrison" or "towers", in short,
after the


33


54


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


After some time one understands that all of them, beyond their function, constituted
the INEXPUTABLE STRENGTH OF THE ORDER, because there is no CASTLE
without a WALL, BLOCK, WALL, GUANITION, TOWER OR BRIDGE.

For a better consideration of the functioning of a HYPERBORNEOUS
ORDER, it is necessary to study two texts on the constitution of a Hyperborean
Order, for example the texts SECRET HISTORY III and IV, which are available to
all Viryas in several pages: http://sabiduriahiperborea.wordpress.com

| remember a talk with Felipe in the GIMNASIO-PLAZA about the Order and the
comrades, explaining how the Loyal SIDDHAS dimensioned the value of the
comrade. FELIPE affirmed: "IN SHORT, BEYOND THE INITIATIONS AND THE
FUNCTION THAT A COMRADE FULFILLS IN THE INTERNAL FUNCTIONING
OF THE PLAZA, FOR THE ORDER AND THE LOYAL SIDDHAS, WHAT THE
VIRYA IS BEYOND HIS SPECIFIC FUNCTION IS PROVEN BY HIS DEGREE OF
AWAKENING, OF COURAGE, ON THE BATTLEFIELD, AND | ASSURE YOU
BRONDINO THAT WHEN THE BULLETS WHISTLE, THERE YOU WILL SEE
WHO IS WHO"; he continued: "BECAUSE | KNOW WELL THAT MOST OF
THEM ARE VIRYAS WHO SEEK THEIR LIBERATION, THEY HAVE A GNOSTIC
PREDISPOSITION, BUT THIS STRATEGY IS AN ACTION OF WAR AGAINST
THE DESIGNATED IN THE MICRO AND MACROCOSM, AND WE WILL SEE
WHO WILL SHOW HIS FACE WHEN THE CHIPS ARE DOWN".

| have in my retina a luciferic smile of Felipe when he finished his commentary that
was extensive, but | relate these two sentences that are in themselves, for more
significant. But to understand how the ORDEN DE CABALLEROS TIRODAL DE
LA REPUBLICA ARGENTINA was configured, its organization, and how it was
organized, | will tell you more about these two sentences, which are very
significant.
and external, these figures describe the operation of the CIRCLES of
O.C.T.R.A. They represent how the Order was constituted on the LIBERATED
PLAZA, its tactical displacement in the framework of the General Strategy of the
ORDEN, within the organic functioning of the LIBERATED PLAZA. | want to
indicate that the images constructed without much aesthetic definition, soon will be
corrected, | upload them because they are significant and allow to have a "visual"
perspective of the formal structure of the PLAZA LIBERADA, which represents
the FOUNDATION where the structure of the ORDEN is sustained in VITAL
form.

The Virya in Hyperborean Initiate in Present Understanding will be able to
enter the cultural register of these 3 figures, moving to the center, this view
acquires a better Gnostic VERTICALITY from which he will be able to embrace in
all its extension and complexion the different spaces of significance of the cultural
register of these images, being able to visualize the TRUTH of the formal
functioning of the "INTERNAL" and "EXTERNAL" CIRCLES OF THE
LIBERATED PLAZA.


34


55


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


PONTIFICE-VRAYA

Sus miradas se reflejan en
todos los circulos
periféricos al centro


GIRGULO DE PIEDRA
Su funciGn es asistir y
apoyar al Pontifice


PLAZA-INSTITUTO

Su mision es instruir
en la sabiduria a los
viryas integrantes de
todos los circulos


PLAZA- GIMNASIO.

Su mision tactica es instruir
en el arte de la guerra a los
viryas y proteger ala
ORDEN


LA ORDEN DE CABALLEROS
TIRODAL, SUS CIRCULOS


Figure 1.


BF)


56


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


| lS


Runa ODAL. PLAZA LIBERADA


Figure 2.


Runa TYR
Escalera Infinita


Runa SIEG-
Escalera Caracol


CENTRO CARISMATICO
Pontifice-Vraya


Circulo de Piedra
Plaza Instituto
Plaza gimnasio


Circulo Externa
Estrategia
Psicosacial-Politica


36


57


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


SIDDHAS LEALES=AGARTHA
ORDEN DE CABALLEROS TIRODAL. SABIDURIA HIPERBOREA


OF META! INS Ra ON
y* ~*~


Runa ODAL. PLAZA LIBERADA


Figure 3


Runa TYR
Escaler Infinita


Runa SIEG-
Escalera Caracol


CENTRO CARISMATICO
Pontifice-Vraya
Circulo de Piedra
Plaza Instituto
Plaza gimnasio


Circulo Externo
Extrategia
Psicosocial-Politica


These three symbolic figures show how the Order was formalized. It is
important to understand that the TACTICO CIRCLES all participated equally in the


GENERAL structure of the ORDER.


EACH CIRCLE IS ANALOGOUS TO AN INITIATORY RING AND REPRESENTS
THE UNION BETWEEN THE ETERNITY OF THE ORIGIN AND THE SPIRIT OF
THE CIRCLE, (WHETHER IT IS ONE OR THIRTEEN COMRADES) BOTH
COMPOSE THE TWO RINGS OF THE INFINITE EIGHT, THE SPIRAL
STAIRCASE: THE SACRED ESWASTICA, THE RUNE ODAL AND SIEG, AND


THE INFINITE STAIRCASE RUNE TYR AND HAGAL.


3/


58


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


ARQUETIPO MANU


Punto A. EL ESPIRITU-ESFERA ES eerie
SIGUIENDO EL CANTO DE A-MOR, E

ENCANTADO Y ENCADENADO POR “ SIMBOLO
DEL ORIGEN AL LABERINTO EXTERIOR.
ENCADENADO,ESTA SUJETO AL DESIGNIO
CARACOL Y AL DESIGNIO SERPIENTE, AL PLAN


De oom


e. |
MANU &
| ViRvA u
BERSERKR
‘o\
", 2


Laberinto DE EL UNO Y DE LOS SIDDHAS TRAIDORES;
VICTORIA Exterior SOLO EL MAS FUERTE PODRA DESPERTAR AL
DESPERTAR.
Virya Berserkr Punto B. MAXIMA TENSION DRAMATICA DEL VIRYA
ESCALERA CARACOL PERDIDO: O SIGUE LO PROPUESTO EN EL DESIGNIO
VALOR "ES S. SAGRADOS CARACOL,DESIGNIOS ESTABLECIDOS EN SU SENDERO


ELIX (EN EL DESIGNIO SERPIENTE) POR EL DEMIURGO,
ENLAZANDOSE A LOS SIMBOLOS SAGRADOS DE EL
UNO; O SE REVELA Y RESIGNA CON SU VOLUNTAD
NOOLOGICA LO PROPUESTO POR LOS SIDDHAS
TRAIDORES, INGRESANDO A UNA NUEVA INSTANCIA
ETICA, EN LA CUAL EL DEBE BUSCAR EN EL SENDERO
LABRELIX LA VIA GNOSTICA QUE LO TRANSMUTE EN
SU VIRYA BERSERKR,


Punto ©. ENCUENTRO CON LA SAGRADA SWASTICA.

SI RESISTE LA MIRADA, SU VOLUNTAD SE TRANSMUTA
EN PURO VALOR, INGRESAASU GNOSIS INTERIOR,
AISLA EL YO EN SU ARQUEMONA ODAL;: ES INICIADO
CABALLERO TIRODAL Y DECIDIDAMENTE MARCHA EN
BUSCA (Punto B) DE LOS ENEMIGOS DEL ESPIRITU.

SI NO RESISTE LA ESVASTICA, RETORNA DERROTADO
(por C,B y A) ASU MONADA UNIVERSAL.


Virya Despierto


VOLUNTAD


We can assimilate the ORDER su to the allegorical image of the EIGHT INFINITY.
The TACTICAL CIRCLES and their corresponding TAPASIGNOS correspond to
the LOWER RING OR CIRCLE representing the SNAIL SCALE, THE DOUBLE
DESCENDING AND ASCENDING MOVEMENT, ENTRANCE AND EXIT OF THE
SHADOW SPHERE OF THE VIRYA, THE NOOLOGICAL UNDERSTANDING OF
THE

SWASTICA AND ITS CONDUCING RUNES act by freeing the virya from the
chains of the STRIP AND PALETON, FROM THE DESIGNS OF SEX AND
HEART, GENDER AND SPECIES.

THE UPPER RING OR CIRCLE represents the LIBERATED PLAZA: the
CARACOL AND INFINITE STAIRWAY OF THE ORDER, its initiatory center
TIRODAL, WE ENTER FREE INTO THE SELBST AND THE VRIL, THE VIRYA
AWAKENS TO AWAKENING BY ITS INFINITE WILL AND ABSOLUTE VALUE
THE VIRYA IS AN ETERNAL SIDDHA.


38


59


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


CASTLE TIRODAL OCTOGON TAU HAGAL.

THE INITIATORY AWAKENING OF THE’ VIRYA, HIS = INTERNAL
TRANSMUTATION, REDUCTION OF HIS ANIMIC ASPECTS (ANIMA, ANIMUS,
SHADOW SPHERE, RESIGNATION OF THE ASPECTS: LOVE, BEAUTY,
CONSCIOUSNESS, REAFFIRMATION ON HIS SPHERE OF LIGHT OF THE
THREE UNCREATED RUNES.


CASTILLO TIRODAL, CONSTRUCCION RUNICA QUE SE EDIFICA SOBRE LA VOLUNTAD
NOOLOGICA DEL INICIADO HIPERBOREO’”

EL VIRYA ES ARMADO CON LAS TRES RUNAS INCREADAS CABALLERO TIRODAL,
ASCIENDE POR LA ESCALERA CARACOL DE SU TORRE, AL SELBST, RECIBE EL PODER DEL
VRIL. SU VOLUNTAD ES PURO VALOR INFINITO °


ESFERA EHRE, POTENCIA NOOLOGICA DEL YO
INFINITO AFIRMADO EN EL OCTOGO TAU DELA
RUNA HAGAL.

EL VIRYA BERSERKR, GUERRERO ETERNO ES
VOLUNTAD ABSOLUTA Y VALOR INFINITO


teal
[eI


Ze Rae
AVY AWA PAMANAYS


‘etl eze
Sendero Elix }


ESFERA DE SOMBRA, ESFERA DE LUZ


En este grafico podemos comprobar que en la Esfera de Sombra, la ESPIRAL Y EL SIGHO DEL DOLOR ( parte del PALETOH de
figura alegorica de la la lave Kalachakrahan) ha sido RE-SIGHADO; sobre la Memoria Arquetipica se situa el OCTOGOHO TAU
(imagen de la RUNA DE ORO) y el SIGHO DEL ORIGEH ( imagen de la SWASTICA) Trazando una analogia con la figura alegérica de
LLAVE KALACHAKRA, verificamos que este espacio de significacion donde regia el Designio Caracol, y el Signo del Dolor es
DESINTEGRADA POR LA RESIGHACION RUHICA QUE EJECUTAH ( energia Astral y Psiquica del designio Caracol) DESDE EL ORIGEN LOS
SIDDHAS LEALES. Intervienie en este acto el SIDDHA LEAL, ancestro Hiperboreo cuyo CARISMA esta ligado por el AURA CATENA al
VIRYA que en esta instancia HOOLOGICA recibe la PRIMERA INICIACION HIPERBOREA. 33
EL SIDDHA LEAL CON SU CARISMA GRABA A FUEGO EH LA ESFERA DE SOMBRA LA RUNA DE ORO, EL SIGHO DELORIGEH ¥ LAS TRES
RUNAS INCREADAS, PODER QUE DESINTEGRA LA ESPIRAL, EL ARQUETIPO HEBREO, y la imagen del MESIAS SACERDOTAL (arquetipo
Jesus) PERMITIENDO LA ELIMINACION DE LA SEMANTICA PSICOLOGICA ¥ LA INCORPORACION DE LA SEMANTICA HIPERBOREA.

EL VIRYA RECIBE LA PRIMERA INICIACION HIPERBOREA, RESIGHADO EL DESIGHIO CARACOL POR LA GRACIA DE SU VOLUNTAD


ABSOLUTA, MARCHA DECIDIDO A RE-SIGHAR CON EL PODER DE LAS TRES RUNAS INCREADAS AL DESIGHIO SERPIENTE. 6 0


EL OCHO INFINITO, FIGURA ALEGORICA, ANALOGICAMENTE SITUADO EN EL PLANO REAL DEL PANTEON
DE AGRIPA Y CASTEL DEL MONTE, Y EN EL OCTOGONO TAU DE LA CIUDAD DE CORDOBA, REGISTROS
CULTURALES HIPERBOREOS QUE PORTAN EL SIGNO DEL ORIGEN Y LAS TRES RUNAS INCREADAS


VICTORIA
16 COLUMNAS ENTASIS TAU
TETRARQUE LABERIX

13 MAS 3 RUNAS INCREADAS


TAU Esfera


de Luz
Designio


4 i > Aa SIGNO DEL
ORIGEN
Caracol y
ESCALERA INFINITA VIRYA Serpiente
, BRESERKR |i] SIGNO
DEL


‘ALOR vEsfera
ide
Sombra


Gnasis
i) Interior


EL PANTEON DE AGRIPA es un SUPER OBJETO AXIOLOGICO HIPERBOREO [( Objeto
cuttural Emergente) su fuerza noolégica esta presente mas alla de lo que represento en
la Edad Antigua, su Objeto Cultural Referente, en la Edad Media es el castillo de
CASTEL EL MONTE, existe entre ambos objetos culturales hiperboreasy esta historia
una ARQUEMONA ODAL estructurado en la CABEZA ROMANA y en los OCTOGONOS

” TAU ( figura) afirmados en CORDOBA por el Pontifice Nimrod de Rosario, el Virya puede ingresar por
estos registros culturales emergentes a sus espacios de significacion mas oblicuos, los cuales le
permitiran ingresar al ASA donde esta depositado el SIGNO DEL ORIGEN, el cual representamos en la
figura del OCHO INFINITO.


VOLUNTAD


SIMBOLO SAGRADO DEL VIRYA


EL OCHO INFINITO Y EL PANTE OH DE AGRIPA.

Imagen del Pantedn, la morfologia estructural de su planta erquitectonica es un
ARQUEMONA ODAL, potencia nooldgica de la run: datica TIRODAL DE LA
VICTORIA. Construccién hiperbérea, sistema real atificial que sostiene en el


Templos Hiperboreos, su potencia arquetipica astral y psiquica contenida en el DESIGNIO CARACOL fueron
resignados por los SIDDHAS DE AGARTHA, desde el ORIGEN, ellos sostienen con sus YOLUNTADES
mundo el SIGNODEL — ORIGEN, stiper Objeto Cultural Axioldgico ABSOLUTAS estos ARQUEMONAS ODAL, los cuales permiten ascender al Virya a traves de su
Hiperboreo que permite ingresar al ASA de la llave kalachakra comprencién a la ultima escala de su esalera Caracol, afirmarse en el SELBST y construir su ESCALERA
En cada COLUMNA, del Objeto Cultural se situanlas 16 RUNAS INCREADAS, INFINITA.
Este SIGNO NOOLOGICO, (representa al ASA, de lalave Kalachakra) permite
resignar el PALETON dela Kdaachakra, sus 49 bijas y el Signo del Dolor, por el
enlacé entre las RUNAS INCREADAS y el OPIDIUM, se ingresa a ASA, a su
espacio interior ninico noolégico, ARQUEMONA OD AL

El Virya ARMADO CABALLERO TIRODAL afirma su apoyatura en el CENTRO


EL DESIGHIO SERPIENTE situado sobre la potencia VITAL y telurica de todo
sistema real emergente, en estos SUPER OBJETOS CULTURALES
AXIOLOGICOS siempre es RE-SIGNADO por las estrategias de los


61


34


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


TAU, enel SIGNO DEL ORIGEN, ingresa a SELBST y orienta su mirada por
el OCULO alos didlos hiperboreas, siente el VRILL proveniente de Los Sidchas
de Agatha, ancla su ye -V¥- enlaPUERTADE VENUS, setrasmuta Virya
BERSERKR

Templo Hiperboreo por EXCELENCIA, representacion arquitectonica del
SIGNO DEL ORIGEN, SU ESPACIO DE SIGNIFICACION ES EL MAXIMO
EXPONENTE CREADO DE LOS SIDDHAS DE AGARTHA, el Fuhrer de la
RAZA BLANCA, sefior de VENUS, LO PRIMERO QUE HIZO AL ARRIBAR A
ROMA FUE INGRESAR EN ESTE ETERNO TEMPLO HIPERBOREO ( |
RESIGNO EL DESIGNIO SERPIENTE EN ESE KAIROS DE UBERACION
RACIAL) Y PLANIFICABA SU RE CONSTRUCCION EN L4. NUEVA BERLIN


Podemos distinguir en esta figura alegorica de la llave Kalachakra que el virya


siempre debe RE-SIGHAR en un OBJETO CULTURAL EMERGENTE el PALETON
donde se halla el SIGHODEL DOLOR y su signo la ESPIRAL, en el mismo se
hallan los TAPASIGHOS que impiden el ingreso del VIRYA BERSERKR al
registro cultural, mas aun si este 0.C E es un sistema real hiperboreo como
lo es el PANTEOH DE AGRIPA o CASTEL DEL MONTE, el castillo CATARO, o la
TORRE del castillo del WELWELSBURG.

RE-SIGHADO los tapasignos de un O. C E el vinya se puede trasladar por el
registro cultural (TIJA de la figura alegorica) al ASA de la kalachakra, O.C .R,
situarse sobre el SIGNO DELORIGEN e incorporar las 13 MAS 3 RUHAS
INCREADAS.

EL VIRYA BESERKR QUE COMPRENDE CON EL SIGNO DEL ORIGEH EL SIGHO DEL
DOLOR, TIEHE EN SU PODER LAS RUNAS INCREADAS, HACE PATENTE EL SELBST
INCORPORANDO A SU YO VERDADERO LAS FUERZAS INCREADAS DE SU YO
INFIHITO, EL VRIL, PODER QUE LO AHCLA EN EL ORIGEH.


POHTIFICES situados en esos KAIROS. En el Kairos de OCTRA, HIMROD
puso en movimeinto la SWASTICA permitiendo su GIRO resignar el
DESIGHIO SERPIENTE en el ARQUEMONA ODAL de Ia ciudad de Cordoba, ello
permitio ingresar la ciencia de liberacion de los Siddhas de Agartha
estructurado en un sistema real Hiperboreo (los FUNDAMEHTOS DE LA
GSABIDURIA HIPERBOREA).Accién que permitio a los VIRYAS BERSERKR
'comprender semantica y eticamente la SABIDURIA HIPERBOREA. Retirado el
PONTIFICE la SWASTICA queda ESTATICA, situacion que se modifico
‘cuando los SIDDHAS DE AGARTHA proyectaron este KAIROS de OCTIRODAE,
con el mismo nuevamente la SWASTICA se puso en MOVIMIEHTO, y este
GIRO permitio que cientos de camaradas de todas las latitudes pudieran
ingresar al OCTOGOHO TAU DE LA RUNA HAGAL.


PALETON. TIuA - ASR
(acl ey (ReeistRO curTURAL) (o.c,8


DIBVJO RLEGORICO SE_LA
_LLANE KRALACHAKRA_


os


«us Sh 7,


EL YO DESPIERTO, DESDE EL SELBST
BISCGEN EL VRIL SL ESPIRFIIU EI ERRNO


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


THE TACTICAL ORDERING OF THE ORDER.


NIMROD DE ROSARIO founded the ORDER and organized it tactically on certain
ARCHEMONIC principles that allowed to PROTECT THE INTEGRANT VIRYAS
OF THE ORDER, making them INVISIBLE in the eyes of the A.R.S.E.P.E. and the
UNIVERSAL SYNARCHY.

The ORDER its representation and organization in the WORLD is manifested by
means of the LITICAL CONSTRUCTION of a "REAL ARTIFICIAL SYSTEM" called
PLAZA or INITIATIC ARCHEMON, its REAL STRUCTURE was
STRATEGICALLY-MINENTLY ORDERED IN TACTICYCAL CIRCLES WITHIN
THE LIBERATED PLAZA.

Nimrod responds in the LETTER TO THE ELECTED about these questions,
the comrade has all the answers there, he went on to describe at this point how
the events that allowed the emergence of the ORDER OF KNIGHTS TIRODAL
took place, trying to bring the virya closer to the truth according to the development
of the GENERAL STRATEGY of OCTRA.

OCTRA's strategy was built on the STRATEGY OF THE LEADER, which
participated in the GENERAL STRATEGY OF AGARTHA'S SIDDHAS. The
STRATEGY OF THE LEADER was constituted and sustained in this space of
significance: the CAMARADES, THE TACTICO CIRCLES AND THE FREE
PLAZA.


First: the CAMARADES.


NIMROD states about comradeship: "Comradeship is not a quantifiable bond, a
measurable relationship, a reason between companions. It is not a mere affective
nexus, like friendship, but spiritual coincidence, identity of ideals that are
simultaneously realized. Camaraderie is determined by absolute instants: the time
and space of the fact; but it lacks an extensive temporal dimension; that is to say,
camaraderie does not admit a category of duration, it is inconceivable a permanent
Comrade, like a friend. Camaraderie produces Comrades of the act, of the
coinciding circumstance; it implies the meeting of two or several, in the same
instant, with a common ideal that becomes concrete. Friendship, on the contrary, is
temporally extensive and spatially limiting and encompassing; it consists of a thick
sentimental nexus, almost measurable, that unites people independently of the
event in which they participate. Friendship is independent of any ethical norm
because it springs from the heart, like all affective relationships. In camaraderie, on
the contrary, Honor is always present. It is required not to question the moral
conduct of a friend; it is an obligation, on the other hand, to observe the ethical
attitude of a Comrade: One could betray the fatherland, with the help of a friend.
But it is only possible to die for the fatherland, with the help of a Comrade. From
the opposition between friendship, affective, and comradeship, spiritual, it emerges
clearly why the traitor manages to extend his betrayal in time, "forever",
analogously to friendship, and why the hero must demonstrate his courage in the
act of an instant, instant that Honor, and the ethics of humility, oblige.


35.


62


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


to forget later: that instant of the hero, which carries all the courage implicit in the
act of its occurrence, is the absolute instance of the Comrades, the perfect
coincidence of those who are going to fight for the same ideal".

Taking into consideration these very clear definitions of the eternal comrade, we
must affirm that the viryas of OCTRA were self-chosen by the GRACE of their wills
oriented in the search for the ETERNAL TRUTHS, (TIRODINGUIBUR) in the
IDEAL that emanates from the heroic mysticism coming from the Paraclete of the
SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA. The comrades, VIRYAS by then "LOST", by their
SEARCH, CHOICE CHOICE, and a "mystery" were guided to the encounter of the
highest WISDOM, CARISMATICALLY COINCIDING WITH THE PONTIPHIC AND
HYPERBORNE WISDOM. If
their GNOSTIC PREDISPOSITION was strong and they accepted the IDEAL and
MYSTIC, abiding by the ETHICAL STANDARDS OF THE ORDER OF THYRODAL
KNIGHTS.
could be ACCEPTED. NIMROD noologically evaluated the CHOSEN'S
CHARACTER RASTE, if he/she carried it, he/she was admitted.


Second: the TACTICO CIRCLES.


About it Nimrod affirms: "A "mystical circle" HYPERBOREO, the center is outside
of them, this condition makes that from where this center is, it maintains the radius
in each circle, this takes us to the idea of cone ..., the circle is its base whose
center is the vertex and is outside of it, that is to say, we can speak of a center
analogically transcendent. This vertex would be the "charismatic center" and it is
considered to be located in a desynchronized time-space plane of the material
world of the Demiurge ... So: a cell (basic organization of Freemasonry or any
synarchic organization) has no transcendence. The hierarchy is vertical in the
horizontality. In a circle the authority is spiritual and has to do with the charismatic
leader, the "charismatic aura" of wisdom that we carry in the memory of pure blood;
and among the members governs the camaraderie. In the cells the bases must
"look up" to visualize the maximum hierarchy, that is to say, an external, sensorial,
temporo-spatial look is required to obey orders. In a circle the comrades must look
"inward" to coincide with that charismatic a-temporo-spatial center , because the
charismatic linkage is common to all in the synchrony of events , this brings us
closer to the concept of mysticism ...Progress in a cell is staggered , which means
a relative change in social position and this is not related to any spiritual value of
the person . In a circle one only seeks to recover the memory of the blood , there is
no process or evolution , but "mutation" .... For a common man it would be
impossible to integrate a circle , because lacking the memory of blood he would be
prevented from perceiving the "CENTER" or the charismatic link and mysticism ...
In the charismatic link there is no space-time communication , to the extent that
one "knows" by rescue of that original wisdom , there is no need to distribute
knowledge that otherwise cause homogenization . A circle is not determined by the
number of members, a single individual can be a circle, that is determined by
the act in a KAIROS. It is not based on an ideological integration, but on the
coincidence in symbols that mutates each one according to his purification
process, in


36


63


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


In any case, it is a mystique that integrates to the extent that the individual acquires
his integrity. There is no hierarchy, since the superior is SELBST itself, which by
analogy, in the racial strategy, is the charismatic leader".


TACTAIC CIRCLES were STRATEGIC SPACES of OCTRA the leader

The charismatic ordered the comrades within the ARCHEMONA, according to the
existing charismatic link between them, by the NOOLOGICAL RASTE of their | and
their TACTICAL FUNCTION. The CIRCLES and their comrades participated in
MYSTIC and the IDEAL of the CIRCLE and its TACTICAL MISSION was purifying
its blood and the virya was AWAKENING.

The circles were the product of the CAMARADERIA, that principle determined the
organization of the CIRCLES OF THE ORDER, its physical space
(PLAZA/CASTILLO TIRODAL) was occupied by the comrades that carried the
same features or symbols, that is to say they participated their looks of the
CENTER, and of the NOOLOGICAL FUNCTION WHICH BOUND THEM
SYNCHRONISTICALLY-MENTALLY in

a common space called CIRCLE.

CIRCLES were made up of comrades whose symbols coincided in order to

execute certain SPECIFIC MISSIONS, in such a way that a CIRCLE was
determined by its TACTICAL MISSION.
SIDDHAS; that is to say, each CIRCLE in a HYPERBORNE ORDER is a
SPECIFIC TACTICAL POINT WHOSE MISSION IS TO ACHIEVE THE
AWAKENING IN THE CAMARDS, TO INITIATE THEM AND PREPARE THEM
FOR THE FINAL BATTLE.

The CIRCLES its structural morphology contained two well determined
spaces; by the ACTUAL INFINITY it participated of the mysticism of the Siddhas of
Agartha and by its TACTICAL FUNCTION of the STRATEGIC GUIDELINES traced
by the PONTIFICE. Within its invisible LIMITS it contained all the VIRYAS unified
under the support of the MYSTIC and each Virya responds by its HONOR and
VALUE to the GENERAL STRATEGY which is only COGNOSCIBLE in its totality
by the SIDDHAS and the PONTIPHICE.

The second space of action in the world of the CIRCLES was built and
FOUNDED, sustained by the WILL AND CHARISMA OF THE PONTIFICE AND
OF THE INITIATED VIRYAS, the same one is UNDERGROUND on an
ARTIFICIAL ROYAL SYSTEM called FREE PLAZA.


Third: the PLAZA LIBERADA.


It is the architectural structure of the ORDER, its PHYSICAL SPACE responded to
a Real Artificial ARCHITECTURAL Hyperborean ARCHITECTURAL SYSTEM, that
"physical" space is MOVING over the transcendent time, but being ENCLOSED
AND WALLED by the strategic principles on which an Order is founded, (Law of
the Archemonic Fence) the whole spatial continent (entities and viryas) of the
LIBERATED PLAZA, is affirmed on its CARACOLIC AND INFINITE structure ON
INVISIBLE AND INVESTIGABLE WALLS OF THE ARCHEMONA.

BEING FOUNDED ON AN INFINITE FENCE; THE TIME AND SPACE OF THE
LIBERATED SQUARE IS INFINITE, THE INVINCIBLE WALLS OF THE


37


64


GUSTAVO BRONDINO
LIBERATED SQUARE RE-SIGNIFIES THE ENTIRE CONTINENT OF


38


65


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


ENTITIES, CULTURAL OBJECTS AND VIRYAS CONTAINED WITHIN THE
LIMITS OF THE ARCHIMONA TIRODAL, RENDER THEM INVISIBLE TO THE
EYES OF A.R.S.E.P.E.

EVERY LIBERATED SQUARE IS AN ESSENTIAL PART OF THE TIRODAL
INITIATORY ARCHEMONA, IN THE PHYSICAL SPACE OF THE SQUARE THE
CIRCLES AND COMRADES MOVE, THE TACTICAL OBJECTIVES OF THE
GENERAL STRATEGY OF THE ORDER OF TIRODAL KNIGHTS LED BY THE
SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA AND THE PONTIFF ARE CONCRETIZED.


These three principles: the VIRYAS, the TACTIC CIRCLES, the LIBERATED
PLAZA, are the VITAL SUPPORT of every HYPERBOREA ORDER, with them is
constructed THE CARACOL STAIRWAY, the EMPEDRATED WAY along which
the GENERAL STRATEGY OF THE ORDER MOVES.

These three components are SUPPORTED by the HEROIC MYSTIC FROM THE
PARAKLITE and by the UNBREAKABLE WILLS
OF THE SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA, tactically directed by PONTIFICE NIMROD DE
ROSARIO.

The VIRYAS, the TACTICO CIRCLES and the PLAZA ARE THE VITAL
SUPPORT of the ORDER'S CARACOL STAIRWAY, the LOYAL SIDDHAS AND
THE
PONTIFICE are the UNCREATED BRIDGE that charismatically link the ORDER,
its SNAIL STAIRWAY with the INFINITE STAIRWAY leading to the ORIGIN.

The Circles tactically are structured in an ORDINAL way concentrically to the
CENTER or axial nucleus of the ORDER OF KNIGHTS TIRODAL (Royal System,
O.C.R); in such a way the PLAZA LIBERADA, (Royal System, O.C.E) the
OPIDIUM ODAL was ordered in the following way.


1)The CENTER.

2) The Stone Circle.

3) The Circle of the Square-Institute.

4)The Gymnasium Circle.

5)The Political Circle (psychosocial strategy)
6) The Outer Circles.


Thus they were ordered in ORDINAL form, (see figures) but it did not mean that
the CIRCLE OF STONE, the number ONE, after the CHARISMATIC CENTER was
CARDINALLY the FIRST; this TACTIQUE order responds to a STRATEGIC
ORDER and it must be understood that by "BEING" or remaining closer to the
CENTER it meant: "BEING" the FIRST; the best with respect to the other
TACTIQUE CIRCLES that were in its periphery. All of them equally participated in
the WISDOM AND MYSTICS OF THE GENERAL STRATEGY. Operationally and
normatively, the ORDER was organized according to this structural order which
responds to a STRATEGIC PLAN that makes the best functioning of the TACTIC
CIRCLES, the PROTECTION of the Viryas and of the PONTIPHICE and the
VRAYA. Such


39


66


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


morphological design responds to the KAIROS OF THE ORDER, which through
this functional mode "protects" it by the ACTUAL INFINITY that is projected from
the KAIROS from the actions that from the "world" (Transcendent Time, the
A.R.S.E.P.E.) will unleash the International Synarchy and its agents to disintegrate
all HYPERBORNEOUS ORDER in the world of pain.

This ordinance has two fundamental goals: TO PROTECT THE VIRYAS and
fundamentally the LEADER who PONTIFICIALLY LEADS the ORDER; it is based
on axiological premises ordered from the ORIGIN by the SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA.
To protect the ORDER, the LEADER, (in this case the MAXIMUM PONTIPHYCE:
LUIS FELIPE MOYANO) and the VIRYAS is the sense

The organizational structure of this CONSTRUCTION, of this ROYAL ARTIFCIAL
HYPERBOREAGEOUS SYSTEM, that undoubtedly behind the forms that it
acquires (its tapasigns) is its maximum protection, the HEROIC MYSTIC
PROVING FROM THE PARACLITUS. Today, in this present time, the ORDER in
the world, WE, the VIRYAS BERSERKR OF THE ORDER OF KNIGHTS, lead it.
TIRODAL OF AMERICA AND SPAIN, moreover, we must emphasize that the
VITAL support of all HYPERBORNE ORDER is the WILL OF LIBERATION OF

The VIRYAS, the PSYCHIC support is their WISDOM and that of the PONTIFICE
and their ASTRAL support is the will and POWER OF THE LOYAL SIDDHAS.


VITAL SUPPORT: THE MATERIAL AND SPIRITUAL WILL OF THE VIRYAS
PSYCHIC SUPPORT: THE WILL AND WISDOM OF THE PONTIFF. ASTRAL
SUPPORT: THE WILL AND POWER OF THE LOYAL SIDDHAS.


These three unified wills are the tactical/strategic MOTOR of every
HYPERBORIC ORDER beyond the forms that its Real System adopts, and its
emerging and referent tapasigns, the ORDER always remains PRESENT
beyond its structural conformation, this is because it is part of the
UNCREATED BRIDGE that since the beginning of time opened the SIDDHAS
OF VENUS in the world of MAYA. IT IS A HYPERBOREAN ORDER, A BOAT
THAT SAILS THROUGH THE TENEBROUS OCEANS OF MAYA AND ITS
ONLY PURPOSE IS TO RETURN TO THE HOMELAND, TO THE ORIGIN.


The foundation of the structural order of all HYPERBORNE ORDER is the one
that allows the DISPLACEMENT of the VIRYAS to the SELBST and to the
ORIGIN that is the end in itself, that is to say, TO ORIENT AND TO AWAKEN,
TO TRANSMUTE THE VIRYA IN A SIDDHA, but beyond the particular is the
ORDER A TERRIBLE RUNIC ODAL WEAPON WITH WHICH TO COMBAT THE
ENEMY IN ALL POSSIBLE SPACES OF MEANING, IN DEFINITIVE IT IS A
"CHARISMATIC CENTER" WHERE IS EXPRESSED WITH ITS MAXIMUM
POWER AN UNCREATED LITICAL WISDOM.


This arrangement of the comrades and circles within the liberated square responds
to the GENERAL STRATEGY of the ORDER OF OF KNIGHTS


40


67


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


TIRODAL OF THE ARGENTINEAN REPUBLIC, which obeys principles that only
included the PONTIFICE and the Loyal SIDDHAS, even more in OCTRA, since,
practically the comrades that entered it did nothave the WISDOM, that is to say,
we must consider as we mentioned before, we joined ODIN'S SHIP "almost"
unconsciously, we got on the MYTH constellation at that time by the SIDDHAS and
the ETERNAL CAMERADE: we joined the ODIN'S BOAT "almost" unconsciously,
we got on the MYTH constellated by then by the SIDDHAS AND THE ETERNAL
CAMARADER,, (subject that | have already developed).

Therefore, it can be emphatically stated that THE PRESENT OF THE VIRYAS OF
OCTRA WAS VERY DIFFERENT FROM THE PRESENT OF THE VIRYAS OF
OCTRA.

OCTIRODAE, (apparently) and it is understandable, since in this present, in this
actuality the VIRYA OF OCTIRODAE contrary to the VIRYA OF OCTRA has in his
HANDS THE HIGHEST WISDOM comprised in the Novel: THE MYSTERY OF
BELICENA VILLCA, the foundations of the HYPERBORNE WISDOM and in the
texts of the CRYSTAL BOOKS, in short has by HIMSELF the highest wisdom and
has this power in its TOTALITY, instead WE had to sacrifice ourselves in pursuit of
the ORDER, we were incorporating the KNOWLEDGE according to the strategic
considerations of the LEADER, in short on our WILLS the comrade had the power
to BUILD HIS CARACOL AND INFINITE STAIRS.

TODAY THE COMRADES OF OCTIRODAE HAVE FREE ACCESS TO THE
SPIRAL STAIRCASE OF OCTRA, THEY CAN ENTER TO ITS HIGHEST
WISDOM, WHICH IS THE WISDOM OF OCTRA. THANKS TO THE MATERIAL
AND SPIRITUAL "SACRIFICES" THAT THE COMRADES OF OCTIRODAE HAD
TO MAKE, NIMROD WAS ABLE TO MAKE THE HYPERBOREAN WISDOM
AVAILABLE TO ALL THE VIRYAS OF THE WORLD.


THE INITIATORY INSTRUCTION OF THE VIRYA: THE
FUNDAMENTALS: THE BACKBONE OF EVERY HYPERBOREAN
INITIATORY ORDER.


. The virya in this KALI YUGA suffers from an intensive attack, from a SYSTEMIC
VIOLENCE that comes from the SENSORY IMPRESSIONS THAT CONSTANTLY
SHOW HIM THE NATURAL ENTITIES AND CULTURAL OBJECTS THAT BEAR
HIS INDISCERNIBLE POINT OF THE EYE OF YOD'S LOOK.

THIS VIOLENCE IS THE PRODUCT OF THE DESTABILIZING INTENTION

PROJECTED BY THE ONE THROUGH HIS GAZE WHICH IS REFLECTED IN
ITS THREE ASPECTS: LOVE, BEAUTY AND CONSCIOUSNESS,
PARTICIPANTS IN THE BEING FOR MAN OF EVERY ENTITY DESIGNATED BY
THE VOX OF THE DEMIURGE.

THE ONE FROM THE A.R.S.S.E.P.E., AND THE INDISCERNIBLE POINT OF
THE ENTITIES CONTEMPLATES EVERYTHING, AND ITS REGENTS FROM
THE OUTER LABYRINTH CONTROL EVERYTHING, THE VIRYA IS THUS
OBSERVED AND CONTROLLED, IN SOLITUDE THE VIRYA MUST BE HARD
AND COLD AS ICE AND STEEL, IF HE IS CARELESS AND LOSES HIS
CONSTANT ALERTNESS.


4]


68


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


WILL BE DESTABILIZED, ATTACKED WITHOUT MERCY, THEREFORE THE
CHARISMATIC LINKS BETWEEN VIRYAS STRENGTHEN THE PARTICULAR
STRATEGY, AND THE HYPERBOREAN WISDOM, ITS INITIATORY KAIROS IS
A CALL TO THE PURE BLOOD WHOSE CHANT AFFIRMS A CHARISMATIC
CENTER WHICH IS AN ARCHEMONA THAT CARRIES INVINCIBLE AND
INVISIBLE WALLS WHICH PROTECT THE VIRYA FROM ANY ATTACK
COMING FROM THE VALPLADS.

THE LOYAL SIDDHAS AFFIRM HYPERBOREAN KAIROS AND THEIR HEROIC
MYSTICISM IS EXPRESSED THROUGH THE UNCREATED RUNES WHICH
HAVE BEEN SEMANTICALLY AND SEMIOTICALLY REDUCED BY NIMROD DE
ROSARIO IN A LITERARY STRUCTURAL CONTEXT OR ARTIFICIAL REAL
SYSTEM CALLED HYPERBOREAN WISDOM (THE MAGIC NOVEL AND THE
FOUNDATIONS).

THE ODAL ARCHEMONA OR LIBERATED SQUARE IS THE EXTERNAL SPACE
OF THE VIRYA IN WHICH THROUGH THE INSTRUCTION OF WISDOM THE
VIRYA UNDERSTANDS HIS INTERNAL ACTION, HIS PONTONIC STRATEGY
TO FOLLOW IN ORDER TO_ STRATEGICALLY DISINTEGRATE THE
DESIGNATED, HIS CREATED SOUL BY LIBERATING HIS UNCREATED
SPIRIT.


This internal and external re-construction, gnostic reversion of the virya requires an
INITIATIVE INSTRUCTION and this is based on a "REAL ARTIFICIAL SYSTEM"
called THE FOUNDATIONS OF HYPERBorean WISDOM.

This construction participates in the 13 volumes of the SCALE OF ORDER, each
VOLUME IS ANALOGOUS TO A SCALE OF THAT SCALE.

SNAIL, is each text of the STRATEGIC Fundamentals and is mutating by its
understanding the BLOOD OF THE VIRYA.

JUST AS THE MAGIC NOVEL TAKES US INTO THE HYPERBOREAN MYTH,
THE FOUNDATIONS ALLOW US TO DESCEND AND ASCEND THE SPIRAL
STAIRCASE TO THE SPHERE OF SHADOW, DISINTEGRATING THE ONTIC-
MIND DESIGNATED IN THE CREATED SOUL, FREEING THE SELF FROM THE
DESIGNS OF THE PALETON (SEX), TIJA (HEART), AND ASA (BRAIN).

This construction created by NIMROD: the FUNDAMENTALS OF HYPERBORNE
WISDOM responds to STRATEGIC purposes, such semantic complication of his
texts has the specific purpose: TO AWAKEN THE WILL OF THE VIRYA IN ITS
DIFFERENT FORMS, therefore, by means of them, the INTELLECTUAL AND
VOLITIVE PERCEPTION of the virya is fought, WILL IS BUILT AND WILL
PURIFIES THE BLOOD.

THE CRYSTAL BOOKS AFFIRM: THE FOUNDATIONS OF HYPERBOREAN
WISDOM ARE THE TAU COLUMN OF THE VIRYA, ITS SEMANTICS AND
SEMIOTICS AFFIRM US IN ETHICS AND PONTONICS, IT LEADS US FROM
THEORY TO NOOLOGICAL PRAXIS (VIA STRATEGIC OPPOSITION AND
RUNIC MARTIAL YOGA) WITH WHICH THE BLOOD IS PURIFIED, WE
AWAKEN IN TWO WORLDS. EXTERNAL AWAKENING WHICH ALLOWS US
TO UNDERSTAND AND FIGHT AGAINST THE DECEPTION OF THE
VALPLADS, OF THIS WORLD. INTERNAL AWAKENING TO THE AWAKENING
WHICH MEANS TO OPEN THE EYES, TO ACQUIRE THE RUNIC GAZE,


42


69


GUSTAVO BRONDINO
WHICH ALLOWS US TO SEE THE


43


70


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


HEAVENS OF AGARTHA. THIS AWAKENING TRANSMUTES THE VIRYA INTO

VIRYA BERSERKR UPON AWAKENING.

The complex semantic structures of the knowledge of HYPERBORN WISDOM
have an end in themselves and were designed under the matrices of the SNAIL
design, their extreme degree of semantic complexity activates all the extreme
matrices that participate in the cultural ontic capacities (mathematical principles
and logical propositions, numbers and letters) of the ARCHETYPICAL MEMORY.
Hyperborean semantics has the strategic purpose of ENTERING THE VIRYA into
the most OBLICUOUS planes of the virya's intelligence required to understand his
ABSOLUTE TRUTH contained in the FUNDAMENTALS.

The Fundamentals its ABSOLUTE TRUTH contained in its LANGUAGE is
analogous to the ABSOLUTE TRUTH of the AWAKENED VIRYA, in such a way
that only the GNOSTIC WILL supporting the ABSOLUTE TRUTH of the VIRYA
partaking of the AWAKENED SELF has the POWER to VOLITIVELY MOVE over
the cognitive capacities of the rational, cultural and conscious subject necessary to
make the WISDOM OF THE FUNDAMENTALS GNOSTIC-MINDED
INTELLIGIBLE.

It is needless to say that the Fundamentals are directed to the VIRYA BEARING
HYPERBORNE LINAGE, it introduces its semantics to the Gnostic understanding
of the CREATED SOUL AND THE UNCREATED SPIRIT, it allows us to
understand how the ARCHETYPICAL MEMORY is constituted, the psyche of the
pasu, of the lost virya and of the awakened virya; fundamentally it INSTRUCTS us
how to re-signify with the UNCREATED RUNES their psychological semantics by
accessing the noological pontonic of the ETERNAL TRUTHS. Such oblique
languages of the contents of the foundations is only apprehensible for the virya
who has ISOLATED THE SELF FROM THE CONSCIOUS SUBJECT and from this
transverse gnostic perspective the virya can activate all the semantic and semiotic
ontic extremes of his archetypal memory, without suffering from his archetypal
designs; in other words, he brings into play the INTELLECTIVE AND GNOSTIC
capacity of the VIRYA with which he paves the way to the SELBST AND THE
VRIL.

| must admit that it was difficult at that historical moment of the Order to understand
the Fundamentals of the Hyperborean Wisdom, not only because of its complex
and literary construction, given the oblique nature of its almost "ACADEMIC"
rhetoric, but also because of the historical circumstances in which the ORDER was
founded, and in those difficulties the virya of OCTRA was MOUNTED.

The comrades of OCTRA mostly lacked a cultural structure because they entered
suffering from the SACRED SYMBOLS, which limit and enclose the SELF in the
rational and cultural cognitive limits of sacralizing dogma deposited in the
Conscious Subject.

THE VIRYAS OF OCTRA CARRIED WILL AND COURAGE, BUT GIVEN THEIR
EXTRAORDINARY OBJECTIVE THEY HAD LITTLE VOLITIVE STRENGTH TO
MAKE

Gnostically intelligible and apprehensible the FUNDAMENTALS, not so the MAGIC
NOVEL because it is built on a more HABITUAL language, understandable for any
virya who has GNOSTIC PREDISPOSITION.


44


71


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


This MAGICAL construction acts on the PHILOGENETIC MEMORY, which
participates in the MYTHOLOGICAL SPHERE OF THE VIRYA, and directly affects
the ASTRAL BLOOD OF THE VIRYA.
Nimrod affirmed the NECESSITY of deeply studying the FUNDAMENTALS since
the MAGIC NOVEL by itself does not PURIFY THE BLOOD because it is VERY
CONTAMINATED, for that reason it was required to have WILL to be able to make
understandable the wisdom poured in them. In addition we must consider that at
the same time that the instruction was received (fundamentals and the novel) the
comrades were designated in particular or jointly or the comrades of the CIRCLES
to fulfill certain SPECIFIC TASKS which | will explain in a next point.
The instruction of the FUNDAMENTALS was a RIGOROUS ETHICAL requirement
and NIMROD was eloquent in entering quickly to the Gnostic understanding of the
same; we were instructed ordinarily, that is to say, he was not delivering the
volumes as we were assimilating the previous ones, in such a way that we
received volume II if we had studied volume |. So on and so forth. This instruction
was done in the PLAZA/INSTITUTE and | want to emphasize a particularity, many
volumes of the Fundamentals NIMROD was "downloading" them during the
KAIROS of the ORDER, in such a way that many of the volumes did not reach the
hands of the Viryas, they were only available to everyone when the strategy of the
Web emerged: "QUINTA DOMINICA", even as | already narrated the magical novel
FELIPE finished it during that time, | want with this to emphasize that it was difficult
at that time to deeply understand the 13 VOLUMES OF THE FUNDAMENTALS.
Some comrades had a cultural structure more apt for this language, they quickly
understood the volumes that were possessed at that time of the Order, to have a
reference when the PLAZA LIBERADA was closed, we had just entered the
seventh volume, but the great majority did not understand them well due to the
different actions that we developed which required a total dedication of the virya
that was designated in those SPECIFIC TASKS.
Those who had some academic instruction such as: PSYCHOLOGISTS, MEDICAL
ENGINEERS, (several comrades were university students or professionals) had a
cultural structure more intellectually prepared to assimilate the semantics of the
same, but the vast majority of young viryas with barely high school or at most
university, others without academic instruction, nor high school, found it difficult to
understand the same, but, ultimately this distance was smoothed with WILL.
Nimrod wrote the FUNDAMENTALS in a totally OBLICUOUS semantic
space, on the contrary, the NOVEL lies in a more HORIZONTAL plane of
signification. The FUNDAMENTALS are totally OBLICUOUS. Beyond
everything and the dramatic tension that generates both the magical Novel
and the Fundamentals, as long as the VIRYA studies with WILL, the
ABSOLUTE TRUTH and its WISDOM will become VISIBLE AND
UNDERSTANDABLE for the KNIGHT OR THE LADY THIRODAL.


45


72


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


The instructive aspect was given to all the comrades of a Circle, on a specific day
for each circle, everything was correctly organized, the PLAZA liberated and its
TAPASIGNO the INSTITUTE AND LIBRARY allowed in its "classrooms" to instruct
this science of liberation, the TAPASIGNO protected us legally and made us
invisible in the eyes of the A.R.S.E.P.E.

The Viryas with their unbreakable wills were assimilating all the possible
knowledge which we drank slowly, but it was the chosen Viryas and on the
way to the AWAKENING who sustained the TACTIC orders of the CIRCLES
inside the LIBERATED PLAZA according to what was planned by Nimrod;
beyond the semantic understanding of the instructed that | emphasize was
limited at that time, | want to emphasize that in that KAIROS DE OCTRA the
VALUE of the comrades, was the UNCOMMENSURABLE STRENGTH OF THE
ORDER.

The Courage and Loyalty of Comrade de OCTRA, his Sacrifices did
NIMROD was able to conclude his work, because without the SUPPORT OF
THE CAMARADAS NOTHING IS POSSIBLE, WITH HIM EVEN THE
IMPOSSIBLE IS POSSIBLE.

The comrades made it possible with their efforts and sacrifices that
everything revealed by the ETERNAL GODS was translated and put into
letters by the great translating capacity (faculty of Anamnesia) of the eternal
comrade.

Later, as we were AWAKENING and PURIFYING the BLOOD, freeing the
EGO of the pasu psyche, of the SACRED SYMBOLS, the VIRYAS were
understanding the semantics, and their wisdom was transforming the viryas,
turning them into men of STONE.

TODAY THE COMRADES OF OCTIRODAE HAVE THAT ROAD PAVED AND
THE DISTANCES TO THE SELBST HAVE BEEN SHORTENED, IT ONLY
REQUIRES DECISION AND VRIL TO WAKE UP TO THE AWAKENING.


THE ETHICAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN VIRYAS IN THE ORDER.


This is veryinteresting toanalyzethis topic because it makes the SHADOW
SPHERE OF THE ORDER.

THE ORDER WAS MIXED, IT ADMITTED BOTH GENDERS, AND THIS IS THE
QUALITY THAT DISTINGUISHED IT AS AN ORDER OF WISE WARRIORS,
NIMROD DESCRIBES THE SITUATION OF THE LOST SPIRIT IN HIS LETTER.


A THE ELECTEDY ADMITS THE SAME
NOOLOGICAL QUALITIES FOR THE FEMININE SPIRIT AS FOR THE
MASCULINE. BOTH GENDERS WERE ENTERED A THE


ORDER Y THE ONLY REQUIREMENT WAS TO ACCEPT THE
ETHICAL CONDITIONS OF THE HYPERBOREAN LADY AND THE TIRODAL
KNIGHT,

THE ACCEPTANCE OF THIS ETHICAL CONDITION ADMITTED THE
ENTRANCE OF THE COMRADE AND OF THE COMRADE, IT IS TO


46


GUSTAVO BRONDINO
EMPHASIZE THE ETHICAL ORDER OF THE SAME WITHIN THEIR CIRCLES,
AND THIS WAS


47


74


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


THIS WAS MADE POSSIBLE BY THE MYSTICISM AND CHARISMA OF THE
PONTIFF, SINCE HIS LEADERSHIP TRAIT GENERATED AN ORDERING OF
THE COMRADES WITHIN THE ETHICAL FRAMEWORK PROFESSED BY THE
MYSTICISM OF THE ORDER.


THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN COMRADES FROM DIFFERENT CIRCLES
WAS PERMITTED AND WAS ESTABLISHED BY TWO ETHICAL MEANS.


THE FIRST ONES WERE CALLED: STRATEGIC CHARISMATIC ETHICAL
BONDS, THEY WERE ESTABLISHED BY THE COMRADESHIP, THE ONLY
ETHICAL WAY OF THE VIRYA ADMITTED IN THE ORDER. THE
COMRADESHIP WAS ESSENTIAL TO RESPOND TO THE STRATEGIC ORDER
THAT ALLOWS THE NORMAL INTERNAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE ORDER.


THE LATTER WERE CALLED: "ANIMIC" BONDS, THEY WERE GENERATED
BY TWO COINCIDENCES: CAMARADERIE AND FRIENDSHIP; AND
ALTHOUGH THEY WERE ALLOWED, THEY WERE SUBJECT TO CERTAIN
ETHICAL NORMS, THAT IS TO SAY, THEY WERE ADMITTED AS LONG AS
THEY DID NOT HARM THE NORMAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE ORDER.


This second ethical mode that was established between comrades, called
FRIENDSHIP generated affective links, affective relationships, these forms of
bonding that goes beyond camaraderie put at risk the ORDER, even more so if it is
about viryas of different genders (friendship is established through affection, love,
sex, passion, etc.). These affective soul ties are the ones that affirm the different
aspects of the SHADOW SPHERE of the virya or Virya and if these soul ties
between comrades are allowed, a SHADOW SPHERE is generated that affects
the ORDER, and is the cause of the SHADOW SPHERE OF A HYPERBORNE
ORDER.

Being a mixed Order and the virya suffering from the reverie of the warm life, for
the simple reason that the Viryas were not yet AWAKE, such soul ties were
generated, that although they were admitted by Philip they should be contained
within the "NATURAL" FRAMEWORK that makes the LADY and the THYRODAL
KNIGHT, that is why these psychic bonds were OBSERVED by the ORDER and
by the LEADER, even more so after the virya had in his hands the FIRST
HYPERBORNE INITIATION.

These psychic links are always present and are generated by "Noological" or
merely "karmic" coincidences (the karmic ones generate love/hate psychic conflicts
if the hot blood is not disintegrated, but this subject has already been highly
studied). FELIPE maintained that the foundation of all HYPERBORROUS ORDER
IS TO LIBERATE THE MALE SPIRIT AS WELL AS THE

FEMININE, OF THE KNIGHT AND OF THE LADY THIRODAL; therefore this
incorporates both genders, although it emphatically affirmed to respect the ethical
guidelines, not to be victims of the unconscious aspects of the PASU BLOOD,
emphasized to understand and respect the ETHICAL WAY OF LIFE proposed by


48


75


GUSTAVO BRONDINO
the ORDER which is the foundation that allows us to AWAKEN.


49


76


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


| want to emphasize that many comrades joined the ORDER with their wives,
girlfriends, and that the amorous and emotional ties were allowed as long as they
were ascribed to the ethical way, because the MYSTERY OF THE A-MOR motive
of the fall is also the door to LIBERATION and is beyond any tactical ORDER,
therefore everything was allowed among the comrades as long as they
RESPECTED and UNDERSTOOD which was the STRATEGIC MISSION OF THE
ORDER OF A-MOR.
The general mission of the Order was to be understood as overriding all particular
considerations.

| MUST AFFIRM THAT THE ORDER SUFFERED FROM CERTAIN DISCORD
BETWEEN CIRCLES OR COMRADES WHO PRETENDED TO BE MORE THAN
WHAT ONE IS. IN THE WARRIOR ORDERS, THESE ANIMIC DISPUTES ARE
PRONE TO OCCUR, THEY ARE SITUATED BECAUSE THE VIRYA WANTS TO
HAVE MORE PROTAGONISM, THIS IS SO AND IT IS UNDERSTANDABLE
SINCE THE ORDER IS MOUNTED ON A SPIRAL STAIRCASE; AND WE KNOW
WELL THAT ONE ONLY ASCENDS IT ONE BY ONE. THIS HUNGER FOR
LIBERATION OF THE VIRYA, TO BE THE FIRST, IS THE REASON FOR
WANTING TO ACCELERATE THE TIMES AND IF THESE ACCELERATED
TIMES ARE OUTSIDE THE KAIROS THEY ARE PART OF THE TIME OF
CHRONOS, AND CHRONOS THE TIME OF THE DEMIURGE DEVOURS THE
VIRYA WHO DOES NOT RELOCATE HIMSELF WITHIN THE STRATEGIC
CONTEXT OF THE ORDER, IF HE LEAVES THE KAIROS OF THE SIDDHAS HE
RUNS THE SERIOUS RISK OF FALLING INTO TEMPORALITY, THE VIRYA
BEING VICTIM OF HIMSELF, OF HIS OWN HUNGER AND OF _ THE
VORACIOUS HUNGER OF THE DEMIURGE AND OF THE TRAITOR SIDDHAS.


THE ETHICAL AND STRATEGIC LINKS BETWEEN THE CIRCLES
OF THE ORDER.


THE INNER’ INITIATORY HYPERBOREAN CIRCLES WERE CLOSED IN
THEMSELVES, THE CIRCLES OF THE ORDER WERE LINKED
CHARISMATICALLY, NOT HIERARCHICALLY, THERE BEING A LINK OR
BRIDGE BETWEEN CIRCLES OF THE ORDER THAT WAS BUILT FOR
STRATEGIC REASONS, EACH CIRCLE CARRIED A SPECIFIC TASK, WHICH
WAS THE MISSION ASSIGNED BY NIMROD AND WAS SECRET TO THE
REST OF THE CIRCLES.

THE CIRCLES ANSWERED TO THE CHARISMATIC LEADER, NIMROD OF
ROSARY, WHO DESIGNATED THE MISSIONS TO THE CIRCLES, BUT EACH
VIRYA MEMBER OF EACH CIRCLE HAD THE POWER TO DECIDE WHETHER
OR NOT TO ACCEPT OR NOT TO ENTER THE MISSIONS ASSIGNED BY THE
CHARISMATIC LEADER. THE CIRCLES COULD DEVELOP THEIR OWN WAR
ACTIONS AS LONG AS THEY WERE CONTAINED WITHIN THE STRATEGIC
GUIDELINES OF NIMROD AND THE SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA.


50


7/


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


THUS, THE LINKS BETWEEN THE CIRCLES WERE CONCRETIZED
SPECIFICALLY WHEN IT WAS NECESSARY TO AFFIRM A MISSION THAT
REQUIRED TACTICAL COLLABORATION BETWEEN THE CIRCLES TO
ACHIEVE THE OBJECTIVES OUTLINED.

THE ORDER AND THE CIRCLES THAT INTEGRATED IT SUCH AS: THE
STONE CIRCLE, THE CIRCLE/INSTITUTE, THE CIRCLE/GYMNASIUM AND ITS
EXTERNAL CIRCLES ALL PARTICIPATED IN THE LIBERATED SQUARE, THIS
WAS THE MEETING POINT BETWEEN COMRADES FROM DIFFERENT
CIRCLES WHEN A JOINT TACTICAL ACTION WAS REQUIRED.

THE LIBERATED SQUARE WAS THE CHARISMATIC CENTER WHERE THE
COMRADES "REVOLVED" AND WERE PHYSICALLY LINKED. THE LADIES
AND GENTLEMEN OF ALL THE CIRCLES WERE LINKED IN THIS ENCLOSED
SPACE, ALL THE COMRADES OF THE CIRCLES COINCIDED IN THIS
CHARISMATIC CENTER AND IN THE NIMROD INSTRUCTED THE CIRCLES IN
THE HYPERBOREAN WISDOM.

THE CIRCLES MOVED ACCORDING TO THEIR OWN STRATEGIC CRITERIA,
BUT ALL WERE AN INSEPARABLE PART OF THE GENERAL STRATEGY OF
THE ORDER.


THE SPECIFIC TASKS OF THE ORDER.

ACTIONS FROM WAR AGAINST THE
VALPLADS ¥ THE SYNARCHY.

THE SECRET OF THE COBBLESTONE ROADS


One of the most significant strategies of the ORDEN was structured around certain
actions that had a specific TACTICO OBJECTIVE.

Nimrod called them SPECIFIC TASKS.

What was your objective of those SPECIFIC TASKS?

THE OBJECTIVE OF THESE MISSIONS WAS TO GENERATE AN ACTION OF
STRATEGIC OPPOSITION, OF WAR AGAINST VALPLADS, AGAINST
THE MACROSTRUCTURE, the purpose of which was to EXPAND THE VITAL
SPACE through which the ORDER WOULD MOVE, that is to say, to build
WALLED ROADS through which the ORDER would move, paths that made it
INVISIBLE and INVINCIBLE.
It is important to understand that the Order of Tyrodal Knights, beyond the
INITIATIVE, has a strategic purpose: TO INCREASE THE VITAL SPACE, TO
EXTEND THE CIRCLE OF ACTION OF THE ORDER, to achieve this purpose the
PRINCIPLE OF THE OCCUPATION, OF THE FENCE AND OF THE WALL was
applied (is applied).
The tactical purpose was to COMBAT THE ENEMY in all TERRITORIES.
POSSIBLE, according to a PLAN that NIMROD had previously elaborated.


51


78


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


To be a member of these SPECIFIC TASKS certain very particular ethical
conditions or certain qualities and specific abilities were required, which were not of
the common denominator of the majority of the Viryas, only certain Viryas who
brought these qualities incorporated in their "being in itself" mastered these
subjects, Viryas that carried a NOOLOGICAL SIGN that NIMROD could
distinguish, such Viryas by their SIGN were chosen and instructed in the mastery
of certain SKILLS OR SKILLS (in the secret of the LANGUAGE OF THE BIRDS, in
the ART OF FORGING ARMS OF

WAR, and in the MYSTERY OF THE CARVED STONE) which, it could be
affirmed, were innate faculties in the spirits of the Viryas designated for such
specific missions.

Nimrod with his capacity to SEE the BEING of the Virya, to differentiate his
features, designated the comrades for those missions which were "secret" and
responded to certain fundamental tactical movements for the Order. If the Virya
met these characteristics, he was CHOSEN and INSTRUCTED in certain
LANGUAGES, it could happen that a Virya could not understand the reason for his
assigned MISSION, only the PONTIPHYPHUS TIRODAL understood at that time
the purpose of the SPECIFIC TASKS.

The chosen virya, if he accepted, had to obey such a mission, nobody forced
him, it was the comrade who accepted or not, his choice depended on his own
decision and nobody else. | want to mean that certain comrades possessed those
abilities and when they were AWAKENING they did not understand their innate
noological qualities. Nimrod INSTRUCTED the chosen comrades and these
comrades, who we must consider comrades that we were on the WAY TO
AWAKENING and we were moved by HONOR AND LOYALTY, very few had the
highly developed FACULTY OF ANAMNESIA to understand THE STRATEGIC
TACTICAL PURPOSES of those SPECIFIC TASKS.
The comrades chosen by NIMROD COULD be drawn from any CIRCLE OF THE
ORDER, they were the CORNERSTONE of the ESSENTIAL WAR which FELIPE
claimed was FIGHTED IN ALL TERRITORIES,
he affirmed that one should SOCAVATE the enemy's foundations and destroy the
EVIL LABYRINTH, which is the NEST where the SERPENT and the DRAGON
nest. The Viryas that integrated this highly specific "CIRCLE" swore to keep their
designations SECRET and had to comply with HONOR, even SACRIFYING
EVERYTHING, LIFE ITSELF IF NECESSARY in order to
to carry out the SPECIFIC TASKS.
ONLY THE DESIGNATED COMRADES AND NIMROD KNEW ABOUT THEM, NO
CIRCLE OF THE ORDER PARTICIPATED IN THESE MISSIONS, WHICH WERE
SE DEVELOPED AT TOTAL SECRET Y IF IFANY
MEMBER OF THIS GROUP OF INITIATES VIOLATED THE ETHICAL CODE, HE
OR SHE HAD TO ANSWER TO NIMROD AND FACE THE CONSEQUENCES. |
WANT TO HIGHLIGHT THESE SPECIFIC TASKS BECAUSE THEY WERE
ACTIONS THAT WERE UNLEASHED AGAINST THE ENEMY, IN T H E
ENEMY'S TERRAIN AND HAD A HIGH RISK FOR THE VIRYA. THESE GROUPS
OF VIRYAS CHOSEN FOR THESE WARA C TIONS BORE A SIGN
THAT DISTINGUISHED THEM: COURAGE AND WILLINGNESS TO SACRIFICE.


a2


79


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


FOR THESE ACTIONS IT WAS REQUIRED TO BE DETERMINED TO DO
EVERYTHING, TO SACRIFICE EVERYTHING, TO HAVE DARING, COURAGE, A
HEART OF ICE AND FIRE IN THE BLOOD.

NIMROD PERSONALLY SELECTED THESE COMRADES AND INSTRUCTED
THEM IN THE MASTERY OF A NUMBER OF "MAGICAL" ARTS, AND | WANT
TO EMPHASIZE THE SPECIFIC TASKS THAT REQUIRED THE DESIGNATED
COMRADES TO BE INSTRUCTED IN THE ART OF WAR.

THE VIRYA IN THESE WAR TASKS HAD TO BE TOUGH AS SS, BE BEYOND
ALL PAIN, HAVE TOTAL MASTERY OF THE MICROCOSM, KNOW MARTIAL
ARTS, HANDLE WEAPONS, AND KNOW ABOUT WAR TACTICS.

THE SPECIFIC TASKS were: ESOTERICAL and TACTICAL, and when | was

| refer to the TACTICAL ones, they consisted of "WARRIOR" ACTIONS unleashed
against certain well determined objectives where THE EXISTENCE WAS AT
STAKE, about them | can not describe anything else | will only say without
demeaning anyone that in them THE MOST BRAVE ENTERED, As for the
ESOTERICAL ones they had another caliber they were "magical" not for it less
risky | can describe some as to be: to locate a "magic" STONE, to inspect a
CAVERNA to its confines, to carry out a LITICAL SURROUNDING in certain
geography, etc. Certain Viryas who had received specific instructions from Nimrod
participated in them, and | must admit that although they were "risky" because
everything "magical" is "risky", they were not so dangerous. Others were (the most
risky), they were directed against the VALPLADS, and had the mission of
OBSTRUCTING, DESTROYING, certain TACTICO TARGETS, SPECIFIC TASKS
that protected the ORDER, the PLAZA and the CIRCLES, fundamentally the
VIRYAS from the actions of the enemy; these ACTIONS OF WAR DIVERTED THE
E.R.S.E.P.E.'S EYES, making us INVISIBLE AND INVENSIBLE.

Many times they acted decisively on certain structures, many of these actions
were BELIC, and the most select and courageous Viryas participated in them,
those who had been trained in the PLAZA/GYMNASIUM IN ALL THE ARTS OF
WAR, these Viryas to my mind, were the ones who had been trained in the
PLAZA/GYMNASIUM IN ALL THE ARTS OF WAR, these Viryas had been trained
in the PLAZA/GYMNASIUM IN ALL THE ARTS OF WAR.
they were not VIRYAS OF BAR (as Felipe maintained) THEY WELDED THE
HIGHEST VALUE and comrades what makes and transmutes the VIRYA INTO A
SIDDHA is not the morality, the sex, his purity, his literary merit, his rhetoric, its
rhetoric, and this is not a bravado as Felipe says, what transmutes the VIRYA
INTO SIDDHA is its VALUE, and those who believe that there is a mathematical or
scientific "form" that magically frees us are wrong, What | can affirm and with total
veracity is that the AWAKENING is affirmed in the HEROIC VALUE and no matter
how much semantic domain, no matter how much dialectics and rhetoric is
wielded, without VALUE THE VIRYA IS NOTHING, with VALUE THE VIRYA IS,
that is why the ORDER and the Loyal SIDDHAS beyond all that the WISDOM IN
ITS SEMANTICS AND SEMIOTICS IS, which INSTRUCTS us and PREPARES us
TO HONOR THE END OF HISTORY, in the ORDER OF KNIGHTS TIRODAL OF
THE ARGENTINE REPUBLIC did not exist.


53


80


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


place for the TIBIANS, in that HISTORY the Virya had to have a STONE HEART to
wield in his blood the MAXIMUM VALUE.

These tactical actions that had a high degree of risk and that | do not want to
describe because | am not allowed to and | do not allow myself to do so, were part
of them the VIRYAS WHO HAD THEIR SELF ANCHORED IN THE COLD
REPTILIAN BLOOD,
comrades who had understood their SYMBOL OF ORIGIN and were beyond all
FEAR AND PAIN, but | want to emphasize that in that period the comrades did not
have understood all the WISDOM and the great majority was their volitional force
that contributed the HYPERBORNE MYTH, few were those who understood and
without demerit to anyone, it is understandable if WE DID NOT HAVE THE 13
TOMES OF THE FUNDAMENTALS, even SPECIFIC TASKS were carried out
without having in our hands the MAGIC NOVEL.

The VIRYA of OCTRA did not get to be instructed in all the texts of the
FUNDAMENTALS, when the PLAZA was closed we only had the fourth or fifth
volume, perhaps some comrades got to have volume seven, but | remember a
conversation with FELIPE and a comrade who was an ENGINEER about the
fundamentals.

To be truthful, | will stop before narrating FELIPE's anecdote to describe how
PLAZA LIBERADA was built. It consisted of two parts, one EXTERNAL, where the
TAPASIGNO worked: the BOOK STORE, PAPER STORE, the PHOTOCOPIERS,
PRINTERS, this was the "business" where all kinds of articles were sold to the
public, especially the photocopiers worked very well, the proceeds were used to
pay for the rent of the PLAZA and expenses, etc. This aspect was the visible face
of the PLAZA, there was a continuous piece, "HIDDEN" where a laser printer
worked, the most advanced for its time, where the Fundamentals and the magic
novel were written, and then photocopied and assembled the texts in A4 format.

| emphasize this because NIMROD typed and then his texts were transcribed by
means of this printer and then photocopied. | want to emphasize this gigantic task,
and for this three comrades had to study computers in order to master this printer,
which at that time was a novelty. This mission assumed by these comrades chosen
by Felipe was part of the SPECIFIC TASKS. In that printer the novel and the
foundations were written, | want to emphasize that a page is going around on the
Web which exhibits as WAR TROPHIES, cultural objects (sword daggers, stones,
etc.) that only had power in the hands of the warriors.) that only had power in the
hands of NIMROD or a TIRODAL PONTIFICE, in the hands of lost viryas they
mean NOTHING, you can also see in that video a filming of the printer and the
texts of Nimrod, and what is worse, the URN where the "remains" are, ashes of
ROSALIA, total impudence, worthy of priests who RENDER WORSHIP TO
DEATH, in short, let's leave these viryas that took possession of the rights of the
novel and that SELL it putting PRICE to what has no price, DO NOT
UNDERSTAND THESE LIARS that the MAGIC NOVEL was not edited during
OCTRA or later not because we lacked the money, know money was left over, the
ABSOLUTE TRUTH is that it was not edited because it must be edited in a
PSYCHOSOCIAL KAIROS, but these comrades in their "good intentions" are


54


81


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


they boast of EDITING THE NOVEL and FELIPE left express orders that it should
never be edited and priced because he despises it.
| don't even know if they know that 100 novels were edited and given away,
they fulfilled a strategic purpose, but the FUNDAMENTALS and the NOVEL
during the ORDER were practically given away, but as there is no worse deaf
person who does not want to hear, these who deceive themselves, because
they only listen to themselves, the VOICE OF THEIR SOULS, think that we do
not edit the novel for lack of means, they are WRONG, and | know that they
do not SELL ONE, AND IT IS NOT MY WORD IT IS ROSALIA'S SENTENCE.

| continue: at the back of the PLAZA/INSTITUTO there were three classrooms,
two extra rooms, these classrooms shared a central courtyard. Each classroom
had about 25 desks, a desk, in short, like any classroom in a high school, where
the comrades were instructed. Well, after this description, | am going to tell the
anecdote because it was marked in my memory. In a class, after two hours of hard
instruction where Felipe was reading and explaining the THIRD VOLUME:
MICROCOSMIC MEMORIES AND MACROCOSMIC RECORDS, half an hour
later | was in the classroom.
angry because there were comrades who were distracted or did not pay due
attention, | must admit that it was difficult at that time because in all sincerity it was
difficult to understand the second volume, imagine the first one, | remember the
state of the comrades who were nodding their heads, | remember the state of the
comrades who were nodding off, and not to mention when he read the Novel to us
every day at one o'clock in the afternoon on Sundays at the notary school where it
was mandatory to attend that meeting that lasted about three hours, if he distracted
you he would pull you by the ears hahaha, he didn't like half of it, it was the worst
offense.

| continue after listening to Felipe in that class for an hour and a half there was a
small break, where coffee and cookies were distributed, smoking was allowed and
gatherings were held, a break that lasted about 15 MINUTES NO MORE and then
we returned to the classroom where we were instructed for an hour and a half
more, | clarify that the classes were dictated after 21 hours, more or less that is to
say at night.
In one of those breaks we gathered at the side of the patio FELIPE and three other
comrades, | remember that a comrade who was an ENGINEER commented to
NIMROD.


- Virya:-Felipe, it is really difficult to understand the Fundamentals.


- Felipe:- Yes, comrade, it is true that | recognize that the subject is complex,
in order to understand the Fundamentals well, at least SEVEN years of
deep study are required, the same as to become a DOCTOR, ENGINEER,
LAWYER, etc.


- Virya:- Yes, it's as if | were going back to school, it's really hard for me to
understand and I'm only in the second volume.

- Felipe:-You are right, you need the INTELLECTUAL WILL, the same as to
be an academic, with the difference that in addition to WILL YOU NEED TO


=r)


82


GUSTAVO BRONDINO
HAVE THE VALOR OF A WARRIOR.


56


83


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


comrade doctors, lawyers, engineers there are plenty of HYPERBORNE few
become them, and | do not take it badly, it is like that, | recognize how hard
it is to understand the Fundamentals, the novel anyone with common sense
understands it if you accept it is another thing now the Fundamentals |
recognize that many abandon if | who come years writing them even little
understand, hahaha (if we laugh all).


- Virya:- | never imagined Philip such an extensive work but | will give
everything to achieve the goals you propose.


At that moment a comrade asked for the floor and said


- Virya: excuse me in my case that | have little intellectual and historical
training | was simply a NAZI | hit my head against the wall but | recognized
that what you wrote and write is True, and now | understand why | was a
Nationalist, | said Nazi but in truth PERONIST.

- Felipe:- Yes and | give you a piece of information neither in the German
Third Reich they had the wisdom that they granted to us, | correct they took
us a difference there was the presence of Wotan, neither more nor less, but
we have a great historical opportunity TO REVEAL THE TRUTH as it was
never done in the history proposed by the SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA | simply
fulfill a mission and you another; and with respect to you engineer, the
fundamentals are complex because they describe in an "academic" way an
INFINITE WISDOM and you never finish learning, the Virya may have
isolated the | of the Conscious Subject, but to understand the Fundamentals
goes beyond that, it requires a WILL that few have if | as | said | am still
learning from them (we laughed again).


Suddenly Felipe ORDERED TO ENTER THE CLASSROOM NEUTRELY, to
conclude | will say that of those four or five comrades three per month had
withdrawn, including the ENGINEER.


After this anecdote | continue. These SPECIFIC TASKS had the mission to build
STONED ROADS (an art mastered with excellence by the IMPERIAL ROME)
and BRIDGES that allowed the ORDER to deploy over the overloaded time of
the Valplads.

The SPECIFIC TASKS allowed the construction of an EMPEDRATED ROAD, it
was a fundamental tactical function for the Order because by that conducive
way the STRATEGIC SURROUND was extended, when EXPANDING THE
RADIUS OF ACTION OF THE ORDER other PLAzas were FOUNDED.
RELEASED. Condition that today assures in this present time the emergence
of TACTICO CIRCLES in all AMERICA AND SPAIN.

THESE SPECIFIC TASKS INVOLVED VIRYAS WHO EXCELLED IN THE ART
OF FORGING WEAPONS OF WAR AND MASTERED THE SECRET OF STONE
CARVING; VIRYAS WHO WERE WARRIORS AND BUILDERS, VIRYAS
DETERMINED TO GIVE THEIR ALL TO MAKE CONCRETE


57


84


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


THIS MISSION, SINCE GREAT RISKS WERE TAKEN IN THE EXECUTION OF
ITS CONSTRUCTIONS. ONE HAD TO BE AS TOUGH AS A SPARTAN
HOPLITE, AS A LEGIONARY OF THE PRAETORIAN ORDER, AS A
HYPERBOREAN INITIATE OF THE BLACK ORDER OF THE SS.

THE VIRYAS CHOSEN FOR THESE TACTICAL ACTIONS POSSESSED THAT
SIGN WHICH PARTICIPATES IN THE SYMBOL OF ORIGIN: ABSOLUTE WILL
AND INFINITE COURAGE.

THESE "COBBLESTONE ROADS" ARE THE ONLY CONSTRUCTIONS THAT

STILL STAND SOLID AND FIRM, THE ROADS BUILT IN THESE SPECIFIC
TASKS ALLOWED THAT FROM THE ARQUEMONA ODAL ROMAN HEAD OF
CORDOBA THE ORDER TIRODAL KNIGHTS MOVED TO THE FOUR
CARDINAL POINTS OF AMERICA AND THE WORLD.
THE IMPORTANCE OF THOSE PAVED ROADS IS EQUAL TO THE
LIBERATED SQUARES OR CASTLES, THE ROAD WAS PAVED TO BE ABLE
TO MOVE QUICKLY THROUGH THE TRANSCENDENT SPACE-TIME,
IMMANENT CONSCIENCE OF THE DEMIURGE, ON THEM WE COULD MOVE
WITHOUT BEING DETECTED BY THE GAZE OF THE A.R.S.E.P.E. (SACRED
RACE ASPECT IN EXTENSIVE PRESENT).

SUCH PAVING OF ONE OF THESE PATHS WAS DONE ON A SPECIFIC
WAY OR ROAD, WHICH WAS CHOSEN BY THE TIRODAL PONTIFF OR BY A
VIRYA WHO FULFILLED THE FUNCTION OF A BRIDGE.

MAGICALLY THIS SELECTED PATHWAY STOOD OUT OVER’ THE
DIFFERENT EMERGING PATHS IN THE DISTOMIC LABYRINTH OF MAYA
(ARTIFICIAL ROYAL SYSTEM, TETRARCH MONARCH LABRELIX).

THAT PATH CHOSEN BY THE INITIATE BUILDER, ONCE LOCATED WOULD
BE MAGICALLY PAVED WITH THE PRINCIPLE OF THE FENCE AND THE
WALL, ITS SPACE-TIME WAS ISOLATED AND RE-SIGNED FOR MORE THAN
A THOUSAND YEARS; FOR THIS AT THE CROSSROADS OF ITS
BIFURCATIONS A RUNIC STONE (STONE OF OPPOSITION, THE ROMANS
CALLED IT: MILESTONE) ON THE CHOSEN MONARCH (THE CHOSEN PATH)
OF THE TETRARCH LABRELIX (TRIFURCATED PATH), ON WHICH AN
UNCREATED RUNE WAS CHISELED IN THE USUAL LANGUAGE (IN LATIN).
THE HYPERBOREAN WISDOM STATES: THE CHISELED STONE, CARVED
ON ITS CONCAVITY THE RUNE OF THE ORIGIN REFLECTS THE INFINITE
POLE IN THE ACTUAL INFINITE, WITH IT WAS PAVED THE GNOSTIC WAY,
THESE STONES OF OPPOSITION ALLOWED THE VIRYA TO ORIENT IN THE
OUTER LABYRINTH, THEY MEANT AN ANCHOR THAT INDICATED WHICH
WAS THE CORRECT WAY BY WHICH THE TIRODAL KNIGHT SHOULD MOVE
TO ARRIVE AT THE TOPOLOGICAL POINT WHERE HE COULD OPEN A NEW
OPIDIUM.

THE CHOSEN VIRYA WAS INSTRUCTED BY THE PONTIFF, THE GUIBUR
RUNE WAS GIVEN TO HIM, (AS A SWORD), THE CHOSEN COMRADE
CARRIED THE GUIBUR RUNE ENGRAVED IN HIS EYES, IN HIS LOOK, WITH


58


85


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


THE POWER OF THE NOOLOGICAL SIGN GUIBUR (TIRODINGUIBUR)
COULD LOOK AT THE WHOLE QUADRATURE OF THE OUTER LABYRINTH,
AND DISCERN GNOSTICALLY WHICH WAS THE MONARCH OF THE
TETRARCH LABRELIX MOST DIRECT TO HIS TACTICAL OBJECTIVE.

THIS CHOSEN PATH WAS THE SHORTCUT, THE MOST CONVENIENT PATH
TO BE PAVED. THE COMRADE AND LATER THE TACTICAL CIRCLES OF THE
ORDER MOVED ALONG THIS PATH WITHOUT RISK.

THE ORDER BROADENED ITS SPACE OF ACTION AND IN’ THAT
HISTORICAL INSTANCE IT OPENED’ CIRCLES IN _~ CERTAIN
PSYCHOREGIONS OF ARGENTINA, SQUARES IN ROSARIO, BUENOS AIRES
ETC. FUNDAMENTALLY IT ENTERED THROUGH THESE PAVED ROADS TO
CERTAIN POLITICAL PSYCHOSOCIAL STRATEGIES, ONE OF THESE
ACTIONS ALLOWED THE ORDER TO GAIN ACCESS TO POLITICAL POWER
AND "ALMOST" TAKE POWER.

|! WANT TO POINT OUT THIS STRATEGY BECAUSE FELIPE LATER
UNLEASHED A POLITICAL STRATEGY WITHIN PERONISM, (UPRISING OF
THE CARAPINTADAS) A SUBJECT THAT | WILL DEVELOP LATER IN
ANOTHER POINT, | SIMPLY WANT TO EXPRESS THAT EVERY
HYPERBOREAN ORDER ONE OF ITS TACTICAL WINGS POINTS TO THAT
PSYCHOSOCIAL OBJECTIVE; THE VIRYA MUST UNDERSTAND THESE
STRATEGIES AND NIMROD HAD BEYOND THE INITIATION THAT MISSION
AND FOUGHT UNTIL THE LAST OF HIS DAYS IN THIS WORLD OF HORROR
TO OPEN A POLITICAL BATTLE FRONT.

COMRADES: IF WE PUT THE MACROSTRUCTURE IN CHECK, WE
CORNERED THE ENEMY AND IF VICTORY WAS NOT ACHIEVED IN THAT
HISTORICAL INSTANCE, IT WILL BE ACHIEVED SOONER OR LATER
BECAUSE IT IS SO DESIGNED, AND WE WILL NOT STOP UNTIL IT
BECOMES A REALITY, AS ORDERED BY THE PONTIFF NIMROD OF
ROSARY AND THE SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA.

THE LOYAL SIDDHAS CARVED THEIR STRATEGIES IN STONE (MENHIRS,
CASTLES, OPIDIUM, HYPERBOREAN "TEMPLES"), ON WHICH THEY
ENGRAVED THE SIGN OF ORIGIN AND THE GOLDEN RUNE.

EVERY STRATEGIC FENCE, ODAL CASTLE POSSESSES A PAVED ROAD,

ON THAT ROAD (ITS SPACE, SURFACE) PASSABLE THEY DEPOSITED THE
WISE SWORD, WITH IT THEY BUILT A STRATEGIC FENCE, THIS PAVED
ROAD IS RUNICALLY ISOLATED, IT MAKES IT INVISIBLE FROM THE GAZE
OF THE A.R.S.E.P.E., OF THE TRAITOR SIDDHAS, AND OF THE IMMANENT
CONSCIENCE, TRANSCENDENT TIME OF THE DEMIURGE.
NIMROD INSTRUCTED US IN THAT CONSTRUCTIVE SCIENCE, A PRELUDE
TO THE CONSTRUCTION OF CASTLES, ANALOGOUS TO LIBERATED
SQUARES; IN ORDER TO BUILD A PAVED ROAD WE MADE A DEEP
ANALYSIS OF THE CONDUCIVE WAYS, (EVEN MORE WHEN THE WAR
ACTION WAS PLACED ON A PSYCHOSOCIAL STRATEGY, ON A CERTAIN
MACRO-STRUCTURE OF THE ENEMY). PREVIOUSLY, WE PROCEEDED TO
CARRY OUT AN ENGINEERING STUDY.


59


86


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


ONCE A PATH (A TACTICAL OBJECTIVE) HAD BEEN CHOSEN, WE
PROCEEDED TO RE-SIGNIFY WITH THE UNCREATED RUNES THE
ARCHETYPAL ONTIC MATRICES OF THE SERPENT AND SNAIL DESIGN
INSTITUTED ON THE SPACE-TIME PATH (MONARCH LABRELIX) CHOSEN.

EACH TRACE OF THE PATH, OR CONDUCIVE WAY AS IT WAS
TRAVERSED, THE SPACE OF THE PERIMETER OF THE CHOSEN PATH WAS
PAVED WITH THE RUNE OF THE ORIGIN, ITS AREA, SURFACE WAS
FENCED WITH THE UNCREATED RUNES FREEING THE CONDUCIVE WAY
OF THE ASTRAL, PSYCHIC AND VITAL POWERS OF THEIR DESIGNS; THIS
PAVED PATH WAS ISOLATED, FENCED, REMAINING INVISIBLE TO THE
A.R.S.E.P.E.

ALL ATTACKS COMING FROM THE VALPLADS WERE NEUTRALIZED, THIS
STONE ROAD ALLOWED US TO CROSS ANY NATURAL OR CULTURAL
OBSTACLE THAT PREVENTED US FROM REACHING THE TACTICAL END
OR FINAL GOAL PURSUED.

THE COBBLESTONE ROADS WERE INTENDED TO PROVIDE A SAFE WAY
FOR THE VIRYAS OF THE ORDER TO TRAVEL SAFELY THROUGH THE
VALPLADS.

ITS ROADWAY PAVED LIKE A MAGIC CARPET TRANSPORTS THE VIRYA
FLYING SWIFTLY TO THE STRATEGIC TARGET, IT IS_ THIS
COMMUNICATION PATH (ONE OR MORE) THAT LINKS THE DIFFERENT
ENCLOSED SPACES, ALLOWING THE MOVEMENT OF THE CIRCLES OR
VIRYAS FROM ONE STRATEGIC POINT TO ANOTHER WITHOUT BEING
DETECTED BY THE EYE OF ABRAXAS.

THE CONSTRUCTION OF THESE COBBLESTONE ROADS WAS THE MOST
STRATEGICALLY IMPORTANT WORK OF HYPERBOREAN ENGINEERING
BUILT BY THE ORDER OF THE TIRODAL KNIGHTS OF THE ARGENTINE
REPUBLIC.
BY THESE LEADING ROADS THE TIRODAL KNIGHTS FLEW TO THE
SELBST, ON THE END OF THEIR ROUTE A BRIDGE WAS BUILT, AND IT
TRANSITED THE VIRYA BERSERKR TO THE ORIGIN. THE PAVED ROADS
THE ORDER OF TIRODAL KNIGHT ENTER US A THE

BRIDGES INFINITE BRIDGES, THROUGH THESE
CONSTRUCTIONS LITICAL SE SAVE THE DISTANCE Y THE
OBSTACLES THAT PREVENT US FROM ENTERING THE SELBST AND THE
VRIL, THROUGH THEM THE HYPERBOREAN WISDOM IS TRANSFERRED
TO ALL THE SPACES OF SIGNIFICANCE IN AMERICA AND THE WORLD.
THE SCIENCE OF HYPERBOREAN LITIC ENGINEERING IS PART OF THE
NOOLOGICAL PONTONIC (ART OF BUILDING BRIDGES) OF THE SIDDHAS
OF AGARTHA. THESE COBBLESTONE PATHS LEADING TO THE INFINITE
BRIDGE OF THE SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA ALLOW US TO ENTER AS
ETERNAL SIDDHAS EITHER TO AGARTHA OR TO THE ORIGIN.


60


87


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


TODAY THIS SCIENCE IS WITHIN THE REACH OF ALL BERSERKR VIRYAS
WHO ENTER THE NOOGICAL PONTONIC OF THE SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA
AND NIMROD OF ROSARY.

AS WELL AS THE EXPRESSION: "ALL ROADS LEAD TO ROME", IN THE
SAME WAY THE PAVED ROAD OF THE ORDER OF OCTRA AND TODAY
OCTIRODAE LEADS DIRECTLY TO THE BRIDGE OF THE ORDER'S TIRODAL
CASTLE (TAU HAGAL OCTOGON), IT TAKES US TO ITS LIBERATED
SQUARE, AND BY THE SPIRAL STAIRCASE OF ITS STONE TOWER, WE
ASCEND BY ITS LAST STAIRCASE TO THE INFINITE STAIRCASE LEADING
TO THE UNCREATED BRIDGE THAT ANCHORS US IN THE HEAVENS OF
AGARTHA OR IN THE ORIGIN.


Conclusion of the first part. WILL,
COURAGE, VRIL AND VICTORY.
OCTIRODAE CORDOBA.

VVV


ANNEX: TODAY IN THIS SPACE OF SIGNIFICANCE IN AMERICA AND SPAIN
ARE PRESENT BY THE GRACE OF THEIR EGOIC WILLS 16 VIRYAS
BERSERKR INITIATED HYPERBOREAN TIRODAL KNIGHTS, IT DEPENDS ON
YOU COMRADES TO OPEN THE INFINITE BRIDGE TO AGARTHA TO MAKE
PROPITIOUS THE BEGINNING OF THE FINAL BATTLE.


In the HYPERBorean WISDOM there is a runic rite that is strategically
performed within the framework of the HEROIC mysticism of a KAIROS of
the SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA and, CAMARADES, let us hope one day to be
able to realize it.
Hyperborean ritual performed with 12 BERSERKR comrades and a VRAYA,
inside a FREE PLAZA. It takes place in the LIBERATED PLAZA, in the
ARCHEMON or SECRET CAVERN of the PLAZA. First, we proceed to resign
and archemonize the SQUARE of the ARCHEMONA, engraving on its four
sides or walls (invisible and invincible walls) the three uncreated runes SIEG,
HAGAL and TYR and the rune ODAL, on the ceiling (sky of Agartha, sphere
of light of the archimona) is engraved the sacred Hyperborean SWASTIC,
and on the floor (sphere of shadow of the archimona) the OCTOGON TAU of
the Loyal Siddhas. With these runes the whole QUADRATURE of the
ARCHEMONA is re-signified which means by hyperborean pontonic analogy
RE-SIGNIFYING the

61


88


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


MACROCHOSMIC QUADRATURE, the immanence of transcendent time on
the SQUARE, affirming the INFINITE FENCE on the INVINCIBLE WALLS of
the ARCHEMON.

It is NOOLOGICALLY UNDERSTOOD, by gnostic apprehension, that every
ODAL FENCE is constructed with the ontic matrices of the Snail design
(Snail Staircase, Real Artificial System), applying on the CONSTRUCTION,
the LAW OF THE FENCE. The principle of the FENCE is constituted by
projecting on the space to be fenced, a mathematical principle, in this case a
square, or RECTANGLE. On the periphery of its morphological structure the
SQUARE will be built and later a PONTIFICE will proceed to ARCHEMONIZE
it. Such a PONTIFICIAL action disintegrates on the enclosed space the
immanence of the transcendent time on the PLAZA and allows to affirm in it
an INFINITE TIME. The ARCHEMONA is built, sustained from the INFINITE by
the Loyal SIDDHAS, and from the infinity of the INFINITE POLE, by the
noological will of the Pontiff and the Viryas Berserkr. Every hyperborean
fence is built on a mathematical principle (regular polygon). Its space
represents the macrocosmic quadrature, but, when its space is enclosed
with the INCREATED RUNES, the INFINITE POLE is precipitated in the
NOOLOGICAL CONSTRUCTION, superimposing on the SQUARE, the
ANGULARITY of the ODAL rune, the mathematical principle being re-
assigned by the NOOLOGICAL POWER OF THE RUNE, which makes the
ARCHEMONA INVISIBLE and INVINCIBLE (a subject studied in the texts of
Philip).

The rite is concretized with the twelve VIRYAS BERSERKR and the VRAYA.
EIGHT comrades, each one of them, are placed in the vertexes of the
OCTOGON TAU, the remaining FOUR comrades on the inner part of the
OCTOGON, and in the CENTER TAU the VRAYA is located. The comrades
wear certain warrior garments, weapons (dagger engraved on the blade with
the three runes) and a MASK, the VRAYA is the only one who wears her
VIRGIN FACE, she performs a ROUND DANCE and evokes the SIDDHAS
WITH A ROUND CHANT, while the VIRYA BERSERKR wield their FUROR
BERSERKR. Their cries of WAR are projected by the EIGHT comrades to the
VALPLADS and by the FOUR comrades to the ORIGIN.

Up to this point this Rite of the PURE BLOOD is revealed. An allegorical
description of it is found in the drama of NIMROD THE DEFEATED and
Princess ISA, but this is all | can convey to you for the time being,


62


89


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


because this is the highest hyperborean secret, and to reveal this secret
requires a PLAZA and an ARCHEMON, a WAR KAIROS, the Loyal SIDDHAS
and a HYPERBORNE PONTIFICE. The Loyal SIDDHAS

from the VALHALLA, they resign the astral and psychic macrocosmic
powers of the Caracol design structured on the PLAZA and the
HYPERBORNE PONTIFICE resigns the Serpent design, the telluric energies
of the PSYCHOREGION where the PLAZA is FOUNDED.

This action, beyond the PARTICULAR, is the initiatory goal of a group of
BERSERKR VIRYAS. This STRATEGY is the highest hyperborean initiation,
and the Viryas who affirm the REAL WORLD OF THE SIDDHAS OF
AGARTHA, and carry in their veins the purest astral blood, GRAL BLOOD,
participate in it. This hyperborean rite OPENS the WISDOM and drives it to
the liberation (noological impulse) of a whole HYPERBORNEAL LINAGE, and
if the situation is propitious, of a NATION or a RACE. But, comrades, this
requires mastery of SEMIOTICS and HYPERBOREAL PONTONICS, of a
degree of ETHICAL EXCELLENCE, where the ILLUSION OF SELF has
disintegrated into the NUDGED TRUTH of the INFINITE SELF. If this is
accomplished, one can enter that secret which participates in the highest
HYPERBORIC RITUAL science, which allows to OPEN a CRACK in the veils
of MAYA, through which enters a power that RELEASES a_ whole
PSYCHROREGION of the PSYCHOID ARCHETYPES and their corresponding
EGRESSORS. This action, which requires the highest VALUE, allows to
affirm definitively in the space where the PLAZA is FOUNDED an INFINITE
time, a TIRODAL ACTION OF WAR (this construction of war, SNAIL STAIR,
was concretized with NIMROD in the strategy of OCTRA, therefore we went
to war, in that instance the VIRYA perceives noologically the TRUTH BARE
OF HIMSELF, because such a war is always present, it is situated at the
BEGINNING of the enchainment and is situated at the end in LIBERATION).
This WAR that the virya wages on himself, has the purpose of liberating all
the viryas in chains from the world of pain. Therefore, the objective of our
effort is to transmit its glory, to reach with our war cry, "CLA-MORT", which
is transmitted by the MINNE, through the AURA CATENA, charismatically to
all the Viryas of the world, a cry that in this STRATEGY OF LIBERATION
affirms our greatest VICTORY. The uncreated time is near when sixteen
CAMARADES will be able to enter the SELBST and transmute into VIRYAS
BERSERKR. This action of war and its


63


90


GUSTAVO BRONDINO


hyperborean ritual is affirmed by the Loyal SIDDHAS in this KAIROS, but, for
this, the VIRYA BERSERKR must concretize, by his ABSOLUTE WILL AND
VALUE, THE STRATEGY THAT THE KAIROS REQUIRES, because,

although it comes from the PARACHRITE, it will only triumph and victory will
be achieved if the chosen ones understand the SACRIFICE that must be
performed in order to unleash on the VIRYAS BERSERKR the KAIROS, the
HEROIC MYSTIC that OPENS the DOORS OF AGARTHA and transmutes the
VIRYA into SIDDHA (not geophysical or topological portals), or topological,
because every KAIROS does not act on matter, even if it is "CHARACATO",
but on the UNCREATED of the VIRYA, or on the infinite enclosed by the WILL
and the VALUE of the group of VIRYAS that re-sign a psychoregion together
with the PONTIPHICE and the Loyal SIDDHA).

From now on, that is the next GOAL, in it is the commitment of the comrades
of OCTIRODAE, who carry WILL and VALOR and of all the comrades who
feel in their blood the WAR CRY of the Loyal SIDDHAS.


64


91


Gustavo Brondino


THE TIRODAL RUNE OF VICTORY, UNCREATED SIGN
THAT ENDOWS THE VIRYAS BERSERKR WITH WINGS
TO FLY TO THE SELBST, TO BE PURE VRIL AND TO
ENTER AS AN ETERNAL SIDDHA TO THE ORIGIN.


VVWV


65


92


DIALOGUE BETWEEN A PONTIFF, VIRYABERSERKR AND A
HYPERBOREAN INITIATE.
TEXT THAT IS PART OF THE SEVENTH CHAPTER OF:


THE GENERAL BLOOD OF THE VIRYA BERSERKR.


Virya I: -| am like giving birth by my BLOOD to the VIRYA BERSERKR, the
Conscious Subject complains in pain and the Instinctive and Affective Sphere
lose all archetypal reference, their designs are disintegrated, EROS, HYPNOS
and TANATOS, beginning, middle and end of the so-called "LIBIDO", are
archetypal gods participants of the vital energy of the microcosm, represented in
the KUNDALINI SERPENT. With the power of the uncreated Runes their heads
are mutated or cut off and by the GRACE of the VRIL, | free myself from the
bonds of the created soul. | feel that fury in my blood coming from the INFINITY
OF MY ETERNAL SELF, | resign myself within all, | free myself from the yoke of
pain, from the passions of being. That VRIL enters me from outside, uncreated
force that is OVER ME but that allows me to BE IN THE INFINITUDE OF THE
SELBST; | feel armed with a unique and absolute POWER, with it | destroy the
deception of the origin of BEING of the MICROCOSM. After much battle, of
warring against the designated within the created soul, with will and courage |
was able to sacrifice the psychological |, | placed myself in the TRUE SELF,
NOOLOGICAL BEING that is from the BEGINNING OF TIME chained by a
mystery of A-MOR in the MACRO and MICROCOSMOS. Upon awakening | am
situated outside of both times, of the immanent time of the microcosmic
conscious subject and of the immanent transcendent time of the macrocosm,
noological perspective that participates of the INFINITE SELF (the true Self and
the Infinite Self are united by the Catena Aura, and the Golden Cord, or Runic
Thread) that is situated in the OUTSIDE of the MICRO and MACROCOSMIC
inside, | can see from the SELBST all the ENGAGEMENT.

How did | achieve this?

Because | learned to DANCE THE UNCREATED RUNES.

By the SACRIFICE of the PSYCHOLOGICAL SELF, | built with my will a
WISDOM (with the ontic matrices of the Snail Design the Snail staircase is built)
HYPERBORNE, SCIENCE OF LIBERATION that allowed me to ascend through
my TOWER (Snail Staircase) to the TRUE SELF, to place myself in that LIMIT
that delimits the UNCREATED from the CREATED, in the NOOLOGICAL
POWER of the INFINITE SELF.

But this strategic comprehension is the product of coldly following my initiatory
instruction with which | was able to ISOLATE the SELF from the Conscious
Subject, to stop being a sleeping man, submerged in the warm blood of animal
passion, to be simply human, all too human. Situated in the TRUE SELF, feeling
in my BLOOD that force that comes from the INFINITE SELF, | understood
gnostically the ABSOLUTE right of the SELF to reaffirm itself in the ETERNAL,
to return as a GOD to the ORIGIN.

This understanding placed me in the OUTSIDE of time, | crossed with courage
the INFINITE BRIDGE TO THE ORIGIN and | understood the reality of the Pasu
man, of the lost Virya, trapped inside, in the psychological | (archetypal memory,
analogous brain, neurological network); in that space where the spirit is
subjected to the DESIGNS of the created SOUL and of the CREATION; to the
will of the Demiurge, and worse, to the DESTINY that is imposed upon it.


93


the LORDS OF THE LABYRINTH, the traitor Siddhas of Chang Shambala. |
understood from the SELBST all the TRUTH of MYSELF and of the WORLD
that surrounds us. This UNIVERSE is a reverie dreamed by the DEMIURGE,
fantastic chimera, imaginative science that affirms the UNCREATED in the
ILLUSION OF THE CREATED UNIVERSE. But this fantastic surrealism that is
life, where each one dreams his reverie, lives the fantasy of being in the
chimera of existence something that never is, the SIDDHAS TRAITORS OF
CHANG SHAMBALA are the culprits of such tragedy. They are the architects of
the deception, they are the ones who with their labyrinthine traps make REAL
the ILLUSION of the GREAT DECEIT. By the LUCIFERIC GRACE of my
ABSOLUTE WILL

| understand perfectly this METAPHYSICAL ENGINEERING with which the
prison was built, which is built on time and its world, in which the Virya is
imprisoned, trapped in being, living the MORAL argument that gives meaning to
his life. Dream life where the lost Virya lives in a dream that is tragic, dramatic
or playful, beyond gender, his destiny is written: the SUFFERING OF THE
VIRYA INDEFINITELY in the SIGN OF PAIN and in the LABYRINTH OF
TERROR.

As a Virya, | courageously revealed myself to myself, to the limits of the
Conscious subject, of the BEING of the microcosm, to its immanent temporality
where the Ego is tied to the Soulic subject. As a warrior in search of TRUTH
and JUSTICE, cold and HEROIC (the Sinarca initiates have that cold blood, but
they are COLD, merciless and sacrificers, because they carry in that cold blood
the SIGN OF PAIN, on the contrary the Virya Berserke carries that COLD blood,
but being in it the SYMBOL OF ORIGIN, it is pure A-MORT) | tore the animality
of the SOUL. As a lost Virya | decided to AWAKE and recover my SPIRIT, the
power that is in my INFINITE SELF. | became an AWAKENED VIRYA, | placed
myself in the TRUE SELF and | had that vision of the BEGINNING OF THE
FALL, what | was when | was out of TIME, free from the UNIVERSAL MONAD,
from the GREAT ENGAGEMENT OF THE ILLUSION OF MAYA.

From this noological perspective that | place myself in the SELBST, by the
value that the VRIL (noological substance of the Selbst) brings me, | transmute
the SELF and enter by my WILL and VALUE to my EHRE sphere. In this state
of LUCIFERIC GRACE | can understand the ABSOLUTE DETERMINATION
OF MY EGOIC WILL. | understood the TRUTH BARE OF MYSELF, the
deception that is sustained in that pair of opposites of the biological body of
which participates the "LIBIDO" represented in the UNCONSCIOUS, in the
purest instinct of the biological being, in the "being in itself" of the Pasu womb.
Free of those instincts that affirm the BLOOD PASU | understood that in the
prison the deception and the illusion of the BEING, is sustained in that
unconscious bipartition of the biological body, in the HERMAFRODITE being
contained in the unconscious potency of the matrix of the GENDER, (masculine,
feminine) structured in the matrix Pasu of the Caracol design. Matrix that
participates by the last end of its demiurgic ontic potencies, the Manu matrix
that actualizes in the SOUL, (by the Kundalini Serpent) the MANU
ENTELEQUIA.

| was able to experience, being AWAKE, how the SOUL COMPLAINS WITH
PAIN when the SELF UNDERSTANDS THE MYSTERY OF ENCOUNTERING,
UNDERSTANDS THAT CHEATING IS STRUCTURED IN IT AND THROUGH
IT THE SEARCH FOR LOVE, BEAUTY AND POWER IS ESTABLISHED, IN
THE THOUSAND WAYS THAT CHEATING IS DISPLAYED, IN THE
DIFFERENT MANIFESTATIONS OF THE ONE IN IT.


94


| understand the deception well | am no longer subject to it!

That ANIMA which is a false representation of HIS ETERNAL PRESENCE, as
SOUL speaks to us and demands us to seek FREEDOM in HIM or else in the
OUTSIDE, in the VERB OF THE DEMIURGO, (in his logos). Within the
ANIMUS or ANIMUS is the WEEK OF PAIN and its WARM TEARS wash the
SIGN OF ORIGIN, its WATERS envelop us in the UNCONSCIOUS OCEAN OF
WARM LIFE. Its presence demands, TO BE, to return to the path of the WARM
BLOOD OF ANIMAL PASSION.

The understanding of the purest A-MOR-T is the comprehension of the purest
A-MOR-T, and we enter it when we achieve VICTORY over the determined, the
merely HUMAN. Pain ceases at the end, it dissipates, it DISAPPEARS by its
own death, by the SACRIFICE OF THE PSYCHOLOGICAL SELF. That death is
a sacrifice that LIBERATES and that is executed with the INCREATED RUNES
on those three HEADS OF SERPENTS that affirm us in the GREAT
ENGAGEMENT, in the internal world of PASSION and in the external world of
TRAITION, spaces of pain executed by the DEMIURGE JEHOVAH SATAN,
and the SIDDHAS TRAITORS. Spaces of

passion, illusion and betrayal from which only the most BRAVE ESCAPE. That
voice of the soul subject, of your CONSCIOUSNESS demands you to place
yourself again in the LOVE aspect, in the BEAUTY aspect and in the HUMAN
CONSCIOUSNESS aspect, manifestations of the demiurge that are
represented in your world and give meaning to life and affirm the PLAN of the
ONE and his allies ON THE VIRYA AND THE CREATION.

In these three serpent heads is affirmed the BLOOD of PASU, in the ANIMAL
KINGDOM, in the HUMAN SPECIES and in the GENDER, but | understand that
beyond the uniformity of the kingdom and of the species is the singularity of the
gender, the biological body is the form that predetermines the BEING and that
hermaphroditism participates of the MAMMAL BLOOD lies in the powers of the
astral and psychic energies of the snail design and in the vital energy of the
Serpent design. In these potential forms is the BEING and that ontic reality is
the root of the Tree of GOOD and EVIL. Tree that represents life and its
manifestations, the DEMIURGE and its creation, that false LOVE where
BEAUTY affirmed in PAIN resides.

By the SELBST, the MORAL condition that determines the BEING disappears,
disintegrates, and one is no longer a victim of the psychic designs, one is not
lost in the ocean of the warm life, the FUROR of the VRIL affirmed in the VIRIL
of the VRAYA or the VIRYA destroys the NOTHING OF THE BEING, and is
liberated from the BEING OF THE NOTHING.

That is why | feel in my blood the FUROR of the VRIL, a condition they HATE.
The demiurge and its representatives in the world, in the LABYRINTH, affirm in
the MANU ENTELEQUIA, the ANDROGINO, that ONTOLOGICAL
BISEXUALITY

carried by the SINARCH INITIATES. From the SELBST, | AM PURE VRIL, | can
understand the essence of the deception that participates of those three heads
of Serpents that animate the quadrangularity of the UNCONSCIOUS, the
SHADOW, support of the TRIFORME FUNCTION of the BRAIN, of the
PSYCHOLOGICAL EGO.

Being ARMED BY THE SIDDHAS WITH THE INCREATED RUNES AS

VIRYA BERSERKR could descend to the unconscious and cut off the heads of
EROS, HIPNOS and _ finally TANATOS; to those images of those
ARCHETYPICAL GODS that constellate the worst traps of LIBIDO, where lies
that ARCHETYPICAL GENDER that leads us to fall into the TRAPS OF


95


CULTURE and takes us to the weakness of human love, to that humanism full
of PAIN, principle of all HUMAN MORAL (to be or not to be, there is the
synarchic dilemma, not the spirit, but the existential duality of the soul).

But now, ARMED AND AWAKENED in the end when | will face TANATHOS,
that ILLUSORY BEING full of mortality | WILL WIN, | know my INFINITE
VALUE, and that DESTINY beyond death dissolves and no LABYRINTH will be
able to hold me because free from death, from its charms and fears nothing
stops me, | will always be free in the ORIGIN. My true Self is liberated from
DRAWING, DREAM and DEATH, it acquires the right to BE ETERNAL in the
ORIGIN.


Virya Berserkr: Comrade, you are in full initiation, DANCING THE RUNES
destroys all illusion, transmuting you, but, appeal to the forces that brings you
the SELBST, to that volitional impetus that falls from the uncreated runes, the
VRIL, there is the power that enters your true Self and gives you the power to
place yourself in your INFINITE SELF.


Virya: Yes, | know about this power, | Know about the VRIL, | lean on it, it is the
strength of my TAU COLUMN, | feel these NEW FORCES, they bring me into a
POWER where | see everything, and these totally revealing images show me
the path, the gnostic way to truth and FREEDOM.

| affirm that transmutation, the value is a fury that enters my blood into my
veins, | MODIFY EVERYTHING, even the microcosm is altered, now it belongs
to me. Thus it is transmuting me, with the double SACRIFICE of those two
BLOODS that predetermine the being, like MITRA SACRIFYING THE BULL |
disintegrate the EROS, | participate of that MAMMY BLOOD, | free myself like
ODISEO of the song of CIRSE, canticle of the soul that sleeps, | gave death to
HYPNOS, thus | woke up definitively from the dream of the LOVE OF THE
CARNAL PASSION.

AWAKENED as the most VALIANT OF HEROES, | will confront TANATOS in
that WARM form of DEATH represented in that archetypal god that awaits us at
the end; triumphant as TESEO | KILLED THE MINOTAURUS and disintegrated
the LABYRINTH, | have in my hands the KEY to get out of the trap and return to
the ORIGIN. Comrade, does this mean the END of all obstacles to return to the
ORIGIN?


Virya Berserkr: correct definition comrade, all that happened to you affirmed
your being in the SELBST, and it modified by the VRILL coming from your
INFINITE SELF all reality, the TRUTH is at your fingertips comrade. But you
must understand that the Virya takes possession of the KEY when he obtains
STRATEGIC ORINTATION and is ARMED WITH THE RUNES.

INCREATED, as you rightly affirm, because otherwise one runs the risk of
falling into the most subtle traps that the One has affirmed in the TRIFORMAL
FUNCTION OF THE LIGHT SPHERE or in the QUADRANGULARITY OF THE
SHADOW SPHERE, because seizing the KEY is an ACT OF TOTAL WAR
against the DEMIURGE and the TRAITOR SIDDHAS, more

you must take it and break the STRIP because it opens the door leading to
LIBERATION.


96


Virya: If | know that | must take hold of that EVIL KEY, | know that it is from the
beginning in the HOT BLOOD, MAMIFERA that participates of the LIBIDO of
the psychological EGO, of those images of LOVE that are the support of the
VITAL energy, that HUMAN HOT BLOOD, has given way to that SERILE
MORAL where the VIRILE has been closed with that KEY of animal love and
carnal passion. | know perfectly well upon entering this HEROIC initiation, to
which | submitted myself with HONOR, that the Traitor Siddhas are evil, more
than any Virya can imagine. They comrades are the masters of the KEY and
affirm with it in the interior of the Virya the ontic quadrature of the Shadow
Sphere, to the noological being in the Unconscious. With this KEY they build
this double trap, it turns on itself in all the axes of the Caracol designs and
fundamentally in the sine displacement of the Serpent creating the illusion that
you are "seeing" towards "inside", and that you are contacting your Spirit or your
Self, so that, believing that you are approaching the Origin, you are moving
away from it, and you will never be able to see the truth.

That KEY closes the padlock that keeps the door of the secret exit closed, in it
is the LOVE of Mother BINAH, and the WISDOM of Father ENHIL, foundations
of the EYE OF YOD in the microcosm, of the DEMIURGO. Comrade, these
great archetypes components of the KEY are from the beginning CHAINING
US, they participate in the deception and | know by experience that they are
represented in the INSIDE and the OUTSIDE, they have life by themselves in
the double INNER AND OUTER LABYRINTH. But do these different archetypal
images that participate of these two bloods that has root in the Key, which is
affirmed inthe EROS, disappeardefinitely always
present in their presences as her or as him? (For the man in these unconscious
images of the anima, this present the mother Binath, the Christian virgin of pain,
the mother earth, the moon, the biological mother; also in the sisters, the wives,
the girlfriends, the daughters, etc.). For the woman: in the Father Enhil, the
Wise Old Man, the sun, the biological father, in the brothers, sons, husbands,
boyfriends, etc._).


Virya Berserkr: -That means that you are AWAKENING TO AWAKENING, and
you have been ARMED THIRODAL KNIGHT you are understanding that KEY
you understand its TURNS, wherein lies the deception of the UNCONSCIOUS.
But this question requires a broader answer. By receiving from the hands of the
Loyal SIDDHAS the uncreated runes, you have the WISDOM and the power of
your INNER GNOSIS, such UNCREATED FORCES allow you to descend to
the UNCONSCIOUS. You are already armed and you must seize your KEY and
that descent to the UNCONSCIOUS is an ACT OF TOTAL WAR against the
DEMIURGE. But you must only DESCEND TO THE UNCONSCIOUS when you
comprehend with the UNCREATED RUNES the SERPENT, only then will you
be able to see inside and resign what is designated by the One in the
microcosm. You must understand, comrade, that the KEYS is founded on these
two BLOODS, mounted on EROS, and the PHATOS of the libido of the
SEXUAL or CARNAL PASSION is one of the limits to overcome. Therefore,
when the TRUE SELF is ARMED with the TRIDENT OF NEPTUNE and the
SWORD OF WOTAN, you can

To descend and cut off the three heads of the SERPENT, to take possession of
the KEY, that means to kill those archetypal gods (Eros, Hypnos, Thanatos) and
then to access and exit through the CRESTA of the VRIL, (oculus) and enter
definitively to the Selbst.


oF


Virya: -That's right! Comrade, even in contact with the Infinite we could not
manage to get into the depths of the shadow sphere, to see the true reason for
the enchantment and entrapment, without first passing through this "other lock",
because | know perfectly well that only armed ones can get hold of that KEY
and turn the Kalachakra's handle.

By killing those three serpent or dragon heads, one breaks the STRIP and
takes possession of the key. | understand, now, | know that the lock of which |
speak would be placed in the heart chakra, reason of all deception and of the
LOVE of the One, plus the BEAUTY, also affirms that lock in that chakra, in that
blood that weakens .....


Virya Berserkr: -Yes and even worse, LOVE leads to the adoration of the
BEAUTY of the world and to POWER and if you fall in those nets you become a
BEING POSTOR OF CULTURE, remember that these three aspects the
MANIFESTATIONS OF THE DEMIURGO are the seat of Thipheret, of the
cabals that give cultural sense to the world, and on these three great archetypes
of the macrocosm the deception is built. These two SANGRES that are in all
races, determine the SACRED SYMBOL OF THE PASU, are the ones that
affirm the KEYSTONE of the Kalachakra Key that is in the MICROCOSM.

Listen well with your inner ear!

The biological body is built with the ontic matrices of the Snail design, in the
same way the KALACHAKRA KEY is built, well by analogy between macrocosm
and microcosm, the physical body is a biological machine whose brain or
archetypal memory contains the whole macrocosm. The macrocosm was
created with the KALACHAKRA KEY and the microcosm in the same way, but
not only its organs in particular but also the aesthetic conformation of its
anatomy and physiology is a KEY; taking the allegorical figure of the Kalachakra
key of Nimrod, we can determine that in the HEAD, superior end of the
biological body, the ASA is found, in it is the |, INCREATED by the SIGN OF
ORIGIN to the Conscious Subject, that LOST I, imprisoned in the IDEAN
CAVERN is over itself the power of the INCREATED RUNES; but being
DORMANT and lost in the LABYRINTH, in the CAVERN it has forgotten all
REFERENCE OF THE RUNES AND OF THE GRAL.

Comrade, that is the drama, because when the EGO is trapped in the ASA, it
seeks to get out of the CAVERNA and being lost it cannot distinguish the Sign
of the Origin, the SECRET EXIT, it only has one door and this only leads to the
TIJA, that exit is the only path that allows it to get out of the CAVERNA and that
path only leads us to the TIJA, and it takes us out of the inner labyrinth and
does not refound in the AFURA, in the outer world or outer labyrinth.

The TIJA is represented by the MIDDLE EXTREME of the biological body, it
resides specifically in the HEART, in the CHAKRA ANAHATA, and this affective
sphere participates of the MACROCOSMIC LOVE ARCHETYPE. In _ this
affective sphere lies the BEING OF THE PASU, although its existential root is in
the ARCHETYPICAL MEMORY, it is the LOVE aspect that in this stage of
evolution of the KALI YUGA, predetermines the being of the Pasu, in its
affective contents lies the CROSS of deception, an aspect of the EYE OF YOD
that observes everything. When the genetic key was modified by the SIDDHAS
TRAITORS, the microcosm chained a spirit and that | was linked to the
MEMORY.


98


The Ego, chained in the blackness of the cranial cavern, only sees the LIGHT
OF THE WORLD through the HEART. The Ego, chained in the blackness of the
cranial cavern, only sees the LIGHT OF THE WORLD through the HEART and
is quickly transferred from the Sphere of Consciousness to the Affective
Sphere. While it is the archetypal memory where the inverted archetypes
(MIRROR NEURONS) are activated, the NUMINIOUS force of the IDEAS or
rational principles quickly fall upon the axiological forces of the EMOTIONAL
SPHERE, THEREFORE IT IS SAID THAT MAN THINKS MORE

WITH THE HEART THAN WITH THE BRAIN and this is real, the Pasu is a
strictly passionate being.

In reality there is a biunivocal connection between these three spheres,
between the three subjects, and that is the reason for the TRIFORMAL
FUNCTION OF THE SPHERE OF LIGHT. We understand by hyperborean
semantic comprehension that it is the archetypal memory where the "I" was
chained, but it is there where the great deception lies, because it semiotically
contains the AFFECTIVE SPHERE, in other words, comrade, it is fundamental
to understand that in the HEART lies the ARCHETYPICAL image of CHANG
SHAMBALA and there is the KALACHAKRA KEYSTICK of the microcosm.

Well, comrade, it is fundamental to understand that the TIJA is the ontological
axial nexus between the ASA (upper end), the CREANEAN vault, and the
PALETON (lower end), the lower extremities, the FEET, of the biological body.
The PALETON is the last end of the microcosm or biological body, and it is
located in the FEET, that is to say, the PALETON is in the LOWER END and
has its ROOT in the beginning of the lower end in the CHAKRA SACRO
COCCIGEO or root chakra of the spinal column, but this chakra or ontological
register is affirmed in the FEET. Well, comrade, it is in the FEET where the
VERTICALITY of the microcosm is supported, there lies a RIGHT ANGLE that
opposes the RIGHT ANGLE that is part of the SECRET EXIT found in the ASA,
but you must understand that this RIGHT ANGLE of the TALO of the feet is the
angle that chains the Virya to the MACROCOSM. This is one of the deepest
mysteries of the ANATOMY OF THE VIRYA because although the SPIRIT is
chained to the ARCHETYPICAL MEMORY by the ASA to the MICROCOSM,
but the MICROCOSM is chained to the world, to the MACROCOSM by the
PALETON, specifically by the LOWER END, by the FEET, that is why these two
RIGHT ANGLES only one is perceptible to the lost Virya, because the
microcosm rests on it.

In the ASA and the PALETON, those two extremes of the biological body are
affirmed the | INCHAINED, and in both is found that RIGHT ANGLE, one that
liberates and the other that chains. Therefore in the FEET is the
ASTROLOGICAL MAP OF THE BIOLOGICAL BODY, which is possible to read,
and in fact is part of an occult science of the Kalachakra, which does not make
much sense to talk about it now. In that lower end of the FEET is that RIGHT
ANGLE, and we know that every RIGHT ANGLE like that of the HAND, allows
to have a reference of the ORIGIN, therefore that RIGHT ANGLE OF THE
FEET also has that reference, but it is re-signed by the HEEL OF AQUILES and
it is that RE-SIGNED right angle where is structured the SIGN OF PAIN
component of the PALETON.


99


Nimrod is specific and between the PALETON, the TIJA and the ASA closes the
Kalachakra Real System that conforms the biological body, the good instructs
us in the KALACHAKRA KEY of the MACRCOSM, but it is in the MICROCOSM
where that EVIL KEY in the form of CROSS, (Sacred symbol) where the
ILLUSION that is OPERATED FROM THE INNER LABYRINTH by the
DEMIURGE and from the LABYRINTH, is structured.

EXTERIOR by the DEMONS OF MATTER. That is why the TIJA, the nexus
between the two, is affirmed in the HEART, in this organ that participates in the
circulatory system is the HOT BLOOD and the worst SACRED SYMBOLS OF
THE PASU, that is why the worst trap is there, in the connective nexus between
the ASA, the BRAIN and the PALETON, the FEET; Therefore, comrade, the
Virya must break the STRIP, but for this he must RECOGNIZE THE POWER
OF THE RUNES to be able to DESTROY THE STRIP.

HERE COMRADE IS THE GREAT SECRET BECAUSE THE VIRYA MUST
FIND IN THE HANDLE THE SECRET EXIT TO THE SELBST AND IT IS NOT
IN THE DOOR LEADING TO THE SHAFT, THIS OPENING OR OCULUS IS IN
THE TAU POINT THAT PARTICIPATES OF THE HANDLE, IN THE SIGN OF
THE ORIGIN AND SUCH SIGN CONNECTS US CHARISMATICALLY WITH
THE MYSTICISM OF THE UNCREATED RUNES, IT UNITES US TO THE
SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA.

Comrade, there is that deception because the lost virya only sees the door
leading to the TIJA and from there to the PALETON, and in the feet is the
ontological support of the being of the pasu, in them is the ONTICO RECORD
OF THE MICROCOSM, the "being in itself" of the biological body, and that is
known by the synarchic sciences that study the secret anatomy of the
microcosm since the beginning of time, as well as the hands (palmistry) since in
them is also inscribed a Right Angle; but comrade, these are SCIENCES OF
THE TRAITOR SIDDHAS, that is why the GITANIANS read the hands and the
HEBREWS the astrological cabalas, (science that studies the HUMAN SOUL).
These are sciences that participate of the INHERITED KABALAS OF THE
SIDDHA TRAITORS OF CHANG SHAMBALA, but this science that must be
UNDERSTANDED, must only interest us STRATEGICALLY, to recognize the
STRATEGIES of the SIDDHA TRAITORS, or to recognize biologically the EVIL
RACE.

| tell you an anecdote about the Fuhrer.

A comrade who met the purest biological conditions was needed for an
espionage task which was strategically vital for the THIRD REICH. The Fuhrer
would personally inspect the one chosen for such a strategy. Several
candidates were presented and one was chosen and brought before the Fuhrer
Adolf Hitler. When he inspected the comrade who seemed to have all the traits
of the chosen one, he called the person in charge of the selection and said:
Comrade, investigate the genealogy of this comrade. After a while, the comrade
in charge of this mission verified that the chosen one carried Hebrew blood
through one of his great-grandfathers, and rejected the selected candidate.
When he communicated this to the Fuhrer, he asked:

-My Fuhrer, why did you throw away this comrade?

The Fuhrer replied: -Simply because | could see in his blood, images in his
body that bore the blood of the accursed race.

-My Fuhrer, excuse me, on which part of your body do | see these signs?


100


THE Fuhrer replied: -First in his RATONILE LOOK, second in his BEARING and
third in certain signs of his FACE which distinguish him as a man who still
suffers from unmistakable traits of the blood of the accursed race.

This example of how the Fuhrer could see beyond the forms, describes how in
the HUMAN ANATOMY is everything, but comrade, do not be guided by the
AESTHETIC FORM of the biological body because the PURE BLOOD was only
carried in the BEGINNING OF THE TIMES by the HYPERBOREAL RACES,
therefore today it is THE BLOOD, THE GROUND AND THE HYPERBOREAL
VERB that makes a Virya a WARRIOR OF THE ETERNAL. Undoubtedly there
are signs that make up the psychic and biological anatomy of the SINARCH
INITIATE, and there are several very specific studies within the
HYPERBOREAL WISDOM, but what we are interested in highlighting are the
NOOLOGICAL CHARACTERS OF THE VIRYA BERSERKR. Why comrade?
Simply because by affirming these Noological traits with the INCREATED
RUNES, the Virya can take possession of his KEY. In such a way that only by
taking possession of that KEY will we be able to open the lock to escape the
PRISON that frees us from KARMA.


Virya: -| understand, Comrade. But do these Noological Traits participate in
woman and man equally?


Virya Berserkr: -No doubt about it! In the case of the woman even more
because she is the bearer from the beginning of that GRAL BLOOD, when she
was a GODDESS, or later as VIRGIN OF AGARTHA and at the end as LADY.
But the Virya has a characteristic that distinguishes her over the man is her
decision, when she decides NOTHING STOPS HER, and she rides on her
WINGED PEGASUS as ARMED LADY, as ARTEMIA, PYRENA, ATHENA, etc.
The feminine spirit is a JEWEL carrying in its noological image the SYMBOL OF
ORIGIN, that is why the SIDDHAS TRAITORS on the woman applied all their
power to neutralize in that MICROCOSM that UNCREATED SIGN that she
carries. Comrade, the SIDDHAS TRAITORS apply on her all their power and
the CULTURE loaded with that sexed EROS is based from the beginning on
DEGRADING HER MATRIX, because in her is the BLACK BLOOD, because
she can give birth to CHILDREN OF STONE. Therefore the feminine spirit as
LADY has in her AESTHETIC immanence the INFINITE POLE and let us
understand that when | refer to AESTHETICS | am not referring to the
aesthetics of the form but to the BEING of the woman. Therefore in MAN this
POWER is REAL in the HYPERBORNE MAN when he_ understands
noologically the PRESENCE of her as LADY, AS VIRGIN OF AGARTHA or as
PYRENE GODDESS. More

comrade, in the STICK of the microcosm of man, is his WEAKNESS, there lies
his HEEL OF AQUILES, which is no longer in the FEET, it has moved to the
HEART, understand comrade, there in that BLEEDING HEART is where the
LOVE ARCHETAGE nests, represented in that HUMANIST CHRISTIANISM,
there the SERPENT nests, in the unconscious of man as ANIMA and in the
unconscious of the woman as ANIMUS. Always the MAN as KNIGHT or the
woman as LADY has the PRESENCE in his noological immanence the SIGN
OF THE ORIGIN, but for that he must clarify the presence of HIM, or of HER in
the EROS that is the CAUSE OF


101


REVERSAL OF THE SPHERE SPIRIT AND THE ESSENCE OF CHAINING.


Virya: -| understand the PRESENCE of the forms that she or he acquires in the
UNCONSCIOUS of the Virya or the Virya. But comrade, where are these forms
of his or her presence in the ontological being of the Virya, where does it lie?


Virya Berserkr: -More comrade, excuse me, it is more complex the trap,
following the example of Nimrod studied we find that the microcosm as a KEY
has a stronger lock after the TRAITOR SIDDHAS intervened the CREATION
theme that we have analyzed in the text THE BLOOD OF THE Virya; because
in the case of man the ROOT OF ENGAGEMENT lies in the PALETON, in the
anatomical support of his biological body that undoubtedly manifests itself in the
TOTALITY OF THE PSYCHICAS of the sleeping Pasu or Virya. The FOOT
symbolically represents one of the ontic matrices that is in the Caracol design
from the beginning: That of the FISH and this being of the animal kingdom
participates from the beginning of time in the WATERS of the MACROCOSMIC
INCOSCIENT where the UNIVERSAL MONADA was generated that gave real
existence to the biological body, therefore the PASU comes from that evolution,
from the FISH and from it the REPTILE becomes but by the MAMMIFERO is
that the EVOLUTION and concretion of the Matrix Pasu is achieved. For that
reason the SIDDHAS altered the order of the microcosm and its designs, and it
is no longer in the FEET because it remembers that there in that end is a
RIGHT ANGLE reason for which many LUDIC activities are executed with the
FEET, in general the SPORTS and the DANCES are sciences that are based
on the MASTERY OF THAT RIGHT ANGLE of that KEY that allows us to
RECORT TIME. More in the Fundamentals of HYPERBORNE WISDOM Nimrod
explains about those languages. What | want to mean is that the TRAITOR
SIDDHAS modified and altered that NATURAL ORDER of the KEY structured in
the biological body and moved the HEEL OF AQUILES that was in the FEET to
the HEART.(AQUILES, dies pierced by an ARROW in the HEEL, in the HEEL
was his weakness but in reality it is LOVE that kills the HERO) because the
RIGHT ANGLE OF THE FEET the conscious control of the same by means of
certain techniques as the RUNE YOGA allows to enter to the understanding of
the RIGHT ANGLE OF THE HANDS and to the RIGHT ANGLE of the IDEAN
CAVERN, WHERE THE SECRET EXIT TO THE SELBST IS FOUND.

If we continue within this mythological and allegorical analysis of the
mythological sphere of the VIRYA, comrade, we will understand that when the
EROS, which is in the sex but which sinks in the root of the FEET, is intervened,
the power is transferred from the PALETON to the TIJA, and in it is the
archetypal god HYPNOS, representative of the traitor Siddhas, participant of the
snail and serpent design. Thus, comrade, the TIJA embraces the whole KEY
and in it is the Deceit, its languages and sounds structured in the HEART,
resound from the FEET to the BRAIN, and it is there where the NARCOTIC
POISON OF THE SERPENT is. In the TIJA, by the mystery of LOVE the EGO
is put to sleep, it is chained and quickly displaced to the SECRET CHAMBER of
the TIJA, and once imprisoned in that PRISON, (the heart possesses CAVES is
analogous to the BRAIN) the door of the ASA and of the PALETON closes and
the SPIRIT is definitively confined to the TIJA.


102


The secret comrade is that while the "I" is chained to the CONSCIOUS
SUBJECT bythe ASA of the KEY, it is quickly PRISONED IN THE SHAFT in
the HEART that is to say in the SACRED SYMBOLS OF CHANG SHAMABALA.
The KEY PALLET is TURNED when the Virya is chained inside the microcosm
in each new reincarnation, because they have since they imposed the
SHAMBALIC INITIATIONS the KEYS OF THE KINGDOM. As the microcosm is
a KEY they can when disincarnating the pasu, erase all vestige of the SYMBOL
OF THE KINGDOM, inexorably this subject is only understood by comrades like
you, the VIRYA BERSERKR and Nimrod is specific. | will try to be more precise
within the instructions of Comrade ETERNAL.

When the enchainment takes place, the sphere spirit is trapped in a biological
body that as | explained is a KEY, in it is HELD ALL THE ONTIC DESIGN OF
THE PASU. The essential difference is that the Virya by itself can never enter to
move from the ASA to the PALETON because the TRAITOR SIDDHAS from the
TIJA TURN the PALETON and imprison in the HEART at the middle end of the
vital energies of the biological body the CHAINED ESIRITU. While we KNOW
PERFECTLY that the SACRED SYMBOLS are in the archetypal memory or
brain, the NUMEROUS affect of these arguments SIT in the HEART and the
same is the essence of deception.

The ROOT of the BEING OF PASU sinks in the UNCONSCIOUS specifically
"its being in itself" participates in the AFFECTIVE sphere, therefore it is the
HUMAN HEART, it is the FORM THAT PREDETERMINATES THE BEING
PASU of the Virya.

lost. That is why humanity and specifically the Virya erroneously seeks the
PRESENCE OF HER or HIM in the HEART, falling into the prison of the sacred
symbols that sustain the MYTHS AND FANTASIES that put us to sleep in the
three extremes of MOTHER BINATH or FATHER ENHIL, in HYPNOS,
extremes that go from LOVE to PASSION to PROCREATION and finally to
PERVERSION, or simply to strictly comply with the PLAN to follow the ELIX
path WITHOUT EVER LEAVING IT.


Virya: -l understand, comrade, and if you will allow me to make an
understanding. That is why transmutation allows us to resign that TURNING, to
revert the TURNING with the power of SWASTIC. Now | understand this
mystery, because even though the BIOLOGICAL BODY IS A KEY SHAPED
LABYRINTH and in the

In the beginning they TURNED the PALETON, now as Virya BERSERKR is the
TRUE SELF a SWASTIC. | understand why the delusion is RESIGNED with the
PRESENCE of the GRAL, that is why it was deposited by the SIDDHAS OF
AGRTHA in the VALPLADS, but the lost virya no longer sees the GRAL, but
comrade | know that the GRAL is derived by mutilation of the SYMBOL OF
ORIGIN, and this in the world is represented in the HYPERBORNE OBLIC
SWASTIC, that is why only when | understood that uncreated sign | was able to
be a VIRYA BERSERKR.


Virya Berserkr: -you are correct because although the best way to define the
spirit is to use the analogy of the SPIRIT SPHERE as Nimrod does, the FLIGHT
to the SELBST is determined by that UNCREATED TURN that participates of
the sacred HYPERBORNE SWASTIC. If the Virya (Volume seven of the
Fundamentals), succeeds in transcending the semantic and semiotic limits of
the


103


ESWASTIC, the Virya enters the HEROIC MYSTIC of the SIDDHAS of
AGARTHA and as you comrade access to your initiation, INCIATIC
AWAKENING that allowed you to ARM YOURSELF WITH THE SIEG
INCREATED RUNES,

TIR AND HAGAL, and DESCEND upon your microcosm. By linking yourself
charismatically with the power of the Siddhas of Agartha you received upon
seeing the SECRET EXIT of the IDEAN CAVERNA, the force of the SELBST
and from it emanated the VRIL, with that power by your HEROIC VALOR you
entered the TIJA armed, killed the warm heart of carnal passion DESTROYED
the TIJA and took possession of the PALETON.

Understand comrade, this act of TOTAL WAR allows the body to be inverted
and converted into VRAX MATERIAL, to gain immortality in ETERNITY. That is
why the Virya Berserkr FOUNDS HIS BEING, HIS SENSES IN THE ICE AND
THE FIRE of the INCREATED RUNES, when

Its forces are POSITIONED ON THE TRUE SELF, they open that uncreated
bridge, INFINITE STAIRWAY to the SELBST, to the ORIGIN. The APOLINE
FRIALDITY that participates in the WARRIOR ETHICS, that COLD FIRE
coming from the VRIL ENTERS into its REPTILIAN BLOOD which is where the
TRUE SELF settles to give DEATH TO THE WARM BLOOD, to the forms of the
ANIMUS, to the feminine aspect of the unconscious in the Virya and the
opposite of the ANIMUS in the Virya.


Virya: -lf so, | understand why we live on that COLD blood. Now comrade: in
each Chakra there is a lock function deposited in that anima or animus that
governs the pairs of opposites that give constitution to the EROS, that
determines us in a GENDER participants of those two bloods of the microcosm.
Well | understand everything, and | know why | have suppressed that warm
blood, but how is that cold blood, reptilian blood, re-signified to enter the
GENERAL BLOOD?


Virya Berserkr: -Well comrade that resignation of that COLD REPTILIAN
BLOOD is understood when the HOT BREED is re-signified, because we must
understand that the SIGN OF ORIGIN entered the HOT BLOOD BY THAT
COLD BLOOD participated from the beginning in the BLOOD OF THE
SIDDHAS. Although the SIGN OF ORIGIN is deposited in the warm blood of the
lost Virya, it is only a PALE REFLECTION because the RIGHT ANGLES were
deformed, in such a way that in the immanence of the psychological "I" it is
impossible to see that ANGLE, that SECRET OPENING, only by accessing the
REPTILIAN COLD BLOOD, it is possible to feel and remember again the
ORIGIN, to understand the SACRED SYMBOL OF THE VIRYA. But this
requires a greater understanding that we will analyze soon, because it is not
convenient for the Virya to be located for a long time in his REPTILIAN BLOOD,
he must understand comrade that once he enters it, he must EXIT THROUGH
THE CRESTA OF THE VRIL and enter the GENERAL BLOOD of the VIRYA
BERSERKR.

But let us not get ahead of ourselves, comrade, let us go by parts, let us
continue to maintain ORDER because only within ORDER can TIME be
defeated, as General Peron once affirmed. THE HYPERBOREOUS WARRIOR
must be a HERO if he intends to re-sign the EROS and escape from the prison
of the BLOOD PASU. But it is important to understand that by having that
reference by the blood


104


The "infinite" of the demiurge or of the soul and then of the spirit) and by
participating in the eternal, you see everything transversally by isolating the "I"
in the Selbst. Noological perspective that allows us to observe from "ABOVE",
not from inside or outside.

This transversal perspective is the product of this over time of the world and of
the microcosm allows you to understand that hot blood and animal passion as
the engine of illusion, of the BEING of LIFE. That is why the sinarch and his
initiations LOOK with LOVE into the MICROCOSM and worship with BEAUTY
the OUTSIDE of the MACROCOSM.

The sinarca initiations or any SACERDOTAL dogma instruct to MEDITATE IN
THE INSIDE, they affirm the Virya lost in the ONTIC DESIGNS and the
deceived minded believe that in the astral, psychic and vital energy that form
the designs that reside in the CAVERS OF THE HEART they will find their
LIBERATION. That search for the SACRED SYMBOLS OF THE HEART within
the Snail and Serpent design, inside the biological body is the root,
(sex/spine/brain) of the power that will lead them to the "enlightenment", to the
entelechy Manu. And comrade, we know well from the teachings of the
SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA what it means for the Hyperborean Virya to fall into
these traps, simply his perdition. There you have the worst mistake, moreover,
the whole secret of the initiations of the Universal White Fraternity governed by
the TRAITOR SIDDHAS FROM CHANG SHAMBALA, is based on
MEDITATION, on PRAYER, on the search to weave the destiny in the rings of
the TIJA, in the HEART, because only through the SACRED SONGS coming
from the TIJA one can access the sacred temples of CHANG SHAMBALA.

WE, COMRADE, THE HYPERBOREAN INITIATES ONLY DESCEND TO THE
MICROCOSM TO DESTROY, TO BREAK THE SHANK AND TAKE
POSSESSION OF THE KEY THAT ALLOWS US TO TRANSMUTE MATTER
INTO VRAJA, AND AFTER THAT TO GO OUT THROUGH THE HANDLE TO
THE CREST OF THE VRIL, THROUGH THE OCULUS TO ENTER THE EHRE
SPHERE, TO THE GENERAL BLOOD OF THE SIDDHA BERSERKR.
Returning to the beginning of your question, of course there are locks in each
chakra of the microcosm, analogous to it these locks are in all the macrocosm,
therefore the singularity unfolds in that pair of opposites that is present in every
entity of the creation and in the MICROCOSM being an_ entity
DIFFERENTIATED first by the DEMIURGO and then by the SIDDHAS OF
CHANG SHAMABALA, contains in the ELIX sense of its astral, psychic and vital
energies that DOUBLE TURN which, as we indicated above, affirms and
CLOSES the GATE, determines the SOUL over the SPIRIT, to the INFINITUDE
first of the demiurge and today in this time of the KALI YUGA to the
INFINITUDE of Chang Shambala, of the KALA-CHAKRA KEY, as the way
leading to liberation. It is the transcendent time of the microcosm and the
macrocosm sustained by the MOTHER BINAH AND THE FATHER ENHIL,
which affirms the LIFE QUALITY and the TIME OF THE WORLD, where the
SOUL of the lost Virya rests and that time of the KALA-CHAKRA is the ROOT
OF THE TREE OF GOOD AND EVIL, where the Virya is CRUSIFIED. Only the
TRUTH LIBERATES and our WISDOM and HISTORY is founded upon it, and it
has no roots in the time of the world as the truth held by the Universal White
Brotherhood of Golen priests and the MASON oligarchs. More comrade of


105


This is not worth talking about because IMROD instructs him and VIRYA
BERSERKR understands everything.


Virya: "Sure comrade, because | am seeing everything.... And as for the Selbst,
as you point out, | can see it from above and we ONLY ENTER it when we
understand the inside, through the gnosis of the INFINITE SELF, and that force
that transmutes the will into PURE VALUE is what allowed me to descend and
to SPLIT the STRIP, to take hold of the paleton with which | could TURN and
see the RIGHT ANGLE, | understood everything perfectly. That power came
from the PARACLITE from the OUTSIDE, and | felt it in my blood, when |
received that VOLITIVE FORCE coming from my INFINITE SELF, | was able to
enter it, descend to the TIJA and DESTROY it and then take possession of the
paleton and with it open the door that allowed me to enter the right angle of the
ASA and come out victorious, to be a NOOLOGICAL GEURREROUS. Now,
comrade, | have

used the dry way, the STRATEGIC OPPOSITION, Comrade What is the most
correct way?


Virya Berserkr: - Well we have those two ways which are both leading to the
SELBST. Only that descending to kill the DRAGON and its Serpent heads
requires a WELL PLANNED STRATEGIC, because in it is at stake LIFE AND
DEATH. That is why NIMROD and its texts are the semantic way and the
Hyperborean Yoga carries that PONTONICS, but it is the Virya who decides
which is the most correct, allows it to smooth out, to shorten the distances to the
SELBST, he can use the DRY WAY or the WET WAY, but for that he must
always have a HEROIC AND WARRIOR ETHICS. We must understand that
LIBERATION is a Gnostic COSNTRUCTION and we must INSTRUCT
ourselves in the science of WAR.

Comrade, beyond the path that is chosen, the Virya should not DOUBT and it is
there where the VIRYA should not STOP, after being instructed to receive the
first hyperborean initiation that requires the mastery of the SEMANTICS OF
HYPERBORNE WISDOM, he can enter the two WAYS, either the dry or the
wet, but as long as that doubt has been dissolved with the power of the RUNES
and that doubt does not exist, he can enter the WET path. That is why the
SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA our DIVINE ANTEPASTS charismatically enter us to
the first initiation by the WAY of STRATEGIC OPPOSITION, subject that is in
the FUNDAMENTALS and that in the text of the EIGHT INFINITY (text that is
still under revision) is analyzed. First one must transcend the sacred symbols
and overcome the confrontation with the ESWASTIC, if this is possible, nothing
is IMPOSSIBLE FOR THE VIRYA BERSERKR. This interesting initiatory
experience that takes us to the FIRST HYPERBORNE INITIATION is "almost"
unconscious, and it is there when we transcend its semiotics by the dry way we
enter from the HYPERBORNE BLOOD, only then we can see the STRETEGY
that allows us to understand the secret exit to the ORIGIN, There is the
beginning and the end, first in the dry way, then we can enter the wet way, but
both require to have the cold fire in the blood, to be part of a GELID WAY, a
path built on an INFINITE BRIDGE of ICE to the ORIGIN. You understand me
comrade...


106


Virya: -Yes, comrade, perfectly, and | know that this is the order with which |
have been resigning the deception, it is almost impossible to alter them, the
instructive of the Siddhas of Agartha is the correct way with which we can
strategically re-sign the Soul Subject. | know that the psychic designs of the
microcosm are activated chronologically and that is inevitable, that is why it is
fundamental to enter the ODAL ARCHEMONA to occupy the TAU CENTER
following the correct steps, | know that outside the STRATEGIC OPPOSITION
every path is a risk.

Comrade, doesn't this ORDER of ROUND OPPOSITION have to do with the
order arranged in the microcosm by the bijas and archetypes, in the MAMMAL
AND REPTILIAN BLOODS?


Virya Berserkr: -Yes. You must understand that the order is established by the
ontic matrices of the snail design with which the microcosm was built, with
which the BIJAS and the ARCHETYPES were activated and gave life to the
KALACHAKRA KEY within the biological body. Thus, the HYPERBORAL
SCIENCES instruct us not to awaken the KUNDALINI SERPENT, that is
why the WET WAY is a risk if the Virya is NOT ARMED, THYRODAL KNIGHT.
Cutting the STRIP has to do with re-assigning sex and love, killing the opposites
or inverting the psychological duality that affirms the squaring of the gender, the
bipartition of the | in the anima or animus, it is in that initiatory instance where
the BEING dies, the ONTOS OF THE PSYCHOLOGICAL SELF and the TRUE
SELF acquires power, but in that first initiation you kill your warm mammalian
blood but keep in mind that she is always in HIS PRESENCE as image of her or
of him.

The FEMALE MATRIX and the MALE MATRIX (uterus and ovaries, and
prostate and testicles), as shown in the text of the Crystal Books volume I, the
archetypal singularity that supports it in the Snail design, its ENERGIES TURN
FORMING ITS ARCHETYPICAL ASTRAL POWER A VORTICE

SPIRAL from which emanates the form of the PAIRS OF OPPOSITES that
affirm the reproductive organs in the biological body. The pasu matrix is situated
at the beginning of time, in the astral and psychic power of the Caracol
design and determines by its pair of opposites the image of the ANIMA in the
masculine microcosm, and the image of the ANIMUS in the masculine
microcosm. This is why the ENCADENMENT has its roots in HIS PRESENCE,
represented in the archetypal image of LOVE, the mystery of the fall through
A-MORT, by the search to RECOVER HIS PRESENCE. But comrade, here is
the reason for the deception and why the WET WAY was always promoted by
the lodges of the White Fraternity that proclaim the awakening of KUNDALINI,
of the fire that is deposited in Kundalini, in the sexual energy. It is only important
to enter the SELBST and from there look inward from the ODAL ARCHEMONA
to comprehend that this SOLAR FIRE or LUNAR COLD (lunar cold, proper to
the priest who adores the GOAT MALE) sustains all the PASSION OF LOVE
that the PASU feels for CREATION. Animal passion represented in the
MOTHER BINAHT, the one who LIVES and sustains with her LOVE the
creation, which the pasu with his LOVE admires her, worships HER as VIRGIN
OF PAIN, to the ONE as FATHER ENHIL.

That archetypal image that biologically lies in the SEX of passion


107


animal, in the MATRIX OF SEX (the womb, the uterus is a CAVERN), is from
the beginning of the ends in the design of the Snail and at the end of its end in
the design of the Serpent. In the ARCHETYPICAL MEMORY, in its astral and
psychic power constituted in the BRAIN and in its OPPOSITE the MATRIX,
between both organs or systems is the whole real system that constitutes the
biological body, SEX AND BRAIN, In them is the SECRET CAVERN or
PLATONIC CAVERN, the LABYRINTH is woven between them (the Sinarca
initiates deformed the skull like the Egyptian pharaohs, to assimilate themselves
to the reptile image of the traitor Siddhas and to close the secret exit of the
idean cavern).

Well, comrade, you must understand why the WET WAY is risky without having
understood the DRY WAY of STRATEGIC OPPOSITION. Applying the allegory
of the Kalachakra key, we know that in the PALETON (sex is the sign of pain
and there lies the snail design) and in the ASA (in the skull, lies the sign of
origin, the chained ego and on it the uncreated runes) is the STRAW, and from
the beginning the ONE uses both ends of the serpent to chain us. This is the
secret that is revealed in the text the BLOOD OF THE VIRYA, and that we have
been discussing both in this conversation. It is the TRAITOR SIDDHAS who
affirmed the TIJA over the ASA and the PALETON, by intervening in the
creation, and determining the ANIMAL EVOLUTION OF THE PASU. The TIJA
which unites by the middle term these two ontic MATRIXES of the Microcosm is
the ROOT OF THE TREE OF ILLUSION. It is the TIJA that founds the MATRIX
OF ILLUSION and it represents the image of the LABYRINTH, and its location
is in the HEART, not in the SEX nor in the BRAIN. That is why one of the most
cryptic sacred images is that of the BLOODY HEART OF JESUS, this means
that the TRAITOR SIDDHAS RESIDE IN THE HUMAN HEART and has the
power over that ORGAN. It is by its middle term, by the CENTER of the
extremes where HIPNOS is found, its HYPNOTIC POWER lies in the HEART of
the Pasu, it is its archetypal power that most puts the lost Virya to sleep, there
underlie the paths of LOVE, the spiral forms of the serpent that sustains and
keeps the EGO (spirit sphere) chained to the ontic quadrature of the
unconscious, but this mandala makes the lost Virya or the lost Self believe in
the GENDER, (in the awakening of the sexual energy or Kundalini), when in
reality to transcend the BIOLOGICAL GENDER is to enter the NOOLOGICAL
GENDER to the LOYAL SHIDDA SPECIES, where the VIRYA IS A SIDDHA.
Because when the Virya awakens he is an ETERNAL SPECIES outside of all
created species and enters the SPECIES of WARRIORS OF THE
UNCREATED SPIRIT, the Virya as a SIDDHA is MALE and the Virya is
FEMALE, he joins the side of the SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA. Understand
comrade.


Virya: -Yes, totally, that is why the lost pasu or Virya remains trapped in the
reality of gender, his ANIMAL being, being trapped in that QUADRATURE, in
that primitive binary form (Yin and Yan, masculine feminine, male and female)
of the microcosm, every day he affirms himself more and more in the confusion
of gender. This is evident today, that is why the perversion of the libido,
homosexuality or unbridled hunger, the hermaphroditism that masculinizes the
woman who is the victim of her animus and feminine the man who is the victim
of his animus, is the cause of the perversion of the libido.


108


of its anima. But in the center of that mandala affirmed in the Anahata Chakra is
where lies the image of the A-MOR that leads to PASSION, and its multiple
forms of pairs of opposites that affirms in the Self the LABYRINTH OF MAYA.
Thus in the TIJA of the heart is the Archetypal Mother and Father, all the pairs
of opposites that generate the reproductive organs in the biological body, root of
the animal passion, of the reason of the Pasu being. Located in the center of the
EYE of YOD, on an INDICERNIBLE POINT is the WILL OF HIM, represented in
the image of the MOTHER-FATHER, which is ONE and both at the same time,
which give consistency to the gender and are the archetypal motors of these
two images of pairs of unconscious opposites that totally determine the destiny
and the illusion of the gender of the lost Virya.

COMRADE, WHAT | UNDERSTAND IS THAT ALL THIS ILLUSION THAT
LEADS US BY PASSION TO THE DREAM DISSOLVES WITH WILL AND
COURAGE AND THIS DRAMA DISAPPEARS BEFORE THE POWER OF THE
RUNE WHICH IS THE TRUTH THAT FREES THE VIRYA FROM PAIN.


Virya Berserkr: -You are correct, it is true, to see into the microcosm is to see
the trap. Every point that the traitors use from the "outside" to handle
emergencies, and every point or archetype that the Demiurge uses from the
inside to operate the stabilizing function of the design, is established in that
presence of him and her in the sex or in the heart and therein lies the error and
the trap from which only the bravest escape. Every time you locate the trap
outside is a clue, undoubtedly, to see the REAL sphere of her and him, is to
UNDERSTAND HIS PRESENCE AS A LADY OR ALADY OF HIM.

GODDESS AS WARRIOR OR GOD in the inside and in the INFINITE POLE
that she represents. BUT COMRADE YOU ARE RIGHT WITH COURAGE ALL
IS DISINTEGATED. But comrade, this is an absolute truth: only in this way the
shadow sphere is resigned, and to resign that which IS NOT, is to
comprehensively affirm its PRESENCE THAT IS, it allows you to re-signify the
quadrangularity and you can turn internally and see the RUNE ANGULARITY
with which the GRAL BLOOD of the Virya Berserkr is CONSTRUCTED. Indeed,
comrade, the unconscious has its manifestation in the pairs of opposites,
EVERYTHING is a TRAP, the biological structure is like a machine that drags
us in time and within its time the "I" is subjected. ONLY WITH THE RUNES THE
TIME IS RESIGNED.


Virya: "Yes, comrade, the only certain path to the ETERNAL SPIRIT is
manifested in the power that enters through the INCREATED RUNES and
affirms itself on the WILL and the VALUE of the Virya, but it is necessary to
realize this. It is fundamental to understand that there is no real resignation
without the POWER OF THE INCREATED RUNES, but one must resign the
runic semiotics with which you managed to remove the influence of finite time
and its emergences of OPPOSITE PAIRS in you, only in this way you manage
to participate in the CURRENT INFINITE, to reach the TRUTH BARE OF
YOURSELF, to have the COLD FIRE of the HAGAL rune.

in your blood, you understand, comrade.

That FORCE THAT COMES FROM YOURSELF, THAT IS IN YOU, ON YOU,
AND THAT IS PART OF THE ETERNAL THAT IS IN YOU, IS THE POWER
THAT WILL

If you discover the uncreated runes you simply discover yourself, your INFINITE
SELF and nothing will ever determine your ETERNAL WILL.


109


| perfectly understand this force that is beyond the runic semiotics, it affirms
itself as an image in the conscious subject that participates in the psychological
self. In other words, an isolated, true "I", which does not yet participate in the
infinite because it has not yet bridged that distance, cannot resign that semiotic,
its symbolic forms because it is the psychic subject who sees and projects the
archetypal runes. But does not the image of the rune, the runic sign, project its
immanence the mysticism of the Infinite?


Virya Berserkr: -Nimrod is precise, and | consider comrade that in his texts is
the answer. But to expand | will tell you that semiotics is for the psychological |,
in fact, one more sign, and that MYSTIC to which you refer is only EMERGING
IN THE WORLD in the semiotic form of the SACRED HYPERBORNE
SWASTIC, also in the GUIBUR RUNE. It alone carries that POWER, that is why
it is the ETERNAL SYMBOL that semiotically represents the GRAL deposited
by the SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA in the Valplads. It is the sacred SWASTIC the
first thing that the HYPERBOREAL INITIATE sees and if its uncreated truth is
understood, the Loyal SIDDHAS PROCEED TO DISINTEGRATE THE SNAIL
DESIGN in the astral blood of the Virya. Undoubtedly the RUNES POSSESS A
POWER IN THEIR SEMIOTIC IMMANENCE, but only by taking conscious
possession of them by the gnostic comprehension of the HYPERBORNE
SWASTIC, the VIRYA IS LIBERATED. In fact, by affirming the uncreated runes,
with the power of the RUNE, the DOUBT is disintegrated.

For example, with the uncreated power of the rune SIEG, ray coming from the
uncreated, the psychological "I" is killed and with the double rune SIEG, the
INFINITE HEDGE is built, its semiotics serves in the Hedge Function to build
the ODAL ARCHEMONA where the "I" is ISOLATED. Resigning this semiotics
is to enter the real runic experience of the SACRED SWASTIC, and through it
one enters the GNOSTIC WAY of STRATEGIC OPPOSITION, the WARRIOR
ETHICS. This form that predetermines the being of the Virya Berserkr causes
the resignation of the ontic matrices of the snail designs and allows the Virya to
seize the rune GUIBUR, the trident of Neptune and the rune TYR, the sword of
Wotan, weapons with which the ontic matrices of the design of the Serpent are
disintegrated.


Virya: - Enlightening comrade! Could it be that by not affirming archetypal
runes, it is easier for the Loyal Siddhas to resign the ontic matrices of the snail
designs? Because | know by revelation, that we only enter the ODAL
ARCHEMONA when we overcome the ESWASTIC, and we understand its
double TURNING and although we are SELF CHOSEN, being unconscious of
the displacement that we are unchaining in the ELIX Path, in reality it is the
LINEAGE OF OUR HYPERBOREAL ANCESTRALS participating of

our SIGN OF ORIGIN that allows us to RE-SIGN the ontic matrices of the Snail
design. In short, it is the INFINITE SELF that from the ORIGIN guides us to the
TRUTH and grants us the POWER to disintegrate the astral and psychic power
of the HEBREW ARCHITAGE and its MANIFESTATION in the most numinous
sacred symbol the JESUS ARCHITAGE; image that is neither more nor less
that represents the DEMIURGO. Well comrade, | understand that this is yes, |
know perfectly well that it is the Loyal SIDDHAS that give us the power to
disintegrate the astral and psychic power of the HEBREW ARCHITAGE and its
MANIFESTATION in the most numinous sacred symbol the JESUS
ARCHITAGE; image that is neither more nor less that represents the
DEMIURGO.


110


the spiritual forces, the WILL to re-assign the Caracol design, plus
Is the Serpent's design re-assigned with VALUE by Virya?


Virya Berserkr: -Yes you are right, the TRUE SELF ISOLATED from the animic
subject affirms the UNCREATED runes and confronts with will the SACRED
ESVASTIC, for the Loyal Siddhas it is easier to resign the CARACOL DESIGN,
if the Virya has WILL but also VALOR, therefore it is fundamental first to have a
great WILL because that force moves us to seek the truth and to enter the
SACRED SYMBOLS that are from the beginning in the ontogenesis of the
being, of the delusion, symbols that participate of all those pairs of opposites
represented in the archetypal memory in the MATRIX MANU of the lost Pasu
or Virya.
The demiurgic designs represented in the Bijas and in the 10 macrocosmic
archetypes, are the formative matrices of everythingcreated, sustainthe
REAL KALACHAKRA SYSTEM, Macrocosmic This is well studied in the
foundations of Nimrod. But, | reiterate that KEY determines all the innate
registers of the biological body, More listen with your inner ear, with your
General blood. Kill the WARM HEART, where the HOT BLOOD nests,
represented in its multiplearchetypal arguments, disintegrate that form
thatthe deception acquires in youGo through the LABRELIX of your being above
and find the images of which the EYE OF YOD participates where the
archetypal potency of the mother Binaht and the father Enhil underlies, resign
RUNICALLY THEIR ARGUMENTS, each PASSION that participates of them or
sustains the illusion of the PERSONALITY and you will LIBERATE yourself.
THE enchainment is by a mystery of was affirmed just in the INSTANT
encounter where the LOVE of the ANIMAL PASSION prevailed, it was placed in
that instant, bythe delusion of the LOVE sustained in the BEAUTY
aspect. Both aspects are conjugated in the ENGAGEMENT, by the poisoned
arrow launched byCUPIDO, bythe carnal passion and the PLACER,

the HUNGER of the EROS the ENCHANTMENT is unchained and the
ENCHANTMENT technically happens as Nimrod affirms. The A-MOR,
participant of the PASSION for SEX, leads in that SUPREME INSTANT to the
DREAM that generates that collision of A-MOR that places them in the
BEGINNING OF TIME. But that principle of time that discharges the
INFINITUDE of the true A-MORT, by the TRAITORY OF THE SIDDHAS and
the power of the KALACHAKRA KEY, they altered that INFINITUDE of the
ETERNAL A-MOT by the INFINITUDE of the A-MOR that affirms the passion
that sustains from CHANG SHAMBALA the TRAITOR SIDDHAS.
That LOVE which is from the beginning in the genetic key altered by the
traitorous Siddhas, which is like a degraded copy of the A-MORT which is from
before the beginning in the SPIRIT of the chained ETERNAL SELF, is what
allows it to be unleashed in the ACT OF LOVE, the first MATRIX image of the
ENCADENMENT by the SIGN OF ORIGIN. In that moment of PASSIONAL A-
MOR the three Aspects of the Demiurge, the eye of Yod, are affirmed and the
whole design and trap unfolds. Then it gives way to Mother Binah and in her is
already the TIJA, the power of the traitor Siddhas from the outside determining
the inside. Well, comrade, this subject is very complex, that is why it is
fundamental to enter the WAY OF STRATEGIC OPPOSITION and when we
affirm ourselves in HYPERBORNE WISDOM never to sit in two CHAIRS AT
THE SAME TIME, to live as an AWAKENED VIRYA in


111


WATCH OUT, always ALERT because the KILLER FIST is always ready for the
one who falls asleep in the ENCHANTMENT OF MAYA.


Virya: -Such a deception comrade and totally hidden, everything is passion,
eroticized feeling that only leads to deception.


Virya Berserkr: -That is why the last thing we must face is the Face of the One,
which is to fight THEM, if we are ARMED WITH THE UNCREATED RUNES,
otherwise it is an impossibility. ARMED WITH THE POWER OF THE RUNES
we have the WILL and the Courage to resign, to disintegrate the TIJA, the
HEART, the LOVE ASPECT represented in multiple forms such as: the
FAMILY ARCHETYPE, etc. THE ARMED VIRYA KNIGHT

TIRODAL has the power to trace back the blood and kill the archetypal Father
and Mother, to reach runically to the very end, to the beginning of our Atom
gravis components of the microcosm, of the mandala being and its center, to
reach the monad, the beginning and the end and to resign it ALL and be FREE
AT THE ORIGIN,

. Understand comrade, only the VIRYA BERSERKR can TAKE HEAVEN BY
ASSAULT, like the great NIMROD, as did the great pontiffs in history:
ALEXANDER THE GREAT, JULIUS CAESAR, AUGUSTUS, NAPOLEON.

And THE GREATEST OF ALL ADOLPH HITLER, is simply a task for HEROES.
That is why the GRAL is always present, a ray of infinite Light that from the
Origin is placed on the center of the world; it is the GRAL that gives us the
INFINITE VALUE to enter the Origin. With the uncreated Light coming from
VENUS, the accursed SIGN OF PAIN is eliminated and all the ontic and cultural
tapasigns are torn apart, broken the STRIP, SPLIT IN HALF, the pairs of
opposites disintegrate and the Virya SPIRIT IS VICTORY!


Virya: -Comrade, allow me to express myself, if | am wrong, correct me. This
DEMIURGICAL LOGOS mantra, represented in the SIGN OF PAIN is activated
in the TIJA, participant of the microcosm, but from the OUTSIDE, from the
LABYRINTH, it is only lived in the SPIRAL, in the relations of meaning with the
lost Virya and the entities, structured at the same time isotropic and anisotropic
at the same time, in this spiral labyrinth, the lost Ego sinks in the deepest
shadow sphere, where the archetypal power of EROS lies, supported by
HYPNOS and TANATOS of the totality of the psychic sphere and the inverted
universal archetypes. EROS by Hypnos unfolds in all the paths of MAYA (Elix or
Labrelix), a movement that affirms over the EGO the serpent and its designs, by
the quadrature of the unconscious, the LABYRINTH and within the labyrinth the
lost Virya. In its paths are the archetypes that are actualized in the quadrature
itself, therefore the Virya IS A LOST BEING, subjected to the law of the
LABYRINTH, lives on an ISLAND, surrounded by an OCEAN of DEEP
UNCONSCIOUSNESS. Thus it creates images in the mind, full of semantic
contents that mean nothing, and the serpent, in its triform function, and reason
structure everything, give life to that ISLAND represented in the LABYRINTH.
The serpent moves everything, moves the Virya to the future added in the time
of the world, drives the psychic and vital energy towards the spheres of light,
affective, rational and consciousness,


112


This is the product of being trapped in the LABYRINTH which is what gives
consistency to BEING.

For this reason | understand comrade that only by disintegrating that
LABYRINTH that the DEMIURGH and by this END the SIDDHAS TRAITORS
OF CHANG SHAMABALA affirm from the BEGINNING, the Virya can look
OBLICUALLY, (he leaves the archetypes that affirm in the microcosm the
illusion as REAL of LABYRINTH) and find internally in his IDEAN CAVERNA
the SECRET EXIT, the OCCULUM that enters him to the SELBST. From the
SELBST everything is understood, even the Serpent and the Virya realizes that
everything is DEMIURGICAL UNCONSCIOUSNESS, VITAL SPHERAL LIFE,
he understands that the SELBST is the SELBST.

that behind the quadrature that governs time and space where the "world" is
sustained, there is the Deceit that sustains everything, you will discover the
DEMIURGO AND THE SIDDHAS TRAITORS OF CHANG SHAMBALA.

| understand perfectly well that they hold the LABYRINTH from their EVIL CITY
and all the metaphysical space of the astral field that predetermines the
MACROCOSMIC SNAIL design, the IMMOBILE BEING of creation represented
by the SEVEN KINGDOMS OF CREATION, is INTERVENTED by the
DEMONS OF THE KALACHAKRA. It is the PASU with its

The postorative action of sense, which gives movement to the immobile BEING
of creation and the TRAITOR SIDDHAS drive the macro-structures of the
immobile BEING by the DESIGN OF THE MACROCOSMIC SERPENT to the
ENTELEQUIAS.

It is the Pasu, lost Virya that sustains the ILLUSION of the TIJA, that gives life
to the IMMOBILE BEING allowing its MACROSTRUCTURES to unfold to the
FINAL ENTELEQUIA. Without the VIRYA

ENCADENADO all vanishes in the MAHAPRALAYA.

Comrade, | am fully aware that LIBERATION IS AN ACT OF TOTAL WAR
AGAINST THE ENEMIES OF THE LABYRINTH and to TRIUMPH, TO
ACHIEVE VICTORY, ONE MUST BEAT THE WORLD'S WORLD OF PAIN.
Only a VIRYA BERSERKR has the VALOR TO FIGHT.

AGAINST DECEPTION. Comrade, am | correct?


Virya Berserkr: - Comrade excellent understanding. That's right, better
definition impossible, every man and woman, must fight for their FREEDOM and
the sex and gender that actualize the BEING in the LABYRINTH affirms those
images of the 3D, in the Creation, images that PREDETERMINE THE BEING in
the SEEMING, that's why that sense that TIME has of displacement FORWARD
is an appearance that gives REALITY, MOVEMENT TO THE LABYRINTH.
Every time the SERPENT moves, TIME is RECHARGED and the CENTER OF
THE WORLD where the KALACHAKRA KEYSTONE is, the verb of JEHOVAH
SATAN beats in the HEART and in the COLD AND SACRIFICING
CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE SIDDHAS TRAITORS.

They from Chang Shambala weave with the will of the lost Virya the plot of the
destiny of humanity, and in that plot is the weaving of its tragic end. The
macrocosm is a DANCE OF PASSION and that rhythmic displacement is the
BEATING of the HEART OF THE ONE in his WORK and that LOVE is
represented in each union of LOVE between a man and a woman, in that dance
of passion is the chaining and the LIBERATION. DEMIURGIC and SHAMBALIC
DANCE that is RE-SIGNED knowing how to DANCE THE RUNES.
INCREASED, only DANCING TO THE RHYTHM OF THE


113


KALACHACRA if one is a VIRYA BERSERKR, only then one DANCES TO THE
RHYTHM OF THE INCREATED RUNES.


Virya: -| understand and feel that RUNE DANCE, my spirit DANCES THE
UNCREATED RUNES and my Luciferian grace in that HEROIC DANCE, proper
of the hyperborean warrior, transmutes me into a SIDDHA.

More, comrade, what an effort of WILL AND Courage! What an act of heroism
comrade, only the MOST BRAVE dare fight that battle that frees the Virya from
the chains of MAYA. Only the HYPERBORIC HERO can DNAZE THE
UNCREATED RUNES and disintegrate that HOT BLOOD!

MAMIFERA that affirms LOVE and the CARNAL PASSION of the PASU BEING
and that COLD REPTILIAN BLOOD that affirms the POWER of the Virya
BEING.

Gnostically | understand that in order to enter the GRAL BLOOD of the being
the SIDDHA, we must disintegrate that BLOOD and disintegrate its designs with
the RUNE ENTHASIS that the VIRYA BERSERKR feels when DANCING THE
INCREATED RUNES, by that TAU ENTHASIS, we go back to the RIVER of the
GRAL BLOODS OF THE HYPERBORNE LINES.


Virya Berserkr: -CAMARADA, RIVERS OF GREAT BLOOD LEADING US TO
THE ORIGIN.
GREETINGS COMRADE. WILL COURAGE AND VICTORY.


Virya: ETERNAL GREETINGS, COMRADE.


WILL, COURAGE, VRIL AND VICTORY


114


CONTENT THAT IS PART OF THE BOOK:
THE GENERAL BLOOD OF THE VIRYA BERSERKR
IMAGES OF THE KALACHAKRA KEY IN MICROCOSM


Second Dialogue between a Pontiff, Virya Berserkr, and a Hyperborean
Initiate


Virya: Comrade, returning to the Secret of the RIGHT ANGLES that are structured in the
biological body or microcosm, can you instruct me on this very oblique subject?


Virya Berserkr: Well comrade, the more you should open your INNER EAR, because this
subject is part of the NOOLOGICAL PONTONICS of HYPERBORNE YOGA, science that only
the Fuhrer ADOLPH HITLER masters with excellence, and that in this kairos is transmitted to
all the viryas that feel in their BLOOD the power of the THYRODAL and THYRODAL RUNES
OF VICTORY.

Comrade, to be more explicit | will instruct you through the study of two images, which are
an artificial real system that allows to understand semantically and semiotically the GNOSTIC
WISDOM (will and courage) that is needed to be able to execute the Hyperborean noological
Pontonic, to be able to DANCE THE INCREATED RUNES and FLY to the SELBST.


Virya: | understand comrade, and | will try to enter into the Gnostic understanding of your
instruction.


Virya Berserkr: First of all, comrade, | want to repeat to you that only the Great Chief of
the RACE OF THE HYPERBorean SPIRITS, who manifested himself as the Fuhrer, had the
maximum mastery of the noological excellence of the Hyperborean Pontonic; It is Adolf Hitler
who instructs us in the art of DANCING THE UNCREATED RUNES, and it is Nimrod, the
Siddha who in this kairos manifested himself in the person of Luis Felipe Moyano, who
instructs us in the art of mastering the TONGUE OF THE BIRDS, and they, together with the
Loyal Siddhas, instructed us in the art of mastering the TONGUE OF THE BIRDS, instructed a
group of viryas in the science of this WISDOM, a legacy that today we can transmit to all the
comrades of the world, Hyperborean Gnosis, which allows us to understand the SECRET OF
THE CARVED STONE and the ART OF FORGING WEAPONS OF WAR, sciences that we
can learn from them.

The hyperborean nooldgicas that reveal to us the whole History and the Strategies of the
SIDDHAS OF AGARTHA throughout its length and breadth.
Do you understand, Comrade?


Virya: yes, | understand perfectly, and as part of this kairos, and having been instructed in
the Runic Wisdom of Hyperborean Yoga, | understand that only with will and courage does
one enter into the deeper semantics of Hyperborean WISDOM. If | could understand the
SEMANTICS of Nimrod, its FUNDAMENTALS, | know that | can understand everything,
comrade.

| glimpse comrade, by understanding and revelation, that the Spiral Staircase built in this
Strategy by the comrades of OCTIRODAE is the continuity of OCTRA, and be certain,
comrade, that only the TRUTH of the RUNE guides me and with it | have disintegrated all
DOUBT, therefore, | intend to enter the HIGHEST FORM OF KNOWLEDGE, and the


1


115


The highest wisdom is that which deals with the RELEASE OF THE SPIRIT PRISONED IN THE
MICRO AND MACROCOSM.


Virya Berserkr: Well comrade, by the permission of CAPTAIN KIEV, by the power of the
SIDDHA TYR and by the heroic Mystique of the PONTIPHIC Luis Felipe Moyano, today we
have in our hands all the WISDOM; as you affirm comrade, the HIGHEST WISDOM, legacy
that is delivered in this kairos of will, courage and honor by the Loyal SIDDHAS to every virya
that seeks TRUTH and LIBERATION.

Comrade, | will develop in this subject a fragment of this wisdom, | will do it in the most
precise way possible, pay the most due attention and that your SELF, which is WILL and
VALUE, may understand these eternal truths.


Virya: | will do so, comrade.


Virya Berserkr: In these two images of the biological body we can verify the structural
morphology of the virya's biological anatomy, its EIGHT RIGHT ANGLES are significantly
appreciated, the SPIRIT-SPHERE is represented by the Rune OCTOGON TAU HAGAL,
analogically, represents this UNCREATED RUNE to the SPHERE EHRE, and such sphere is
sustained IN THE ABSOLUTE WILL AND IN THE INFINITE VALUE, noological essence of
ETERNAL SPIRIT.

The chaining generated the runic deformation of the SPIRIT-SPHERE; it is the product of
the fall to the Created Order a Mystery of A-MOR, such passion generated the loss of
ORIENTATION, and that disorientation product of a SONGS OF LOVE, was the cause of its
enchantment. For the search of A-mort and the purest of beauties, for the innocence of his
purity and the brightness of his Uncreated Spirit, for carrying that excellence and nobility, the
Hyperborean Warrior lost his ETERNITY, VILELY CHEATED he was precipitated from the
UNCREATED TO THE CREATED, and such a fall, such a precipitation and chaining by the
SIGN OF ORIGIN (the search for the purest A-mort) to the SIGN OF PAIN, must be reversed,
and only the STRONGEST will be able to achieve that reversal.

We know perfectly well, as instructed by Nimrod of Rosario (see: allegorical figure of the
Kalachakra Key), that in the ASA is the SIGN OF ORIGIN, and underlie in its enclosure or
space, the noological powers of the UNCREATED RUNES, but by a Deception of Love, the
TRAITOR SIDDHAS built on the Sign of Origin their TAPASIGNO: the SIGN OF PAIN; on the
INNER LABYRINTH they erected with the 10 macrocosmic Archetypes and the 50 bijas
(sacred images and sounds of the One), the ONTIC MATRIXES OF THE ARCHETYPIC
MEMORY, MATRIX that predetermines the anthropomorphic form of the microcosm. The
human brain, as cranial vault, would be the PRISON where the lost and deceived SELF would
enter, to search, to recover the loss of its ORIGIN, of its A-MOR-T.

As the Spirit is chained to the ASA, to the microcosm, the Noological Sphericity
undergoes the runic deformation, which reverses the NATURAL STATE OF THE SPIRIT as
SPHERE, and incorporates it into the HUMAN form. The Spirit is reversed and DRESSED in a
new form that determines its BEING. The Traitor Siddhas with the Kalachakra Key, by trapping
the Spirit, chain it to a microcosm and put it to SLEEP.


116


This point is a secret and the greatest Mystery, because it has to do with the
METEMPSYCHOSIS or REINCARNATION or INCARNATION, and this experience can
only be accessed by those who have been able to recover that LUCIFERIC GRACE that
is triggered when the virya can experience the NOOLOGICAL state of SPIRIT SPIRIT
SPHERE.

THE SPIRIT AS A SPHERE IS NOT ONLY A GEOMETRIC ANALOGY, ON THE
CONTRARY, THE SPHERICITY OF THE SPIRIT IS THE NATURAL STATE OF THE SPIRIT
WHEN IT LOSES ITS BIOLOGICAL FORM; THEREFORE, THE MASTERY OF THE
SECRET OF THE RIGHT ANGLE IS THE GNOSTIC WAY THAT ALLOWS US TO
RECOVER THE SPHERICITY OF THE SPIRIT.

FOR A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF THIS TOPIC WE WILL DEFINE WHAT A
SPHERE IS: A GEOMETRIC FIGURE; A SOLID DETERMINED BY A CURVED SURFACE
WHOSE POINTS ARE ALL EQUIDISTANT FROM AN INTERIOR POINT CALLED CENTER.
THUS, ANY CURVE IS A LINE THAT CONSTANTLY DEPARTS FROM THE STRAIGHT
DIRECTION WITHOUT FORMING ANGLES.

THE CURVE IS, IN SHORT, A BROKEN STRAIGHT LINE, A STRAIGHT LINE THAT AT
A MOMENT DEVIATES FROM ITS DIRECTION. THEREFORE, THE SPHERICITY OF THE
SPIRIT IS SUSTAINED IN ITS NOOLOGICAL STRUCTURE BY THE MYSTERY OF RIGHT
ANGLES, AND THE LOSS OF THE NOOLOGICAL VERTICALITY OF THE SPIRIT IS
GENERATED BY THE DEFORMATION OF ITS RIGHT ANGLES, WHICH SHIFTS THE
CENTER, THE INFINITE SELF, FROM THE INSIDE TO THE OUTSIDE, FROM THE
UNCREATED TO THE CREATED. THIS REVERSION (TURNING) GENERATES THE
DISINTEGRATION OF THE SPHERICITY OF THE UNCREATED FORM OF THE SPIRIT, OF
ITS RIGHT ANGLES, CAUSING THE RUNIC DEFORMATION.

THIS BREAKING OF A POINT OF THE SPHERE, OF ITS CENTER (OF THE INFINITE
SELF, TAU CENTER OF THE SPHERICAL FORM OF THE SPIRIT), MOVES THE SELF
FROM INSIDE TO OUTSIDE (BY A MYSTERY OF A-MOR), THROWS IT INTO THE ABYSS
OF THE CREATED AND IS TRAPPED IN THAT INFERNAL OCEAN BY THE
MACROCOSMIC ARCHETYPES AND THE BIJAS OF THE DEMIURGE, REMAINING AT
THE MERCY OF THE WILL OF THE ONE, WHICH WILL UNDOUBTEDLY PUT IT TO
SLEEP AND CHAIN IT, A MYSTERY THAT ONLY THE SIDDHAS UNDERSTAND.

TODAY, IN THIS PRESENT, THE SPIRIT AT DISEMBODIMENT IN EACH
INCARNATION IS AT THE MERCY OF THE POWER OF THE CHANG SHAMBALA
SIDDHAS, WHO WITH THE CURSED SCIENCE OF THE KALA-CHAKRA KEY PERFORM
THIS ACTION WITHOUT ONE'S INTERVENTION.

IT IS "ALMOST" IMPOSSIBLE TO GLIMPSE THE FORM THAT PREDETERMINES THE
BEING OF THE SPIRIT IN THE ORIGIN FROM THE PRESENT STATE (CHAINED SPIRIT);
BUT THE VIRYA BERSERKR, RUNICALLY, CAN AFFIRM’ THAT THIS
ANTHROPOMORPHIC FORM IS THAT OF A SIDDHA BERSERKR.

WHAT WE CAN AFFIRM IS THAT BEYOND THE ORIGIN, THE SPIRIT AT THE ORIGIN
OF ITS FALL, AT THE BEGINNING OF TIME, BY LOSING ITS NOOLOGICAL
VERTICALITY, LOST THE SPHERICITY OF ITS FORM, LOST ITS CENTER.

LOSING THE TAU CENTER OF ITS FORM, BY A MYSTERY OF A-MORT, THE
DEMIURGE IN THE BEGINNING OF TIME CHAINED IT TO THE UNIVERSAL MONAD, AND
IT WAS REDUCED TO THE FORMS OF THE ARCHETYPAL MATRIX OF THE MONAD:
THE SPHERE, THE CIRCLE AND THE POINT.


117


WE WANT TO MEAN THAT IN THE GNOSTIC REVERSION OF THE VIRYA INTO
SIDDHA, THE NOOLOGICAL FORM IS RECOVERED, THE BODY IS TRANSMUTED INTO
VRAJA, INTO SPIRIT-SPHERE.

NIMROD PLACES THIS FORM AS THE GEOMETRIC FIGURE THAT IS MOST
ANALOGICALLY ASSIMILATED TO THE SPIRIT, BECAUSE THE SPHERE IS THE MOST
PERFECT IMAGE WITH WHICH THE PURE SPIRIT CAN BE COMPARED.

THIS SUBJECT, COMRADE, IS OF THE MOST OCCULT AND IN THE TEXT THE
GENERAL BLOOD OF THE VIRYA BERSERKR WE BREAK IT DOWN COMPLETELY, BUT
| WILL ONLY TELL YOU THAT THE FORM THAT DETERMINES THE IMMOBILE BEING
OF THE DEMIURGE IS THAT OF THE UNIVERSAL MONAD, AND ITS MORPHOLOGICAL
STRUCTURE IS THAT OF A GREAT ARCHETYPAL SPHERE (MACROCOSMIC
ARCHETYPAL SPACE) THAT ENCOMPASSES THE ENTIRE CONTINENT OF CREATED
ENTITIES (SOLAR LOGOS, PLANETARY LOGOS), THE UNIVERSAL.

AS THE UNIVERSAL MONAD REPRODUCES ITSELF INFINITELY (BY THE WILL OF
THE ONE), EACH POINT (ATOM GRAVIS) OF THE SPHERICITY OF THE UNIVERSAL
MONAD REPRODUCES ITS ORIGINAL ARCHETYPAL FORM; IT IS EACH POINT OF THE
SPHERE OF THE UNIVERSAL MONAD, AN INFINITE VECTOR THAT SEPARATES
ITSELF FROM ITS MATRIX WHILE CONSERVING ITS PRIMORDIAL FORM, THAT IS TO
SAY, EACH PARTICULAR MONAD PROJECTS ITSELF TO THE ARCHETYPAL
MACROCOSMIC PLANE AS A SPHERE.

IS THE MACROCOSMIC ARCHETYPAL PLANE (ANALOGOUS: GNOSEOLOGICAL
SPACE, METAPHYSICAL ENGINEERING, DIVINE ARCHITECTURE, SNAIL DESIGN) THE
MATRIX THAT MOLDS ACCORDING TO THE 10 MACROCOSMIC ARCHETYPES AND
THE BIJAS CONTAINED IN THEM (ACOUSTIC, LUMINIC AND NUMERAL CABALA) THE
“BEING-IN-ITSELF" OF EVERY CREATED ENTITY.

HYPERBOREAN WISDOM AFFIRMS: THE UNCREATED SPIRIT OF THE VIRYA IS
THE ONLY BEING WITH REAL, NOOLOGICAL EXISTENCE IN CREATION, AND IT IS THE
ONLY THING THAT WILL SURVIVE OR SUBSIST AFTER THE MAHAPRALAYA, THE
GREAT COSMIC NIGHT, ALL OTHER ENTITIES OF CREATION ARE ILLUSION, THEY
WILL BE DEVOURED BY THE JAWS OF THE DRAGON.

SO THAT THE ONLY REAL THING IN MAN IS HIS SPIRIT, WHICH IS THE
NOOLOGICAL ROOT OF HIS “BEING-IN-ITSELF," AND THAT SPIRIT, WHEN IT IS
LIBERATED IN THE WORLD OF MAYA, REPRODUCES ITSELF ACCORDING TO THE
PRINCIPLE THAT DETERMINED ITS FALL, ITS ENCHAINMENT: THE UNIVERSAL
MONAD.

THEREFORE, THE PURE SPIRIT UPON LIBERATION IS A SPHERE IN THE VIRYA
BERSERKR, WHICH IS TRANSMUTED INTO VRAJA MATTER, BUT IN THE ORIGIN (OR
AGARTHA) IT IS A SIDDHA.

ON THE CONTRARY, IN THE PASU OR LOST VIRYA, HIS SPIRIT IN EACH
DISINCARNATION IS REDUCED TO THE MINIMUM EXPRESSION OF THE SPHERE, TOA
POINT, WHICH CONTAINS ALL THE PROPERTIES OF THE SPHERE, BUT BY THE
ACTION OF THE TRAITOR SIDDHAS AND THE KALACHAKRA THAT PHAGOCYTIZED IN
LIFE HIS WILL IN THE SACRED SYMBOLS, WITH THE METAPHYSICAL ENGINEERING
OF THE CURSED KEY THEY REDUCE OR ENCAPSULATE THE SPIRIT TO ITS MINIMUM
ARCHETYPAL EXPRESSION: THE POINT (FRACTAL POINT).


118


THE DEFORMATION OF THE RIGHT ANGLES OF THE SPIRIT-SPHERE IS BY THE
ACTION OF THE ARCHETYPAL MACROCOSMIC PLANE (TODAY IN THE POWER OF
THE TRAITOR SIDDHAS, THEY INTERPOSE THEMSELVES BETWEEN THE UNIVERSAL
MONAD AND THE ARCHETYPAL MACROCOSMIC PLANE, WITH THEIR METAPHYSICAL
ENGINEERING, THE KALACHAKRA KEY, WHICH IS BUILT WITH THE SAME ONTIC
MATRICES OF THE ARCHETYPAL PLANE, POWER CONFERRED TO THEM BY THE
DEMIURGE HIMSELF, WHICH IS BUILT WITH THE SAME ONTIC MATRICES OF THE
ARCHETYPAL PLANE, POWER CONFERRED TO THEM BY THE DEMIURGE HIMSELF)
WITH THE RUNIC DEFORMATION OF THE SPIRIT-SPHERE, THE ONE BUILT THE PASU
MATRIX AND THE MANU MATRIX, THAT IS WHY THE BIOLOGICAL BODY IS
ONTOLOGICALLY SUPPORTED BY RIGHT ANGLES.

ALTHOUGH THE BIOLOGICAL BODY, THE ANTHROMETRIC FORM OF ITS
PERIPHERY IS FORMED BY A CLOSED CURVED LINE THAT DELIMITS ITS BEING, THIS
FORM SEPARATES ITS INNER SPACE FROM THE MACROCOSMIC OUTER SPACE; IT
IS THIS IMAGE OF ITSELF, THE TAPASIGNO (NEXT TO THE "BEING-IN-ITSELF" THE
UNIVERSAL AND "BEING-FOR-MAN" THE PARTICULAR) OF ITS ETERNAL SPIRIT, OF
THE SECRET OF THE RIGHT ANGLE, OF THE RIGHT ANGLES THAT SUSTAIN AND
CONTAIN ITS ONTOLOGICAL MANIFESTATION.

THEREFORE, TO RESOLVE THE SECRET OF THE RIGHT ANGLE CONSISTS IN
RECOVERING THE DOMINION OF THEM, AND THE GNOSTIC REVERSION ALLOWS TO
RE-SIGN THE SPIRAL, TO RECOVER THE EIGHT RIGHT ANGLES WITH WHICH THE
PASU AND MANU MATRICES DISINTEGRATE; THE VIRYA RECOVERS HIS SPIRIT-
SPHERE, HIS NOOLOGICAL VERTICALITY, AND WITH THIS POWER HE TRANSMUTES
HIS MATTER INTO VRAJA, HE IS A SIDDHA IN THE ETERNAL.

Comrade, the Spirit is chained to the universal Monad and from there to its particular
monad, incorporated into the AKASA BALLOON of the microcosm, there it is reduced and falls
asleep in the MATRIX OF THE ARCHETYPIC MEMORY, definitely chained to the biological
body, but it is fundamental to understand that in this instance of the KALI YUGA, although
internally he is a victim of demiurgic designs, it is his external reference (external labyrinth) that
will determine his destiny, his next incarnation, and that is the POTESTY OF THE LORDS OF
KARMA.

In the text the GRAL BLOOD OF VIRYA BERSERKR we developed that power that the
Traitor Siddhas have with which they have closed not only the possibility of seeing the
ORIGIN, but even the possibility of seeing the "infinity" of the Archetypal Plane, but this subject
is not part of this dialogue.

The chained Spirit is a victim of the DARKNESS of his CRANIAL CAVERN. By the loss of
his VISION, by the blindness of his PASSION, he has been PRISONED and fallen asleep in
his PRISON, in the CRANEAN BOWL. On OPENING his EYES and recovering his VISION,
the Spirit understands that he is no longer eternal, that he has been thrown into a world of
which he KNOWS NOTHING and must learn everything, the virya understands that he is
INCOUNTAINED TO A FORM, to a BEING and that he participates of a double nature, of a
species, and as a HUMAN he must assimilate the KNOWLEDGE of the external world that
surrounds him on all sides, and of his internal world, which manifests itself to him in thousands
of biological, physiological, psychological and psychological questions: biological,
physiological, psychological, SPIRITUAL, which will be unveiled over time. His new world,
habitat, is a LABYRINTH full of mysteries and secrets that he will have to unveil, even more so
when he becomes CONSCIOUSLY aware that he has lost his eternity, and worse, when he
becomes SPIRITUALLY AWARE of his situation, which launches him on a search (search,
option, option, etc.).


119


120


and choice; path ELIX or LABRELIX, subject treated by Nimrod in the FUNDAMENTALS and
in the text of the EIGHT INFINITE) desperate of his ORIGIN. Unfortunately, in that "awakening"
is his maximum deception, because he will be BITTEN BY THE SERPENT, although he will
have the right to KNOWLEDGE, he will first enter KNOWLEDGE, he will be trapped by the
traps of Maya, by the SACRED SYMBOLS OF THE HEART, of the TIJA, that is why the virya
risks everything in an act of VALOR, OF HEROISM (when we say he risks everything it is this
very interesting definition, a subject that has to do with the aberro typologies, treated by
Nimrod. This action of gambling everything with the typology that affirms the LUCIFERIC
GRACE in the virya, is an act of daring, of total courage, like the soldier in battle, or in a ludic
case, like the gambler who gambles all his money in roulette to escape from his misery; it is
the LUCIFERIC GRACE above all an ETHICS OF VALUE, OF HEROISM THAT WE

ALLOWS TO BE A HERO, and only the HERO carries the sword of the VRIL).

Comrade, this knowledge does not liberate, indeed, it enchains, but it puts us before the
THRESHOLD of the WISDOM of the ETERNAL SYMBOLS, of the SACRED SYMBOL OF THE
VIRYA. Believing in the deception, in the KNOWLEDGE of the SERPENT, he will never be
able to sign the serpent, he will only be able to be EQUAL TO THE SERPENT, narcotized by
the poison of the serpent, he does not see that his FREEDOM is within HIS HAND'S REACH
(in the CAPULE of his SECRET CRYPT there is an OCCULUM, a RIGHT ANGLE, a secret
exit leading to the SELBST), but, his CARETAKERS know of his power AND HE IS QUICKLY
TRANSFERRED to a more WATCHED space, from which it is more difficult to get out, to
escape; He is hastily transferred from the ASA to the TIJA, to the sacred precinct of the TIJA,
where the LOVE Aspect rules. In the brain or archetypal memory rules the BEAUTY Aspect
OR ACTIVE INTELLIGENCE, the purest archetypal beauty of the created forms, component of
all the entities of the world that surrounds it, internally and externally, but that INTELLIGENCE
allows it to make a gnostic apprehension of the world, because in the SECRET CRYPT is his
CENTER, his SYMBOL OF ORIGIN, and through it he can retake his INNER GNOSIS, that is
why the Demons of the KALACHAKRA and the Demiurge, quickly move him from the ASA TO
THE SHAFT, from the BRAIN TO THE HEART (incidence of the external culture and of the
internal ontic designs). When the virya becomes aware of his loss of ORIGIN, he is already
trapped in the SACRED precinct of the HEART, in the TEMPLE, victim of the SACRED
SYMBOLS and of the Sacred Symbol of the Pasu. He is phagocytized by the LOVE ASPECT,
now he sees the world with LOVE and BEAUTY, later, perhaps with CONSCIOUSNESS (in
most humans this faculty of the conscious subject, falls simply in the limits of the rational or
cultural subject, this faculty is proper to the sinarca initiate, or the awakened virya can
understand the deception of this conscious subject).

These two great macrocosmic Archetypes, fundamental pillars of enchantment and
enchainment (mother/father; love/beauty; the product of that beauty and that love is carnal
passion, profound Mystery of enchainment) and, FUNDAMENTALLY, it is this Aspect where
the FAMILY ARCHETY is ANCHORED.

The SPIRIT-SPHERE, RUNE OCTOGON TAU HAGAL, falls from the ASA (the reversed

Spirit-Sphere is archetypically reproduced in the biological structure of the CRANIAL BOWL) to
the ONTOLOGICAL QUADRATURE of the TIJA, its ROUND SPIRIT-SPIRIT form.
SPHERE, fused first in the "sphericity" of its cranial vault, but now it REFOUNDS in the
Quadrangularity of its Affective Sphere, in the ontic SQUARE that is formed with the FOUR
RIGHT ANGLES that conformed and sustained its Uncreated form, by its runic deformation its
ANGLES were altered, reversed, TURNED,


121


inverted its NOOLOGICAL CONCAVITY and it is now, the concave CONVEXO. With such
TWISTS the SHAFT is constructed, and with its SQUARE the ANTHROPOMORPHIC FORM
that determines the NONOLOGICAL in the ONTOLOGICAL. In the Tija are found the four
CHAKRAS, and in each of them a DEMIURGICAL DESIGN, an astral, psychic and vital form
that determines the ETERNAL SPIRIT to the CREATED SOUL (this subject is deeply studied
in the Fundamentals and is not the motive of this text, We can only affirm that the EIGHT
RIGHT ANGLES of the biological body have their ARCHETYPICAL COUNTERPART, their
astral and psychic tapasign, in the SEVEN CHAKRAS, and physiologically in the SYSTEMS of
the biological body).

The biological body or microcosm, transits in its temporal existence through the SEVEN
stages of its chronological development, SEVEN periods of its temporal life that are
chronologically and biologically related to the SEVEN CHAKRAS, to the ontic immanence of
each ontic Register; these chakras RULES AND CONTROL all its biological and psychological
clocks, adjust the immanence of the time of the microcosm to the immanence of the
transcendent time of the macrocosm, subject that Nimrod, comrade, instructs in the
Fundamentals.

Strictly speaking, SEVEN plus ONE: seven that participate of the astral, psychic and vital
bodies of the microcosm (four of the snail design and three of the serpent design), and ONE
that represents the NOOLOGICAL immanence of the SELF chained to the MICROCOSM.
Moreover, this NOOLOGICAL BEING (will, value) is drained in the INSTINCTIVE SPHERE:
AFFECTIVE SPHERE and RATIONAL SPHERE, in the ANIMIC SUBJECT, structures that
compose the SOUL of the microcosm.

Chained and transferred to the TIJA, in those first four STAGES of his life he lives in the
way of life of his mammalian blood, warm blood that circulates in his WARM HEART, as the
stages go by, the SACRED SYMBOLS of the TIJA, of the HEART, are unchained, and that
produces the runic deformation of the RIGHT ANGLES with which they weave the weft of the
LABYRINTH, building with them the SACRED CAVERN OF THE HEART, building the ontic
structures (designs, LOVE Aspect) of the TIJA, the SACRED SYMBOLS that support the
SACRED SYMBOL OF THE PASU, which is represented by the SPIRAL.

The deformation of the STRAIGHT ANGLES of the STONE (middle end of the biological
body) forms the archetypal morphological structures (fractal theory, PHI archetype, snail
design studied on the logarithmic spiral of Fibonacci) astral, psychic and vital of its ontic
registers, especially of the emotional "pillars" (in the art of the Stone Carving the PILLAR is the
tapasigno of the COLUMN) of its AFFECTIVE SPHERE. Each RIGHT ANGLE, derives its
ROUND FORCE in a biological form, a physiological SYSTEM: in this case, the TIJA
determines the circulatory or cardiovascular system, the ASA, the nervous system.

By the serpent's design, each disintegrated runic force affirms the ontic matrices of the
snail design and is actualized, by the serpent's design, in a biological structure. It is the force of
the ENCHANTED SPIRIT that generates its CREATED FORM, and it is the REVERTED
SPIRIT that potentiates all the demiurgic designs in the biological body. It is the WILL OF THE
SPIRIT that sets in motion the WILL OF THE SOUL, it is its uncreated forces, partakers of its
will, which are scurried in the created soul, that set in MOTION the ontic designs and the VOX
(WILL OF THE ONE) in the FOUR CHAKRAS of the Tija.


122


In the Hyperborean Yoga we are instructed on this subject comrade, and we know well that
the term CHAKRA, which comes from the sacred language of the TIBETAN LAMAS, the
Sanskrit, means WHEEL, therefore KALA-CHAKRA means WHEEL or SPIN, or EVOLUTION
of TIME (WHEEL or SPIN, sine displacement of the SERPENT on the TRASCENDENT TIME
of the MACROCOSMOS, analogous is, to the KUNDALINI SERPENT, his
ascending movement within the immanent time of the microcosm). That sacred language of
THE ONE and of the Golen Priests, as is the Hebrew of the Levite priests, is a language that
responds to those archetypes and to the designs of the Manu entelechy, which is why INDIA
and ISRAEL are the land or gateway to CHANG SHAMBALA, ONE OF THE MANY THAT
EXIST, and from those GEOTOPOCENTRIC points, the infinite axes or vectors of these two
great macrocosmic Archetypes (macrocosmic astral and psychic powers) that are embedded
in the SPINE OF EVERY BEING, depart, Therefore, these priests never cease to recite their
mantras, to PRAY to the ONE and to their masters the SIDDHAS OF CHANG SHAMBALA, but
it is this sound that actualizes the JESUS ARCHETYPE in the heart of each lost virya, which is
why we must resign the WARM HEART, kill its designs in order to recover its RUNIC
ANGULARITY and mutate it into STONE, into FIRE AND ICE.

In short, in the first four ages (7-14-21-28 years) the LOST SELF in the TIJA is
ESSENTIALLY UNCONSCIOUS, it is totally referenced by its archetypal reason (brain, Beauty
Aspect) to the SACRED SYMBOLS that participate in the spheres of the HEART, which is
knotted by the TIJA to the OUTER LABYRINTH, searching OUTSIDE for the TRUTH or the
meaning of its EXISTENCE.

We affirm that the SIGN OF PAIN is only discovered CONSCIOUSLY when the whole
semiotic morphological structure of the TIJA has been built, that is to say, when the ONTICAL
SQUARE of the ANAHATA CHAKRA is affirmed, when the SACRED SYMBOLS that give
ontological consistency to the MAMMARY BLOOD of the pasu Being, to the SACRED
SYMBOL of the DOG, have been built. Meanwhile, the virya lives the LOVE of PASSION, the
enchantment of the HEART, the ILLUSION OF THE CALM LIFE, has existence its soul
subject, by the ASA, in the immanent time (serpent design) of the TIJA. In this period the
HEART prevails over the BRAIN, although it is important to distinguish that the EGO is always
anchored in the ASA, but it is its WILL that is drained in the SECRET CAVERN OF THE
HEART and, later, its VALUE in the WATERS of the PALETON, ontic space where the designs
of the HUMAN species, the SACRED SYMBOL OF THE FISH, rule.

The RIGHT ANGLE of the ASA, the FOUR RIGHT ANGLES of the TIJA, and the THREE
RIGHT ANGLES of the PALETON ARE ROUGHLY DEFORMED, and with them are
build the ontic matrices of the microcosm; during these four periods the ONTIC
DISPLACEMENT of the EGO drained in the soul subject, culminates the confirmation of the
virya in its KARMA.

After the immanent time where the merely HUMAN is constructed, the virya is a BEING
enslaved to the designs of the warm HEART, lives on his mammalian blood; the virya in his
soul evolution is becoming conscious of the SIGN OF PAIN and can understand (if he has the
courage) the THREE STRAIGHT ANGLES of the PALETON. But, comrade, the Demiurge from
within and the Traitor Siddhas from without, during the edification of the Tija, take charge of
DEFORMING the STRAIGHT ANGLES of the PALETON, in such a way that, when the virya
can SEE the SIGN OF PAIN, such vision, because it is referenced from the


123


HEART, being poisoned by the narcotic virus of the LOVE ASPECT of the Heart and the
BEAUTY ASPECT of the Brain, only perceives that PAIN as its archetypal reversion in the
world: as LOVE (love for creation, for the entities of creation, for the creator of creation, for
oneself as a singular being of creation, etc.).

The lost virya, his SPIRIT, his TRUE SELF is trapped in the Asa, plus his WILL is wrung in
the Tija and his VALUE in the Paleton, by the beauty of the world and of the genus he is led to
the love of the heart, and by that illusory carnal love, to the unconscious waters of SEX, and by
sex to the search in the OUTSIDE of the A-MOR, and such a search in the LABYRINTH is
fruitless UNLESS in the virya his ASTRAL BLOOD is still uncontaminated, if he has that
ASTRAL BLOOD, a mnemic reference of the ORIGIN, a memory of his PATRIOT, a
NOSTALGIA of A-MORT for his A-MADA, if he feels that presence in his blood, he will be able
to see in the outside the SACRED SYMBOL OF THE VIRYA, an infinite reference of the
ORIGIN structured in an entity that carries the INFINITE POLE (subject treated in the
Fundamentals of Felipe Moyano and in the Eight Infinite of Gustavo Brondino).

In short, he will be able to understand with the SIGN OF ORIGIN all the macrocosmic
archetypes and their cultural designs built in the outer labyrinth, and by NOOLOGICAL
INDUCTION he will be able to see the inner labyrinth and understand the SERPENT, and if his
will is nourished with the power of the INCREATED RUNES, he will be able to kill the serpent
and be free of its narcotic poison, creating with it an ANTIDOTE that will be a POISON for the
enemies of the Spirit, this ANTIDOTE that HEALS, AWAKENS the SLEEPING virya, is a
POISON that kills the TRAITOR SIDDHAS, disintegrates their cultural Strategies, poison that
re-signifies with the SIGN OF ORIGIN the SIGN OF PAIN.

Disintegrated the ROTATION of the Quadrangularity of the Shadow Sphere of the Tija, the
virya, dominates the DOG, re-signs the symbol of the SERPENT, affirms on the HEART the
ODAL ROUND ANGULARITY, builds his SNAIL STAIRWAY, is owner and master of his DOG,
of the VITAL energies of the serpent design, can descend ARMED as a THYRODAL KNIGHT
to the deepest SHADOW sphere, to the PRIMORDIAL WATERS where is the design of the
FISH, the symbol of the SNAIL; if his WILL is PURE VALOR he will be able to reconstruct the
THREE RIGHT ANGLES of the lower extremities, to recover his NOOLOGICAL
VERTICALITY, resigning, definitively, the astral and psychic powers of the snail design, he will
be able to DANCE THE INCREATED RUNES AND FLY TO THE ASA.

Having disintegrated the WARM HEART (splitting the SHAFT), affirming the COLD FIRE of
the THYRODAL RUNE, like a Spartan warrior, he will be able to dominate the THREE RIGHT
ANGLES of the FEET, and the FISH is transmuted into an EAGLE, and as such, through the
transitive nucleus (SEX, COLUMN, BRAIN) between the PALETON, the SHAFT and the ASA,
he ascends FLYING (not like a snake crawling, as it is done by the serpent), through the
transitory nucleus (SEX, COLUMN, BRAIN) between the PALETON, the SHAFT and the ASA
ascends FLYING (not like the serpent crawling, as do the Golen Priests and the Sinarchic
initiates, but erect as a Praetorian warrior).

VIRYA BERSERKR WITH HIS WAR CRY, SINGING (HIS FUROR IS EQUAL TO HIS
VALOR) AND DANCING ON THE RUNE OF THE ORIGIN, HIS EAGLE TRANSMUTES INTO
A WINGED PEGASUS OCTOPOD TAU, THE WISE WARRIOR LORD OF THE DOG AND
HORSE, AS SIDDHA BERSERKR BEGINS HIS RETURN TO THE ORIGIN.


124


| hope you have understood comrade, | know that this subject is difficult and requires a
very deep gnostic apprehension, but it is what is required to BE an ETERNAL SPIRIT beyond
ILLUSION.


Virya: | understand perfectly, comrade.


Virya Berserkr: well, | am glad that you can understand and comprehend gnostically this
WISDOM that summarizes all the possible knowledge of the Truth of the Serpent, power that
allows us to manufacture with its POISON the ANTIDOTE that AWAKENS US TO
AWAKENING, and that from such ANTIDOTE, we will build the NARCOTIC POISON (the
weapons, the psychosocial Strategy) that we will inoculate to the LORDS OF THE
LABYRINTH, to the Demons of matter. ANTIDOT/NARCOTIC with which they will be able to
wake up from the deception, or else die for their deception, because understand well comrade,
even if today they hold the POWER, and with that KNOWLEDGE they try to subjugate the
eternal wills, sooner or later the MEN OF STONE will reveal themselves with all the POWER of
the WISDOM, and with it they will be able to claim again like Parsifal the THRONE, the GRAL.

As ALEXANDER THE GREAT, JULIUS CAESAR, OCCTAVUS, NAPOLEON and the

Fuhrer
ADOLPH HITLER, and so many others who gave everything to affirm the WISDOM of the
Siddhas of Agartha in the world, so we must give everything for the LIBERATION OF THE
ETERNAL SPIRIT.

Do you understand, comrade?


Virya: correct and | am full of grace and courage, and | thank you for your instruction and |
know that with the guidance of our invisible comrades we will be INVINCIBLE, and by my
LOYALTY AND HONOR, | will watch over my comrades and the HYPERBORN WISDOM, | will
give everything to be able to AWAKEN TO AWAKENING and achieve ETERNITY AND THAT
OF MY COMRADES.


Virya Berserkr: Hail Caesar! CAMERA. HONOR AND VALOR is GRACE.
From the VRIL, and beyond all fear, dread and error, the virya by the GRAL, can always
go back to REMEMBER the UNCREATED ORIGIN OF HIS ETERNAL SPIRIT.


ETERNAL GREETINGS COMRADE!
TO YOU, AND TO ALL VIRYAS WHO FEEL IN THEIR
BLOOD THE HEROIC MYSTICISM OF THE SIDDHAS OF
AGARTHA.


OCTIRODAE CORDOBA
ARGENTINA. VVV


125


10


126


EXPLANATIONS OF THE FIGURES


First figure. Image of the dorsal ulna, we can verify in the microcosm of the pasu, the
KALACHAKRA KEY shape of its biological body.

In the second figure we can verify this image in an upright form, the noological posture of
the awakened virya. In both figures we can verify the EIGHT right angles, but in the second
figure, we verify according to the instructions, the path of the virya to his liberation.

EIGHT RIGHT ANGLES:

1) The right angle of the ASA: Crypt ideana.

2) The four right angles of the TIJA: in the HANDS, in the ELBOWS, in the SHOULDERS
and in the SEX. The hands, elbows and shoulders, we can verify that two right angles (two
hands, two elbows, two shoulders) are manifested in this archetypal duality, beyond the dual
they are unified in the ROUND singularity.

3) The three right angles of the PALETON: that of the HIP, that of the KNEES and that of
the FEET, in the same way, beyond the archetypal duality of the biological body, governs in
each pair the NOOLOGICAL singularity of the SECRET OF THE RIGHT ANGLE.

The EIGHT RIGHT ANGLES by their VERTEX, they transit us, they lead us to the RUNE
OF ORIGIN, they AFFIRM US IN THE SPIRIT SPHERICITY, IN THE OCTOGON TAU OF
THE RUNE HAGAL.

Comrades, please excuse me, the images of the figures will be corrected, they were
designed in this way to more easily graph their gnostic content, but they lack a certain
aesthetic, of course, eternal apologies, they will be conveniently corrected when the text THE
GRAL BLOOD OF VIRYA BERSERKR emerges to the Web.


Figure |


eo OCHO ANGULOS RECTOS
en el microcosmos o cuerpo
biologico.


LUMBAR ZONA CERVICAL
DORSAL
PALETON TWA ASA
EXTREMIDAD INFERIOR TERMINO MEDIO EXTREMIDAD SUPERIOR
SEXO CORAZON CEREBRO
11


127


Figure 2


ASA, boveda craneana ANGULO RECTO DEL ASA


CEREBRO


Cripta secreta del ASA.
Yo encadenado al
microcosmos


ANGULO

RECTO DE
LAS
MANOS


ZONA
CERVICAL


ANGULO RECTO


DEL BRAZO -4
Y DE LOS HOMBROS ae =
mée
TWA s ms
Camarasagrada 3
del Corazon .


Anclaje del Yo
perdido al Ser
del corazon


PALETON
Camara secreta
del Sexo
anclaje del
microcoésmos al
macrocoésmos


ANGULO RECTO DE
LOS PIES


\


12


Espacio
ASA  SIGNO DEL ORIGEN


RUNAS INCREADAS
SIMBOLO SAGRADO DEL VIRYA


TAPASIGNO DEL ASA
ASPECTO BELLEZA


CUADRATURA DE LA TIJA,


SIMBOLO SAGRADO


Espacio
DEL PASU


TIJA
TAPASIGNO DE LA TIA
ASPECTO AMOR


ANGULO RECTO DEL
SEXO


Espacio


PALETON TAPASIGNO DEL
PALETON EL SIGNO


DEL DOLOR


128


The Black Magic of
Chang-Shamballah


(Excerpt from the text: The Return of Quetzalcoalt,
Huiracocha and the Cosmic Warriors, Author: L.
Wotan)


Order of Tyrodal Knights of America and Spain
OCTIRODAE MEXICO


129


2.1 Introduction


This text was created directly to attack an enemy of which the reader who finds himself in the

some "Spiritual" path is unconscious, here is exposed the lie and the trap as it is. This text will be hated
by many until they try to destroy it, but there will be some who will be able to react in time and realize
the deception in which they are involved. To give a spiritual message that is understood by all is not
something simple when there are too many dogmas and too much confusion, but this text has the
strategic objective of giving a message of a forgotten truth. This text does not seek to instill fear
because fear is an illusion and a weapon of the enemy.


There are many spiritual movements in America and Spain and most of them are related to the 2012
issue, all those movements exposed here seek the evolution of the human being without revealing a
terrible secret behind them. All these movements seek the evolution of the soul. Most people think that
the evolution of the soul is the greatest good but what if it were not so, here the reader will have the
possibility to discern for himself a reality that he does not know.


Throughout history there have been soul and spirit movements. Most of the spiritual movements of
2012 are based on the soul. The movements of the spirit have been persecuted by a secret mafia until
"almost" achieving their total destruction, if this text is possible it is because this occult knowledge has
reached our days due to the sacrifice and work of great warrior spirits.


It is important for the reader to know that this text is based on a spiritual knowledge that once existed
publicly in Atlantis, in the Mayas, Aztecs, Toltecs, Greece and Rome, this knowledge is called
hyperborean wisdom, before proceeding it is important to clarify that hyperborean wisdom is a
knowledge of spiritual liberation, but it is NOT an evolutionary knowledge like many new age
movements, which are part of a worldwide secret agenda of the movements of 2012, an agenda that
will be exposed in detail in this chapter.


Here we enter into a dilemma between liberation and evolution. Evolution is to achieve the highest
perfection of the soul, the highest perfection of a race, of a people, of this planet, the highest good.
Liberation is to escape from evolution and its laws such as the law of karma, attraction, etc. etc. etc.
That is why the hyperborean wisdom is a science of spiritual liberation, of individual or racial
transmutation, because it seeks that the spirit escapes from its material prison, that the spirit realizes
that there is a deception, that is why this text seeks to reveal that deception and show the reader that
there are always other ways that the same system that has trapped us does not allow us to access them.


Many ancient cultures have called this deception maya. Many people who claim to be awakened and
are in some "spiritual" movement believe they understand the Maya but they do not, the truth of Maya
could drive people weak in spirit crazy.


130


So we have many people in many spiritual paths trying to evolve or ascend. And almost nobody trying to
free themselves, logically those who try to free themselves, the owners of the system will try to
persecute them until they exterminate them with their agents, as it has already happened in other
historical stages when they made the crusades or the inquisition, or when they almost exterminated the
Aztecs, Incas and the Native Americans, what a terrible secret reveals the hyperborean wisdom that the
owners of the world do not want anyone to know. The reader should know that if a book or text can be
bought in a shopping mall, it is because the system wants it, it is part of their strategy to confuse more
people who are trying to wake up, so we have many books, blogs, videos that talk about conspiracies,
aliens etc.


It is important to use some concepts of hyperborean wisdom before proceeding with the text. We will do
so in a simple way for the reader who is not familiar with the wisdom.


The viryas or viryas are apparently ordinary human beings, but it is not so, this name is used by the
hyperborean wisdom to name those semi-divine men or women who have something of which they are
not conscious, an inner element of some extraterrestrial ancestor. That inner element is something very
valuable for the owners of the prison of the maya, for the owners of this material prison, that is why
what the hyperborean wisdom looks for is that those semi-divine beings can escape from the prison,
but to begin with it looks for the viryas to become aware of the great deception. So there are two types
the lost virya and the awakened virya, the lost virya is the one who has not realized that there is a
control, a prison, the one who lives his ordinary life without knowing why he is here, until the question
arises as to why he is here and he undertakes a search, the search of which will be explained in detail
later. The awakened viryas are those who have realized the deception of maya, those who sometime in
their lives have access to such knowledge that is the hyperborean wisdom. Studying the hyperborean
wisdom is like opening Pandora's box, once the virya opens it, he will never be deceived again. He will
undergo an inner transmutation and will do the impossible to escape from the material prison, in that
escape the viryas must have will of steel and courage to face such a strong reality. If the viryas are
strong enough, they will be able to achieve victory in their spiritual liberation.


So it means that not everyone dares to walk such a difficult path, no one said it was simple as preparing
the recipe for a cake because the hyperborean wisdom has the power to be inwardly different for each
virya. Because each virya has a unique inner structure and an inner labyrinth of which he is not aware.
That is why the wisdom has the way to transmute the virya differently.


The hyperborean wisdom as its name says comes from a place called hyperborea, is a place that is
forgotten in time, but still there, a place that has received many names the best known of them is
Agartha.


131


Here we will explain a fundamental difference to avoid confusions that circulate on the internet about
Agartha, a difference that must be clarified because the owners of this prison want to confuse by
making the viryas believe that Agartha is the capital of Shambhala. Its ancient name is Chang
Shambhala. Agartha and Shambhala are not the same, they are enemies and here we will explain why
using the knowledge of hyperborean wisdom. Both places are out of time.


In Agartha dwell the Gods Loyal to the eternal spirit, the Loyal Siddhas, what we mean by this is that
they inhabit eternal beings outside this world, who promote the liberation of the viryas from their
material prison, from the spirits chained in matter, in the illusion of maya.


On the other hand we have Chang Shambhala, a gigantic extraterrestrial city that lies between the Earth
and the Sun of which the lost viryas are not aware. In this city dwell the Traitor Siddhas and the
extraterrestrial demons of matter, who promote the evolution of the soul and are the ones behind the
ascension agenda and all the movements of 2012.


We will explain why they call themselves Loyalists and why they call themselves Traitors.


Millions of years ago some spirit beings totally antimatter came to the solar system, and penetrated
through a portal that is still in Venus, these beings were known as the Hyperboreans, the division
between the Siddhas or Gods began because a group of them decided to make a pact with the god who
had molded this material world, during this pact some spirits sphere (hyperboreans) were tied to the
matter to promote the evolutionary plan of the god of this place, that unleashed a war between the
Gods, since the god of this place, of this solar system in specific, was the projection of the ONE, the
creator of this material universe, which was divided into many consciousnesses or devas builders to
experiment with their creation, the problem was that when making that pact in this area of the solar
system, the sphere spirits were tied to the projection of the pasu (animal-man) a being that did not
evolve for being a creation of the god of this place, to that god molder of the matter we will call
demiurge using the guidelines of the hyperborean wisdom.


When the Traitor Gods began their experiment and made a pact with the demiurge this generated the
anger of the Loyal Gods, because they saw theirs tied in matter, in the illusions of the thousands of
worlds that the demiurge was projecting in matter, the eternal Gods had the right to mold or create the
worlds they wanted but they did not have the right to bind their equals in their insane creations, since
there are uncreated realms of the unknowable God, the true God, uncreated and eternal realms of the
spirit where there was no evolution.


Then the demiurge began to make and undo his creations each time making them more perfect, in the
Hindu tradition this action of creating and destroying is called manvantaras and pralayas, the Traitor
Gods began to chain or more races from other kingdoms, in order to carry out the evolutionary plan of
the demiurge and push it to an unimaginable level, in order to do it and deceive the spirit races had to
use a very complex system called kalachakra. With that system they were able to chain the uncreated in
the created.


132


It is difficult in the current state of the lost viryas to intuit how many Atlantises and Lemurians have
existed, we will use the last Atlantis to continue the text.


Then the war began a war that has millions of years, in which the Loyal Siddhas stole from the demiurge
several spaces in the universe created by him, in order to unleash strategies and free their own, this text
is part of one of those strategies and whoever feels it is also, will join the fight and do his best to free
himself before the world government is implemented and millions are sacrificed with the lies of 2012
and the planned planetary destruction of the Traitor Siddhas. The worst evil is that the sphere spirit
races can never escape from matter and forever sink into it, never to return to their origin. That is why
the Loyal Gods desire the total liberation of the races trapped in this prison or to take over as much of it
as they can because there are millions of non-incarnated sphere spirits in a dormant state or in other
higher dimensional planes existing under the false belief that their denser bodies must evolve.


When the Loyal Siddhas tried to massively liberate their own with a direct intervention approximately
12,000 years ago the Traitors who control the kalachakra from Shambala destroyed everything ina
cosmic war to sabotage the liberation, the Loyalists led the so called white Atlanteans and the Traitors
led the brown Atlanteans, When everything was destroyed some remnants of the white Atlanteans had
to make strategies to escape, using lithic technology and the brown Atlanteans began to erase history
or distort it as much as possible, one of those remnant groups that escaped from this insane creation
were the Mayans. With the stone machines they built they managed to escape through their last walled
city, currently called Tulum, although the name of the city was "the walled city where the sun is born",
because it is the place in all of Mexico where the rays of the solar logos (sun) arrive first, this was used
by the Mayas as part of their escape strategy, when the Spaniards arrived to the place the indigenous of
the area, asked what the place was called and they answered tulum, which means in Spanish "this is my
home". There are many incorrect translations on the web that say that tulum means "fence" or "wall".


Although some Maya remained to leave a strategy with the Incas, the Toltecs, and later with the
Aztecs, all strategies sought the liberation of disembodied spirits, not the lies we are told today, which
will be exposed in this text.


It is important to know that when the spirits were chained in matter, their main prison is the soul
created by the demiurge which reincarnates indefinitely in the wheel of samsara controlled by the
Traitor Siddhas, that is why when this chaining happened a spirit-soul duality was created, not the
duality of the soul that the servants of the evolutionary plan want to sell us.


The duality of the soul is real but it is part of the prison of the spirit when it incarnates in a physical body
or microcosm as a man or as a woman, to understand such mysteries that are being


133


The reader must go beyond the ontological duality of the created soul. If the reader is not able to feel
these truths of the eternal spirit, it is because he is under a very strong effect of the illusory world and at
the same time has very contaminated astral blood, since the last cosmic battle.


The more contaminated the astral blood is, the more confusion the viryas suffer, that is part of the
strategy of those who trapped us here. Because of that confusion many viryas can be trapped in the
thousands of forms of the illusory world.


The purpose of this text is not to explain the kalachakra system, but some key points will be exposed to
explain the strategies and black magic being used by those of Shambhala to deploy the spiritual
movements of 2012. By exposing them in this text using the capacity of anamnesia provided by the
hyperborean wisdom we seek to re-orient and awaken the lost viryas that are trapped under them,
who came down from Agartha but are still looking for answers.


The kalachakra system can do many things, it has the capacity to erase the memory of the chained
spirits, as well as to modify the designs of the created entities that come from the solar logos, the sun
that we currently see is the vehicle that the solar demiurge uses to project its creation, then from the
city of Shambhala of the Traitor Gods that is between the earth and the sun, they use the key to modify
everything they want in the worlds of maya, they use the key to modify everything they want in the
worlds of maya, they can even deploy global strategies so that the unconscious of millions of beings that
are connected to the planetary collective unconscious, follow those philosophies and that is why we are
exposing in this text the strategies of the enemy, that they are using for America and Spain with the
movements of 2012.


When any spirit decides to descend to matter, he cannot escape the effect of kalachakra, which means
that for all those who descend with any mission, the effect of oblivion is inevitable.


2.2 The spiritual movements of 2012


After the introduction to begin the dissertation here exposed regarding the spiritual movements of 2012
it is important to know that many of the people who are in any of these movements are trapped by a
myth that unfolded from the planetary collective unconscious to boost or modify the evolutionary plan
of humanity since the Traitor Siddhas seek to establish a new world religion based on all these
movements as well as their world government and they must do it because if they do not modify the
evolutionary plan and generate the partial destruction of the planet, they run the risk of the illusory
world reaching its final perfection, Hyperborean wisdom calls these perfections entelechies, if that
happens, they would also disappear and lose their physical immortality in this creation, along with their
cursed city, they want to avoid the final battle at all costs, that is why it is important that the spiritual
warrior who reads this book should know where he stands and on which side he is working in this
cosmic war, because maybe he is working without knowing it for his own spiritual death or for the
evolutionary plan of the demiurge, maybe he will also deny this text, everything will depend on how
strong he is to accept the truth and the fall of his internal/external illusion that has him trapped in the
myth of 2012 that unfolds in many faces. That strength will be given to him by his spirit

6


134


uncreated trapped in the created soul. Your true Self by activating, becoming alert and realizing the
deception of the created forms around you.


All apparently "new" movements that come from the East are not new because they have been practiced
there for a long time, but they are directed by the Traitor Siddhas, it is part of their strategy to put to
sleep and trap as many sleeping viryas as possible in America and Spain.


All movements are directed by the occult hierarchy of the Earth, by the Great Universal White
Brotherhood, who unknowingly or unknowingly are serving an evolutionary plan directed by their
spiritual guides who exploit them for the benefit of the evolutionary plan of the demiurge and his
creation.


The international synarchy, an organization of which nobody really talks about runs all these initiatory
movements, we will talk about it later, but we will start with each one of the movements to understand
the difference between a synarchic initiate and a hyperborean initiate. Between created light and
uncreated light. It all begins when the sleeping virya, the first thing that has been instilled in him is the
belief in some religion or in atheism, since he is a child he is programmed to believe in some religion or
to be an atheist to believe in what science says, as he is mentally programmed with certain patterns
controlled by the system of the international synarchy.


When the virya by his purity of blood begins to question the religions and already went through enough
of them and his purity of blood makes him fall into many or know of many looking for the truth, until he
realizes that there is a control in them, this is when he or the virya begins an initiatory journey a change
of lifestyle, begins to investigate and seek information, then is when he falls into one of the traps of the
illusory outer labyrinth that have the Traitor Siddhas and the new labyrinths that have been generating.
A more detailed explanation of this matter can be found in The Crystal Book of Agartha - The Infinite
Eight by Gustavo Brondino, although to read this text and understand it you must have the basis in
the hyperborean wisdom that can be found in the books of the foundations, otherwise the reader will
not understand its information. Later on we will explain what these bases consist of.


The first of the paths of the labyrinth of maya in which the viryas are trapped are the religions.


2.3 Religions


The religions in the world are many and varied but in America and Spain where we are focusing our text,
the most powerful belief is based on Christianity with all its existing ramifications such as Christians,
Catholics, Mormons, Adventists, Jehovah's Witnesses, etc etc etc. All these ramifications are intentional
by the controllers of this prison and their servant leaders of the international synarchy.


135


It is important to clarify that when the Spanish conquest took place, the Catholic temples that were the
first to be built were built in places where the telluric energy of the planet is very strong, so it is no
coincidence that at least in the case of Mexico churches have been built on top of the temples and
pyramids of the Toltecs and Aztecs, three examples that we can mention here , Three examples we can
mention here are the churches in Cholula, Puebla, which are built on top of the Toltec temples and
pyramids, the second example is the cathedral of Mexico City which was built on top of the major
temple built by the Aztecs, the third example is the construction of the Basilica of Guadalupe on the hill
of Tepeyac where an important Aztec temple was buried. These temples were built with the purpose of
annulling the power of spiritual liberation generated by these stone constructions based on Atlantean
lithic technology. By building the Catholic temples at the top the servants of the Traitor Siddhas had the
possibility to trap the unconscious astral and psychic energy of millions of Mexican viryas and modify
their genetic code with those stone machines, but not only this happened in Mexico we can also see it in
all America and Spain where the temples were built in strategic points of telluric energy.


In order to complete their strategic mission on the control over the Aztec blood and put it to sleep, from
Shambhala they came up with the idea of inventing the myth of the Virgin of Guadalupe, this was
executed by the Jesuit missionaries, using the indigenous image and Juan Diego, in this way they
trapped millions in a myth that still exists to this day and controls millions of Mexicans who blindly
believe in it, and makes them kneel before the Traitor Gods who only seek to take advantage of their
energies to complete the evolutionary plan of the demiurge. In spite of the scientific analyses that have
been made to the image, the Traitor Siddhas have the technology to deceive even the most skilled
skeptic or scientist, that thousands of impossible things have been discovered in the image of the virgin
is part of the control that they had planned to reaffirm the faith of their myths.


So we have millions of sleeping viryas trapped unknowingly in religions, to understand the prelude to
the Spanish conquest and why the Europeans came to totally destroy the legacies of hyperborean
wisdom we recommend the lost virya who reads this writing to read the book The Mystery of the
Belicena Villca by Nimrod de Rosario, also so he can understand how in the Vatican there have always
existed the children of the demiurge and his servants as well as the children of the unknowable god,
although this sounds ironic.


Then we have the totality of a secret conspiracy network in America and Spain to continue putting the
viryas to sleep or to introduce them into new evolutionary systems that we will develop in this text.


In figure 1 we can observe the symbol of the fish used by the religions based on Christianity, we will
explain what this sign means using the knowledge of the hyperborean wisdom so that the reader of this
text knows how the Traitor Gods use this symbol in the outer world of the maya; when the virya
observes and introjects this sign, he programs his shadow sphere (microcosmic unconscious) to follow
the evolutionary plan. Because the symbol of the fish is the sign of the Hebrew archetype, the
evolutionary symbol of the soul and of this creation. Besides this symbol is a tapasign of the odal rune
(figure 2) and its spiritual truths, when we speak of tapasigns


136


We are talking about signs that the Traitor Gods put over ancient spiritual signs to cover their
metaphysical truths. When we speak of Hebrew archetype we are not speaking of genetic racism but of
an archetype of the planetary collective unconscious that is a serious problem for the extraterrestrial
spirit races (hyperborean spirits), since they are being dragged more and more to sink in matter by
identifying themselves psychologically with a type (TYPO) of human (pasu - animal man) that must
inhabit the planet Earth, losing in this way the divinity more and more degraded, until merging with
creation and never being able to escape from here.


Figure 1: Symbol of the fish of Christianity and of the evolution of the animal-man (Manu) (tapasign of
the odal rune, it is found horizontally to program the unconscious submission of the viryas to the
evolutionary plan of the Traitor Gods).


Figure 2: Odal rune (original ancient symbol representing the spirit of erect, this sign before the fish
tapasign was used in different ancient magical systems, it still exists in our days and is used by modern
pagan magicians, however what we are trying to explain is that the Traitor Gods cannot allow these
signs to give guidance to the lost viryas and much less discover the secrets of the right angles taught by
the Hyperborean wisdom.


For this reason the fish sign has oval angles which cause the soul subject to predominate instead of the
spiritual SELF.


After this, the virya in his journey through the labyrinth of Maya discovers that there are Eastern
movements or religions such as Buddhism or Hinduism, with all its ramifications and understands that
there are techniques to know himself, however many of these techniques were already degraded in the
East by the Traitor Siddhas and do not fulfill their original purpose, the reader of this book must discover
for himself which of those religions frees him and which makes him evolve in the matter.


Here we expose all the paths that the lost virya or virya will follow in search of his or her purpose and his


or her
9


137


cause of being in this place, all the information and the paths of the Mayan world that you will travel in
this search will be exposed.


2.4 Yoga, Buddhism and Hinduism


There are many types or methods of meditation, mantras and energetic exercises for the microcosm,
many types of yoga and various branches of Buddhism and Hinduism, however most of these branches
have transcendental meditation as a background, without realizing that the adept who falls into these
branches is each day renouncing more to his uncreated spirit, as he enters into altered states of
consciousness, relaxation or peace, gradually achieving the perfection of his soul or is evolving, trying to
reach a greater and greater light of consciousness without realizing that he is being deceived by not
explaining in any of these methods the difference between his soul, his spirit and much less the
enchainment in matter, even when looking inward or when beginning to merge his soul with creation,
he seeks to reach certain states of elevated consciousness until reaching the samadhi that Buddha
reached, the reality is that the Buddha in which most of the lost viryas believe is in Shambhala and
ascended by merging with the demiurge. Basically the lost virya who falls into these paths can spend his
whole life trying to rise to reach false enlightenment. The reality is that what the Traitor Siddhas seek is
to erase the spiritual sign of the origin of the viryas by convincing them that it is a very positive path,
thus we see millions of viryas who have managed to escape the traps of the Christian religions getting
into these paths that will only lead them to their spiritual death by achieving the perfection of their
created soul, To get rid of these paths of the illusory world of kalachakra is very complicated, but not
impossible, since the virya lost in these paths is more controlled by his soul than by his spirit. Because
the spirit is hostile to its material prison, to matter, and when | speak of hostility | do not speak of
hostility towards the other lost viryas that inhabit the world and surround him. If the reader wants a
more detailed explanation of the types of yoga, we recommend reading The Crystal Book of Agartha -
the Hyperborean Martial Yoga by Gustavo Brondino.


From all these oriental spiritual movements derive some that we want to take into account in this text
since it is important because they are acquiring much power in America and Spain and especially in
Mexico where they were brought as a strategy of the Traitor Siddhas to put to sleep the viryas and use
them for their world plan of "ascension". The first of them is the Ishaya movement.


2.5 Ishayas


This spiritual movement is based on ascension and the so-called 7 states of consciousness of the soul,
the lost virya that enters this path, in the first level of initiation uses 4 phrases of neurolinguistic
programming that are directed to the squaring of the shadow sphere (unconscious) and the astral
energies, this programming translated into Spanish is based on the Sanskrit language of the Traitor
Siddhas, because it is important to know that Hebrew, Sanskrit and English are languages that the
Siddhas want to use to destroy the Romance languages, real artificial systems in this world of maya.


10


138


that the Loyal Siddhas created when the demons of matter made dead languages Greek and Latin. They
use the energy of the voice to be able to perform this programming, since the voice has the power to
create or destroy. Thus the ishaya initiate is convinced that by mentioning the said phrases he is
ascending by concentrating on them he is ascending in the states, finishing the first initiation the initiate
is made a chant with mantras in sanskrit and a ritual with the image of jesus-christ and without knowing
it little by little his spirit is asleep and his sign of the extraterrestrial spiritual origin is resigned and
blocked with the hebrew archetype that is currently judaizing humanity, The hebrew archetype is
explained in more detail in a deep study of the hyperborean wisdom, The ishaya movement is based on
the story of the book "First Thunder" where it talks about John and Jesus hiding in Tibet after their
persecution and applying the ishaya ascension techniques to be able to control the physical body and
ascend, Anyone who has read the Belizean's book can discern for themselves that this movement within
its disguised "benevolence" came to America and Spain under an occult agenda of Shambhala, speaking
of the movement in Mexico this lasted a long time in the hacienda of San Francisco Cuadra in Taxco,
Guerrero, anchoring certain occult energies that sought to trap millions in the future movements of
2012. Then we have the initiates who after becoming adepts decide to take additional courses where
they become masters and select a color that represents them (white, red, black). Masters who are
taught Sanskrit and more techniques to trap them in the maya and thus unknowingly renouncing their
spirit and perfecting the created soul.


2.6 Dhyanapeetam


Founded by Swami Nithyananda a brahmanic guru from India who uses certain mandalas and
transcendental meditations to help the perfection of the soul, all brahmanic priests work for Shambala,
the guru uses these techniques so that little by little the disciple will renounce his spirit, as well as
promotes in his meditations the awakening of kundalini, trying to exploit and hypnotize his disciples
from a distance. Sent from Shambhala with a special agenda for America and Spain, the lost viryas
followers of his movement are being used to achieve the highest perfection of the soul and thus avoid
their real spiritual liberation. Some lost viryas of purer blood realize the deception when the guru asks
them to wear a picture of the guru around their neck or make an altar for him, since any lost virya with
a certain level of astral blood purity can realize that doing so is following an idol. And after following so
many idols in religion and other movements the lost virya is already tired of falling into the same thing.
This is how the lost virya continues to search and falls into other movements that we will continue to
mention.


11


139


2.7 Movements 11:11


This movement seeks to anchor the necessary energy for planetary ascension, a movement that was
generated after the harmonic convergence directed by the Traitor Siddhas to generalize the new leap in
the future of humanity when the demiurge realizes its second evolutionary intention, its followers the
lost viryas in this path of the labyrinth of maya are based on the matter of the master cylinder of energy
anchorage that is located in the Titicaca lake and from there they direct or receive the energy towards
all the nodes of the planet, especially of America and Spain, most of the adepts do not know that their
spiritual energy is exploited. Since the Traitor Siddhas and all alien Traitor demon races are moving the
energy of the Shambhala vortexes from Tibet to South America to counteract the liberating energy of
the Loyal Siddhas. That is why they are desperate in their desperation to grab adepts since, by no means
they can allow millions to realize the lie, many will realize and wake up and others will not accept it,
they will deny this writing as well as all the writings of the hyperborean wisdom, they will think it is from
the enemy, but without knowing that the enemy and the friend that they believe are different energies,
are the same energy deceiving them at the end of the day. In this movement many adepts and many
who do not know it observe in the clock the number 11:11 without realizing it means that their
unconscious is being dragged towards the plan of the Traitor Siddhas, if the lost virya wants to escape
from this, the hyperborean wisdom gives him the weapons to use the power of the uncreated runes and
resign that dragging (we recommend the lost virya to read the crystal books of Agartha). In these
movements of the 11:11 they seek to open portals and anchor energies from Shambhala on key dates,
such as 8/8/08 or 10/10/10 and in 2011 on 11/11/11. For anyone who has studied numerology and
knows the secret of numbers and vibrations, the numbers and dates in which these 11:11 issues are
working, are anchoring unconscious energies to the new evolutionary plan dragging many adepts to
their own spiritual destruction, because as we mentioned before one thing is the evolution of the soul
which is what the Traitor Siddhas seek for the benefit of their evolutionary plan and quite another the
liberation of the sphere spirit chained in the body/soul that the Loyal Siddhas seek.


2.8 Essenes


This branch of the illusory world that the Traitor Siddhas promote and that is focused on the evolution
of the soul claims to be based on the teachings of Jesus Christ, the reality is that it is not so, the Essenes
already existed before the demiurge incarnated as Jesus Christ and they were the ones who helped,
guided and initiated during his incarnation, this is a truth that reveals the hyperborean wisdom and that
we are exposing in this text, This is a truth that reveals the hyperborean wisdom and that we are
exposing in this text, the demiurge creator-moulder of matter of which Plato also spoke, imitated what
the kristos-light of Atlantis did when he tried to rescue the spirits chained in matter. There are several
groups of Essenes, the original ones were and are Hebrew masters, there are some other groups that
have taken that name as the "Essene Psycho-Cybernetic Studies", which also promote the evolution of
the soul based on the teachings of Jesus Christ, many lost viryas that promote those movements believe
they are doing the greatest good, by teaching knowledge that improves the evolution of the soul until its
final perfection, based on the laws of the laws of the soul, the laws of the soul, the laws of the soul, the


12


140


laws of the soul, the laws of the soul, the laws of the soul, the laws of the soul, the laws of the soul, the
laws of the soul, the laws of the soul, the laws of the soul, the laws of the soul.


13


141


cosmic and certain functions of the microcosm but without ever telling the followers that they are a
spirit race chained in matter. Many of these groups can be found in some countries of America, Europe
but mostly in Mexico. Many of these groups were directed and created by the universal white fraternity,
by exposing these spiritual movements we do not seek with this text to make an in-depth study of each
one of the traps of the Traitor Gods, but to expose the key points and not to make the reading of this
chapter so complex. The objective is to expose the key points so that the lost or awakened virya who
reads this text can orient himself and understand the true cosmic war.


2.9 Reiki


Within the spiritual quest to know more about oneself, the lost virya will sooner or later come to know
the healing technique of reiki or any other energy healing technique. It is no coincidence that nowadays
attempts are being made to give free reiki initiations all over the world and more specifically in America
and Spain, which is where we are focusing this writing since all America and Spain play an important
role in the liberation of the captive spirits and in the future of humanity, those so called third world
countries have remained so because the Traitor Gods wish so. It is important to know that originally
reiki was created with another hyperborean objective before falling into total degradation by the agents
of the Traitor Gods who also ended up bending the warrior spirit of the Japanese after the second world
war, now it is being used as part of a secret agenda by the international synarchy, to accelerate the
evolution of the microcosm.


The technique in any of its four existing levels of traditional reiki seeks that the initiate channels the
universal vital energy to send it locally or at a distance to people who are sick, that "benevolent"
universal vital energy would be a fusion of the lost virya with the astral energy of the creation of the
demiurge although reiki uses the distorted concept of ki/chi/ka or as the hyperborean wisdom calls it
vril, spiritual energy, the technique does not seek at all that the reikist initiate frees himself, on the
contrary it seeks to trap him in any of the reiki myths of the planetary collective unconscious and that
he ends up succumbing and renouncing his spiritual SELF by merging with his material prison.


Although reiki uses the concept of lineage to teach the technique, this concept has no relation with the
concept of lineage that the hyperborean wisdom uses to refer to the great extraterrestrial ancestor.
And it is important to make this clarification because the concept of reiki lineage is a concept that was
implemented by the synarchy.


It is important that the lost reikist viryas or any other virya that is in any group of the new era and that
reads this writing know that this writing does not seek to offend anyone since feeling offended is also
something illusory generated by the soul, however it does not mean not feeling anything. When
someone begins to conquer the real strength of his spirit, he starts to control the soul, and


14


142


can generate the emotions he wishes, if he conquers the vril. This text seeks to awaken and destroy a lie
that has been built throughout history and that has us in a crucial question.


So what is really sought with this writing and many others related to the hyperborean wisdom is to
touch the spiritual part of each virya and achieve the initiation, liberation and racial transmutation of
the viryas of America and Spain who are lost in the "spiritual" paths that the Traitor Siddhas are
proposing for 2012 and ascension. This writing is focused for the viryas on those paths because only you,
who are currently a minority of the population can make possible the awakening of a race and the
return of the forgotten spiritual knowledge and values, you despite being lost on those paths, are at
some advantage with other lost viryas who are in greater spiritual confusion in the prison of the maya.


Beyond our cultural barriers and the country of origin in America from which we come from, there is
something that unites us, which is the language, the soil and a blood that is not physical, in turn that
language unites us with Spain because our language as well as other Romance languages such as
Portuguese are a system created by the Loyal Siddhas. (To go deeper into this subject we recommend
the reader to read "The Crystal Book of Agartha - The Mystery of The House of Turdes by Gustavo
Brondino").


And we clarify that here we are not promoting the issue that the Traitor Siddhas are trying to promote,
the issue that we are all one, and that we are all united with the heart, because the heart chakra is a
prison and it is where the EGO is mostly exploited, The soul love that the Traitor Siddhas promote also
imprisons, although it seems that it liberates, it is not so, because little by little the ego is yielding its will
by letting itself be carried away by this false love and leading the lost viryas (as) to merge with creation,
instead of freeing themselves from it.


One of the things that the hyperborean wisdom proposes to the spiritual warrior is to take total control
of his chakras, of his emotions, etc., of his microcosm and NOT that the microcosm/soul ends up
subduing the "I", that it ends up subduing the will of the spirit.


2.10 Red Path, Shamanism, Nahualism, Nahualism


In the red path and shamanism but especially in nahualism, customs inherited by the Mayas, Incas,
Toltecs and finally the Aztecs, there were some things that were still beneficial for the spiritual liberation
of the viryas and that had certain knowledge based on the hyperborean wisdom, however many things
were lost in time, although this "loss" was intentional, due to the infiltration of agents and black
magicians of the international synarchy that sought to destroy or degrade this knowledge under the lie
that it was pagan and went against the Christianity that they wanted to establish by force to subjugate
the peoples of America to the Hebrew psychoid archetype of the planetary collective unconscious, the
black magicians that came from Europe knew very well what their mission was. It took them a long time
to infiltrate in order to control the pure blood of the peoples of America who still conserved the
memory of the Loyal Gods, of Quetzalcoalt, of Huiracocha. Although the peoples of America resisted, in
the end they ended up infiltrated by the


15


143


In North America the druids coming from the English empire subdued the people known as the Native
Americans, and in Central and South America the Europeans also fulfilled their mission. In Central and
South America the Europeans also fulfilled their mission and after the degradation of the customs they
began the miscegenation which ended up confusing and degrading even more the peoples of America
until almost achieving the disappearance of the races, as it happened with the Aztecs, the same thing
that they had already been able to do in Europe they did in America. Some think that the Druids are
good, because they have written good things about themselves, but it is not so, they do it to deceive the
lost viryas.


Basically, what used to be liberation, ended up becoming evolution and slavery. Since Christianity
concepts were added to the customs. The opposition to matter ended up becoming love for it, in
concepts such as love for mother earth, to merge with it and to do the greatest good for the soul, the
true issues of the spirit were distorted and confused with the soul. The love of the illusory world (maya)
managed to be established and is still preserved to this day in the customs of the red path, customs that
were previously tools to advance towards spiritual liberation, ended up being used to perfect the soul.


An example where we can see this concept is in the temazcals, in the past the great initiates entered
caves or grottos, which symbolized the individual unconscious or shadow sphere and after certain
rituals the initiate began a new life transmuted into something different, a breakthrough was achieved
in the liberation, that same temazcals sought, transmute the initiate into something different under
certain physical and psychic tests using certain elements of nature, but without merging or tying to it.
Nowadays it is something totally different in some places where it has been degraded to the point of
being used for profit or as a simple sauna bath without any spiritual background, and even if it has one,
it does not fulfill the initiatory purpose. In the more traditionalist places where it is given a "spiritual"
approach, it is used to benefit the microcosm, the evolution of the soul. Where the ancient concepts of
grandfathers, grandmothers, directions, herbs and pachamama are used for the love of matter and the
evolution of the soul.


The sacred objects of shamanism (copaleras, objects of power, feathers, drums etc.) were degraded
over time by the confusion of the spirits in this dark age which hyperborean wisdom calls kaly yuga.
These objects still fulfill some magical functions, however, the metaphysical background for which they
were originally created was lost in time. Those objects were created as artificial real systems for this
illusory or maya world, but in the end they ended up modifying themselves and making the viryas slaves
of them. Since from now on the viryas would surrender their will to them to be protected by them or to
be used as the only viable tool to achieve a leap in the evolution of the soul, thus forgetting that any
object that one puts sense (external) can be used as a magical weapon if one uses his spiritual force to
give it the function that one desires.


The reality is that the shaman of the red road is unknowingly a lost virya, trapped in his own rituals,
rituals that are sometimes simple or sometimes complicated and that in the end end up


16


144


trapping him in that branch of the illusion that creates the kalachakra key that the Traitor Gods control.
There are still some peoples under the belief of the blood and they try not to mix it with the mestizos
but this knowledge is distorted since most of them in spite of believing in the blood, they have already
been domesticated forgetting the true meaning of the blood which is not only a genetic matter as it is
believed and which clearly teaches the hyperborean wisdom.


The true spiritual warrior does not need external cultural objects to protect himself, since in his spirit he
possesses the weapons he needs to protect or defend himself. The true warrior knows that what is
outside is a projection of what is inside, and that what is outside traps in the world of forms, this
external projection is through the reversion of the spirit sphere that is studied in depth in the
hyperborean wisdom. The key is to use the knowledge of the hyperborean wisdom to open the records
that were lost in time and return them to their original mission that the Incas, Mayas, Toltecs, Aztecs,
etc. bequeathed to us, and that is part of the purpose of this text.


Within the red path we have some writings like those of Carlos Castafieda for those who have studied the
hyperborean wisdom with their capacity of anamnesia can know that it has a message of liberation or
that it enslaves the world of matter. Because both messages exist in the texts of Castafieda.


Of all the branches of the red road, the most remarkable is Nahualism, the most persecuted and
punished magical science since Mexico was invaded by the Europeans. Many nahuals were
exterminated and their magic and stories of those warriors were lost in time. The true meaning of
nahual was interior or spirit, that which is inside, the greatest secret kept by the demons of matter is
the exploitation of the uncreated spirit trapped in the microcosm to create and maintain the reality we
know or what most lost viryas call "real".


In nahualism or as many call it nagualism, it is currently given a focus onthe duality of creation, the
duality that exists in the microcosm, this approach was a distortion created by the servants of
Shambala, but part of its true foundations that were handled by the Toltecs will be explained below,
nahualism is based on the tonal and the nahual, what really meant the tonal would be the part that the
hyperborean wisdom calls the soul or soul subject with all its existing spheres (cultural subject,
emotional subject, conscious subject) and the nahual is the uncreated part or the spirit that does not
belong to this creation, the will of the spirit, originally the Toltecs sought to make the reversion of the
spirit sohere trapped in the soul/microcosm to escape from the material prison as the Mayas had done,
this is what the hyperborean wisdom currently proposes. The Toltecs sought for the nahual to end up
totally taking over the tonal, they sought this by using certain physical and psychic techniques to
achieve the inner transmutation, techniques that we will explain more in detail in the chapter of the
nagualism of the empty hand. Nowadays many of the foundations of nagualism are based on the
dualistic creation of the demiurge, this is because for no reason the owners of the material prison can
allow the spirit trapped in the lost viryas to free itself or to tell of the great deception.


17


145


Tonal = reason, judge, evaluate, witness (soul with its soheres/bodies that reincarnates and witnesses its
lived experiences, prison of the spirit created by the demiurge and the Traitor Siddhas).


Nahual = will, spirit (uncreated spirit trapped in the creation of the demiurge, will used to create the
culture of the world of illusory forms and thus evolution exists).


We have touched on some of the most important points of the red path to explain the lost or awakened
virya as the Traitor Siddhas have a secret agenda unfolding in America and Spain to ensnare millions on
that evolutionary path.


2.11 Types of magic (Santeria, Voodoo, Holy Death, Color Magic)


If Cuba is the major source of Santeria in America and allows this type of magic to exist without being
punished, it is because the Traitor Siddhas wish it so. One of the greatest secrets of the international
synarchy is that they allow and promote, both capitalism and communism, and put them in an apparent
confrontation to deceive millions of lost viryas, on the other hand the Loyal Siddhas created
nationalisms and national-socialisms, although later the international synarchy used the name of
socialism to degrade it and hide it under communism and capitalism. That is why whenever any of those
political movements of the Loyal Siddhas have arisen, they have been attacked by the international
synarchy, creating coups d'état and wars. The hyperborean wisdom is very clear in explaining in depth
this matter which will not be developed in this writing, but it is important to know that if Cuba is
communist and Santeria is allowed without the Cuban government following its leaders is because they
are part of the control, the same happens with other countries where voodoo is practiced as Africa and
speaking specifically of America in some parts of the Caribbean as Haiti. It is convenient for the synarchy
that these things exist in order to psychically control the masses with metaphysical things and have
them totally impoverished.


It is difficult to know how many types of shambalic magic exist today as some have emerged recently,
such as the cult of the holy death that has emerged in Mexico, but we can hear of white magic, black
magic, pink magic, etc. But we will explain to the lost and awakened virya reading this text, how these
systems of the illusory world trap many and how they exploit them when they follow their path of
spiritual search.


Almost all current magical systems are controlled from Chang Shambala, the way they work using some
guidelines of hyperborean wisdom is that these systems use egregores. Those egregors need to be fed
through the vital or psychic energy of other entities, whether human or animal. The way this happens is
that those systems of witchcraft or magic need some kind of sacrifice either personal or of some entity.
We will give some examples. The first thing that the lost virya does is to make sense of those systems,
whatever it is, by making sense of it or focusing on it, the requested virya makes an energetic
connection with the system and without realizing it is phagocytized, which implies that part of his will
goes to make sense of the system and this follower of that type of magic is trapped through his
unconscious or shadow sphere, as well as


18


146


All the "spiritual" paths that we have explained so far the virya is trapped, but we want to deepen a
little in this one because this system is maintained thanks to its very powerful egregores that are fed by
the black magic of Chang Shambala to put the viryas to sleep and open cracks in the auric field of the
microcosm, something similar does the addiction to drugs.


After the virya is caught, he starts doing good things, let's say he does magic to help others, talking
about the simplest magic like white or pink magic, let's say he uses a red ribbon or a candle or some
affirmation, written or oral. Unknowingly the lost virya is transferring part of his psychic energy to that
outer symbol feeding it, when that egregore receives the energy and returns the favor convinces the
virya that the system works, unknowingly the virya is already trapped in an illusion created by the
system and the egregore, thus begins his path in magic. This is the simplest case. After this the adept
begins to attract astral entities that are maintained and are projections of those egregores, perhaps
those entities will communicate with him or her and then teach him or her more techniques.


Let's talk about a more complex case, such as voodoo or Santeria. Let's say that the santero is already
an initiate and has already been given his saints or his muertito in voodoo, his helping spirits. In
exchange for "favors" or protections the magician needs to make a sacrifice, generally that sacrifice is
an animal, by sacrificing an animal in exchange for the favor the magician transfers his will to the desire
and in turn the astral and vital energy of the sacrificed animal that is generally found in the blood and in
certain organs, this energy is what feeds the egregore that is generally controlled from Chang Shambala
by means of the planetary collective unconscious. The sorcerer/magician receives the favor, little by
little the energy of the egregore and the entities that are projected from it to the astral plane, are tied
in the unconscious energy or shadow sphere of the sorcerer and begin to envelop him, deceiving him in
the world of illusion, the magician believes he is prospering and believes he is the best, believes he is
superior, believes he is different, without realizing that he is trapped he can spend his whole life being a
great magician/witch or initiated in some type of magic, without ever knowing of his enchainment,
besides the sorcerer will believe that he knows himself without knowing that he is trapped and
involved, with time the lost virya will have yielded almost all his will to the magic system without
knowing it and that will not only be in this plane, but also in others, believing that his will is totally
done, he will fear not having the protection or the help of his "allies", forgetting that nothing absolutely
nothing can with the pure will of the spirit.


In the worst case if the lost virya who is a wizard/witch cannot pay for the favor he asked for and will be
punished, in the worst case he can be forced to disembody, attacked by the same entities or punished
by the demons of matter under the argument of not fulfilling his mission, the biggest problem is when
any of these systems of black magic that is disguised as "benevolence" and can give physical abundance
that at the end of the day is pure illusion, is used to open astral portals or when the witches/magicians
are forced to make great sacrifices and we can see it nowadays in Mexico where the demons of matter
are asking for great sacrifices and a racial cleansing, their more than 50,000 dead say it all, where
externally we are seeing a fight that in reality is metaphysical. Since there are really many sorcerers
behind those deaths and many followers of the holy death that are feeding that egregore in exchange
for protections. Here we are not delving into every single magical system, such as voodoo dolls, bokor,
saints,


19


147


godparents, guides, dead people, "angels", reading of shells (one of the systems of divination in
Santeria connecting to the records of the planetary collective unconscious) etc... there is a lot of public
information about it, what we are looking for is to expose the trap of the Traitor Gods and to warn the
lost or awakened viryas of the terrible power of the kalachakra.


When one falls into this path of illusion, the inner enemies emerge thoughts to the consciousness in the
magician/witch so that he denies that he is trapped and the same happens with the other traps that we
have explained and maybe the lost virya reading this text will think that also the hyperborean wisdom is
another trap, because really that doubt will emerge in reason, but a simple way to prove to the lost
virya that it is not, is that by all means the Traitor Gods have tried to destroy the primordial origin of the
extraterrestrial spirit races trapped here. Nothing in history has ever been so punished as the
hyperborean wisdom. Whole kingdoms and races have been destroyed for possessing it.


2.12 Gnostics of Samael Aun Weor


Many viryas lost in their search through the outer labyrinth will fall into the gnostic current of Samael.
Although his followers deny it, he secretly worked for the universal white brotherhood and part of his
mission was the deliberate plagiarism of works of Gurdjieff, Krumm-Heller, Blavatsky among others and
his plagiarism adapted these works to the methods of Chang Shambala, to promote the evolution of the
soul, methods that seek the destruction of the spiritual "I", which they want to disguise under the
concept of the ego, they confuse millions of lost viryas making them believe that the problem is the ego,
they disguise the true spiritual "I" with the mask of the ego, the ego is the problem in all the traps of
Shambhala. What they will never say is that the ego they want to disguise is really the manifestation of
the uncreated spirit, trapped in the consciousness (conscious subject - hyperborean concept).


Many gnostics of Samael have reached destruction or madness when trying to awaken kundalini using
the methods of Samael's gnosis. They use some methods very similar to Freemasonry that we will
explain later, they secretly use bookstores to distribute their texts making the lost viryas believe that
the texts are the greatest secret, in this way they make the virya feel that he is someone very important
and he is trapped in that part of the illusion, they handle many texts that are really promoted by the
great universal white brotherhood like those of Blavatsky and they make the viryas believe that they
are on the right path even though they also make public conferences of esoteric subjects many of those
speak of the evolution of the soul.


It is said that at the end of his life Samael discovered the great deception and was assassinated and
attacked by the demons of matter and by the black magicians of the white brotherhood, some say that
at the end he began to say in his delirium that his teachers were demons. To free oneself from a path
like gnosis or freemasonry is quite complicated because although humility and service to others is
preached, an unconscious craving for power and superiority traps the viryas in these paths. All the works
of Samael promote the evolution that the demons of matter desire, evolution vs. liberation as we
mentioned before.


20


148


Although the lost virya who reads this text may think that this text seeks to discard all paths and force
him to follow the hyperborean wisdom, that is NOT the purpose of this text, but as previously stated, it
seeks to expose the Traitor Siddhas and all their traps without beating around the bush, so we expose
the entire tree where the branches come from so that the lost viryas can awaken to awakening.


2.13 Masons


It is one of the most powerful arms of the international synarchy with its millions of followers around
the world, from common people to big businessmen or politicians, millions of lost viryas fall into the
nets of this esoteric "spiritual" organization, many spend their whole life and many incarnations
belonging to Freemasonry without ever discovering the deception of the illusory world that kalachakra
exerts when falling into this "spiritual" branch. There are several different Masonic lodges and various
rites with their different degrees such as the Rosicrucian, blue lodges, symbolic, York Rite, Scottish Rite.
The York Rite with its 13 degrees and the Ancient Scottish Rite with 33 degrees respectively. We do not
seek to make a total development of each one of its levels and chambers of synarchic initiation, there is
a lot of information about it, to the great masters of the lodges logically that their guides and masters
will never speak to them of the true chaining of the sphere spirit, since their masters are the demons of
the matter which disguise themselves as great guides, just like the great universal white fraternity that
we will develop in another point. Although they promote the spirituality of man, this is based ona
better society and a better world through the evolution of the consciousness or of the soul, of the soul,
of the soul, of the consciousness, of the soul, of the consciousness, of the soul, of the soul, of the soul,
and of the soul.

the 12 spiritual values that are disguised under the evolution of the soul and the greater "good" for
society.

In the end, millions of lost viryas are fooled into believing that through the

The evolution and "spiritual" development of the soul achieves liberation, which is not true, someone
can remember their lives, access their akashic archives and never remember their chaining, because no
matter how many lives are remembered, the latency state between them is never remembered, the
Traitor Siddhas, owners of the wheel of samsara, will always erase those intermediate memories in each
incarnation. Many, even if they are grade 33, all their lives will be lost viryas, believing to be awakened
and having managed to develop some qualities of the microcosm.


One can have any level of master or companion or remain at the lowest level of apprentice during the
entire temporal existence of the microcosm and never know the truth of the spiritual enchainment,
although some knowledge is similar to the hyperborean wisdom as for example: the mason seeks to
control the body of desires (soul) and the hyperborean wisdom proposes to seize the part of animal-
man the part created by the demiurge that would be equivalent to the soul subject with its respective
spheres. The Mason also tries to penetrate his shadow sphere, his unconscious or what they call the
West, his inner worlds and does so in certain chambers such as the chamber of reflection which is
similar to a crypt and uses the same principle that we explained with the temazcals, also the Mason
seeks to escape from the material prison as proposed by wisdom. The problem lies in the fact that the
Mason, not knowing the truth of his enchainment, the primordial war of the Gods, when penetrating
21


149


into the inner worlds that lie in each of the


22


150


The seven chakras of the microcosm, chakras that control the physical organs, in the end the "I" remains
chained in the heart, this is what the Traitor Gods seek, the Mason in the end will remain chained in
what they call the temple of the heart, without ever knowing the truth of his chaining of his sphere
spirit. These seven interior worlds are a copy of the seven exterior kingdoms of nature created by the
demiurge, or we could say that they are part of the hells of matter where the Hyperborean spirits are


chained.


That is why in Freemasonry they seek to give the shape of a cube to what they call the philosopher's
stone, molding its interior to that form and doing it in the same way in the exterior temples of the
lodges, the Mason ignores that the cubic form actually traps the spirit sphere in the three-dimensional
forms (3D) of matter and that is what the Traitor Gods seek, On the contrary, the hyperborean wisdom
seeks to make the gnostic reversion of the cube to the sphere, that is why the hyperborean wisdom


considers the Mason a lost virya, although he believes to be alert, he is not because the "I" cannot see
the real prison of the maya, no matter how many astral travels and records are known about oneself,
one does not know his original enchainment. We recommend the lost or awakened virya reader to read
these eternal truths in Gustavo Brondino's analysis of Davincy's image of the Vitruvian man in his text


The Mystery of the House of Turdes.


Anyone who rebels against his lodges in a high degree and discovers the deception will sooner or later
be annihilated by his own masters, by physical or metaphysical means. What can the lost virya know
about his enchainment in the created soul, an enchainment that has millions of years in his short life
span, 70 or 60 years on average, almost nothing. Millions of Masons follow the direct order of their
masters for the evolutionary social changes to be carried out believing that they have a great mission in
life and that they are doing the greatest good and that with this mission they are helping the "Great
Architect of the Universe" that at the end of the day would be the demiurge "The ONE". If any of these
Masonic branches in its beginnings had another purpose, it ended up being controlled by the synarchy
as they have infiltrated thousands of spiritual movements throughout history after the sinking of the
last Atlantis. Although we must clarify that most of the Masonic branches from their origins were
created by the synarchy under its pyramidal form, and we see it as mentioned in the book of the
Mystery of Belicena Villca that the Masons are the evolution of the Templars, although the Masons see
their Templar ancestors as martyrs having been destroyed by Philip the Fair and the Vatican, The
majority of current Masons ignore this history, because the major secrets of the great initiates cannot
be revealed even if they are 33rd degree, because if they were revealed many Masons would desert the
lodges, the Masonic pyramidal form is totally contrary to the Hyperborean movements. Many Masons
deny being ritualistic but the truth is that they are and those rituals are also part of their chaining, in all
rituals if they are not conscious of their astral energies they will end up trapping the Masonic initiate in
the illusions of the macro-structures of maya.


23


151


2.14 White Brotherhood (Great Universal White Brotherhood)


This kalachakra path is the most powerful arm of the synarchy and there is a very strong relationship
between Freemasonry; the great universal white fraternity is also known as the white brotherhood,
although Freemasonry and the white brotherhood are not the same, members of both groups carry out
joint plans which also include orders of monks of the Catholic church. In the kalachakra paths of the
enormous labyrinth of maya, the lost virya or virya who has the most purity of blood and who has
escaped from the other kalachakra paths will sooner or later come across the signs or the white
brotherhood group, and will be invited to become a great sinarch initiate. The white brotherhood is the
occult hierarchy of the earth and is directed entirely from Shambhala, the lost viryas or evolved pasus
who are initiated or become masters of the universal white brotherhood will sooner or later be invited
to travel to Shambhala and enter one of its initiation chambers. But this will only happen when the
initiate has shown fidelity to his masters. Without knowing it, the lost viryas on this path will never
know the mysteries of their enchainment or their possible liberation, since at this level the lost virya
believes that he will ascend and that a great evolutionary movement for humanity is near, In this way
the lost virya is trapped in the belief that he has finally found after many searches his mission in life and
maybe he is convinced that he is one of the 144,000 chosen ones, as it happens with the other myths
that we have already explained and that trap the astral and psychic energies of the lost viryas.


The mission currently entrusted to the White Brotherhood by the Traitor Siddhas is to

physical construction of the "New Jerusalem", with this they seek to make a replica of Chang Shambala in
3D matter, as they did when they built St. Peter's Basilica in the Vatican (figure 2) which represents the
kalachakra key in matter and clearly explains the hyperborean wisdom.


24


152


The virya lost in the white brotherhood will be instructed in the knowledge of the ascended masters, the
seven rays, the Shambhala philosophy of the | AM (also used by the Masons), in the extraterrestrial race
groups of the Traitor Siddhas, the builder devas, the angelic hierarchies like the Ashtar Command, beings
of Orion, Procyon etc. etc. etc. etc. He will also acquire knowledge in the use of energetic objects, such
as power stones, swords to cut or anchor energies (karmic, hauntings) the use of these swords is
something very different from the construction of hyperborean weapons of war, he will also learn magic
systems, talismans such as the tetragrammaton (five-pointed star) or the malta cross with the
inscription of the |AM and some integrated power stone. The sinarca initiate will have to wear from his
initiation and in each of his "spiritual" works a white tunic and a cloak which will be magically worked to
carry a counter astral part and protect the initiate from the high frequencies that will be anchored from
Shambala. Another thing to wear is a linen belt as well as a headband on which the initiate will have to
embroider with his own hand the name "YAHWEH", one of the names of the demiurge Yahveh Sebaot (Y
H V H Sebaot), another reason to wear this garment is to resign and block the sign of the origin that each
lost virya carries without knowing it, sign of the extraterrestrial spiritual lineage to which he belongs.


Never to the sinarca initiate or to the masters of the white brotherhood, whether they are evolved
pasus or lost viryas, the mystery of the enchainment is revealed and their energy is exploited if


26


153


if any of them became aware of the deception, it would be the greatest evil for the Traitor Gods since
they do not want a rebellion of their subjects.


Thus the initiate in the white brotherhood, as in Freemasonry, learns all the techniques in the different
levels or chambers of initiation, although the techniques and the knowledge of certain laws grant
certain "magical power" in the material world and can surprise the lost virya, they never help him to
know the primordial betrayal of the enchainment and to revert it. Learning any of the mentioned
magical techniques such as the use of stones can only serve awakened viryas as part of their personal or
group strategies of liberation.


Something that also characterizes the great universal white fraternity is the triangle with the circle
inside or with the eye inside, the eye of yod that teaches the hyperborean wisdom and that is in all
matter, this symbol is also used by the freemasons. The great universal white fraternity also uses
certain instruments such as the Tibetan bowls and mandalas. All the instruments and signs seek to
distract and put to sleep the lost virya, in the worst case it seeks to modify his DNA with frequency and
sound to turn him into a great synarchic initiate.


Next we will start with some movements that are more recent and are being used for the "evolution"
of 2012.


2.15 Channels


There are currently many channels but we will explain exactly how this process works and how the
Traitor Gods are deceiving thousands of viryas.


Currently there are many channels around the world, some channeling ascended masters, angels,
archangels, extraterrestrial beings or other kinds of "spiritual" beings. Most of the recent channeling
began in the 1980s. The reality is that all these channelings are directed from Chang Shambhala, entire
books have been written about channelings promoting the ascension or evolution of humanity, this is
done because in his second intention the demiurge plans to project a new humanity and that this new
humanity is responsible for transmuting the entire galaxy created by the greater demiurge THE ONE.
They need to do this so that the chained spirit of the lost viryas stops struggling, because that inner
struggle is always happening.


The way to anchor the energy to be able to channel is by connecting the 4 superior chakras where
according to the hyperborean wisdom the spiritual "I" is mostly chained. The 4 superior chakras are
used but mainly the vishuda to be able to transmit the oral message, the ajna and the sahasrara to be
able to see and maintain the communication, and the anahata to anchor in the heart-temple, inner
world the total base of the shambalic energy.


27


154


A sufficiently strong virya who has not renounced his or her spirit will not be able to channel even if he
or she attempts to do so, for within him or her, the EGO will hesitate and resist doing so. There is
always a natural resistance from the self because there is a certain purity of blood in that virya. This
does not mean that someone who is a channel and realizes the great deception of maya has no
possibility to re-orient himself or herself and begin his or her liberation. For this lost virya, if he/she
does not belong to the occult hierarchy of the earth, he/she is only being used for some benefit of the
Traitor Gods.


The reality is that all channelings only give messages of peace and evolution, of great changes or
contacts with alien races that never really come and if some do occur it is because it is so designed and
planned by the Traitor Gods. No message teaches any technique to escape from the material prison
and most are used to merge with the creation of the demiurge.


We have messages from "great" beings (Kryon, Ramtha, etc. Etc.) or from archangels such as the
archangel Michael, Metatron, Uriel etc. etc. etc.. The reality is that these beings angels, archangels,
seraphim, etc. etc. etc. are part of the emanations of the Creator. They are part of the emanations of
the demiurge when he divided himself into his devas builders, they are the same but projected ina
different way, projected in some of his thousand faces. Then we have those angelic hierarchies that
direct the future of humanity so that the evolutionary plan is fulfilled, imitating the unknowable god
and deceiving millions of viryas lost in those beliefs and channelings. Only someone who can see with
their spirit or their true awakened SELF, that is, an awakened virya, will realize that they are doing very
well in their agenda, confusing millions so that they remain asleep and are managed like cattle.


2.16 Galactic Confederation and Extraterrestrial Races


Perhaps to the reader, whether lost or awakened virya reading this text, the names of Ashtar Command,
Galactic Confederation of Light, Arcturians, Pleiadians, Andromedans, Reptilians, Raelians, Cassiopeians,
Greys, etc., etc., may sound familiar. Many people talking about many races and massive contacts but
contacts that to date have not happened. There are several agendas of disinformation by the
international synarchy and its agents, here we will make a detailed explanation about it.


It is difficult in the present situation of the lost viryas to know who is who in this cosmic war, so we will
now bring out the truth as it is. Most of the messages of the races


Extraterrestrials either through "contactees" or channelings, talk about this great leap that humanity will
take, basically most of them promote evolution or Gaia's ascension, in those messages they are not telling


the truth. Many of these messages are to further confuse the lost viryas and we have many writings
about races and messages.


The reality is that Gaia (Gea) name that comes from the Greeks, represents the energy of the goddess,
that energy of the goddess had nothing to do with matter as the extraterrestrial races are promoting.
The true meaning referred to the energy of the feminine hyperborean spirits, to the warrior valkyries of
Valhalla, the feminine energy is an energy strongly exploited by the


28


155


Traitor Gods that is why the effect of kalachakra on women (mother archetype) is much greater than
that of men. It is not by chance that for a long time their power was discredited in society. Although
some texts talk about this a little, they do not reveal the greatest secret of all, which is that the woman
has the power to transmute the virya into immortal siddha, which is something that the hyperborean
wisdom teaches.


The female hyperborean spirits were never fully chained in matter, the reality is that the male spirits are
the ones who suffered the most confusion during the chaining, because of this the Traitor Gods used all
their power to limit them and keep them under control.


So we have the extraterrestrial races promoting the love of Gaia, the material prison of the chained
spirit races, disguising the Gaia belief of the goddess energy and confusing the lost viryas. It is difficult to
give names of races to those who really want to help and those who want to exploit us, that is why the
hyperborean wisdom calls them Gods/demons/extraterrestrials/Siddhas Traitors, those who promote
evolution and those who promote liberation Gods/extraterrestrials/Loyal Siddhas. Although there are
several races and several spiritual hierarchies, these concepts are used to avoid greater confusion than
currently exists.


It is important to know that according to hyperborean wisdom since the kalachakra was implemented
with the construction of Chang Shambala, the Loyal Siddhas could no longer remain on the earth's
surface and that is why we see things, constructions of the past etc. that we cannot explain.


If they could no longer stay on the earth surface it means that most of the races that claim to come to
help us really come from Shamballa, and many of those races have to pass through there in order to
pass the frequency grid that keeps us chained and trapped in the illusion. That is why almost all the
races that visit us want to exploit us because they really know that we are trapped Gods, since many of
them are projections of other solar demiurges that come to benefit from us to be able to transmute
their galactic zone, due to the fact that from here, as we already mentioned, an evolutionary plan for
the whole galaxy is thought to be made. Many of those races that visit us only have souls, that is why
they see us as royalty, because they are collective souls without spirit, projections at the end of the day
of the ONE, the greater demiurge.


Many conspiracy theories, especially those of the Greys and the Reptilians, are disinformation on the
part of the servants of the Synarchy, we recommend to the sleeping or awake virya who reads this text
to discern for himself these truths, many writings such as Sitchin Zecharia, among many others that
speak of these ancient Gods, seek to reinforce the belief that evolution is the best as science has done
with Darwinism, they also seek to reinforce the belief in the demiurge.

We say it is disinformation because the reality is that the Traitor Gods when descending through the
archetypal plane to matter can take any form, angels, virgins, reptiles etc. etc., and most of the greys
are in Shambhala and are servants or are controlled by the Traitor Gods, all conspiracy theories and
texts that talk about it have disinformation.


29


156


Let's analyze something very simple as someone like David Icke or David Wilcock and many other
contactees such as Sixto Paz, Billy Meier etc. They can or could speak publicly without hiding and fill
spaces of more than a thousand people and openly ask for the truth of extraterrestrials to be revealed
without hiding from the secret agencies, if that is possible it is because they are part of the agenda of
disinformation, they are part of the thousands of agendas that the international synarchy has created to
implement their government and their new world religion. There are beliefs for all tastes and flavors.


As we mentioned before; it means that if some knowledge is allowed, can be acquired or bought ina
store and is not penalized, it is because it is part of the agenda. Then we can see how many myths
deployed from the planetary collective unconscious have trapped thousands in many paths of the
illusory world.


If there really was an "alien contact" it should have already happened, what is the purpose of making us
wait, but it does not happen and they disguise that lie under the "respect" of free will, the truth is that
free will does not exist it is an illusion of the maya in which the spirit races are chained, although many
new age followers claim otherwise, the reversion of the spirit sohere trapped in the microcosm creates
that illusion and the hyperborean wisdom is very clear in explaining it. The international synarchy
already has an agenda to deceive millions under the alien invasion or contact, which is part of a secret
agenda to take many viryas to other planes of meaning (worlds of maya) of the demiurge the ONE. The
reality is that those who want to help us (Loyal Siddhas) cannot easily approach the lost viryas of the
worlds of maya, to achieve this requires a great effort, some of the causes are because it is complicated
to locate the spirits chained in the transcendent time that is the linear flow of the consciousness of the
demiurge, it is the time as we know it which drags us into the future, another cause is that they have to
descend the archetypal plane and that can not be done in any place. The Loyal Siddhas have millions of
years trying to awaken and free the spirits from their material chains. Some have departed at different
historical epochs.


So it is important that now that the lost virya who is awakening by reading this writing, by himself
realizes that many of the most famous stories such as area 51, the Roswell accident, etc. are
disinformation, although there are beings who come to study us and people who have had experiences,
the reality is that they are planning or trying to reproduce what exists here in other places. That is why
the more disinformation that exists, the more control and ramifications the branches of the illusory
world will have. Now the virya reading this text will notice why it was mentioned at the beginning that
this text would attempt to be destroyed. No one in control wants to be exposed, least of all those who
have us trapped in this insane evolutionary creation.


There are many ufologists in the world who talk about the different types of extraterrestrial civilizations
and their ships, the best known in America and Spain but mainly in Mexico is Jaime Mausan who profits
with the UFO phenomenon without reaching any conclusion, only showing video evidence, many viryas
who ignore the true story fall into the misinformation of many ufologists who work and get rich on the
lost viryas who are looking for answers. The


30


157


The truth is that the famous UFOs never come, they have always been here, since this war has been
going on for millions of years. Perhaps the lost virya thinks that with what we expose here, we seek to
judge the movements or specific people, but it is not so, the judgment is part of the reason and the
reason must be controlled by the spiritual SELF, but to control it does not mean to block it as the
synarchy proposes, besides what we are looking for is to remove the masks of an invisible enemy for
many and to destroy the lie that has millions in confusion.


There are in turn many theories of the hollow earth and intraterrestrial cities all over the earth, there
are many places but we will not mention them all, most of the existing information is disinformation at
the end of the day, since many places of extraterrestrial sightings do not exist subway bases or cities,
but portals to Shambala. We have two of the most famous places in America promoted by the synarchy
and its branch the great white universal brotherhood, in the northern hemisphere we have Mount
Shasta located in the United States of America in the state of California, where they say there is a
Lemurian city. In the southern hemisphere we have in the Cerro del Uritorco, in the province of
Cordoba, Argentina the intraterrestrial city of Erks. Here we want to make some important revelations
for the lost virya. There are many Argentinean web pages that are misinforming about the truths that
we expose here, some that we would like to mention are the webs http://www.erks.org/
http://www.agharta.com.ar/ http://www.shambhala.com.ar/ all of
them are intertwined. The truth is that the famous city of Erks apart from being a city and being the
biggest portal to Shambhala in South America has a purpose of being there, that purpose is to make
opposition to a place liberated in Cordoba by the Loyal Siddhas, this place belongs to the Siddhas of
Agartha, Gustavo Brondino in his texts makes mention of that liberated place. The Traitor Siddhas had
to make their place in the Uritorco to counteract the Loyal Siddhas, to this place and its chapel attend
thousands of lost viryas in search of the truth without knowing the true history revealed by the
Hyperborean wisdom. The lost virya can have a slight idea of the terrible hatred that the Traitor Siddhas
will have for this text and the other hyperborean texts, hatred because all their lie of 2012 will fall and
this will avoid again the sacrifice of the captive races in matter, hatred for revealing again historically
these truths and their hidden plans. With the honor of the uncreated spirit we fulfill this mission and
hope that the message will be understood and spread if the reader can still hear the call of his spirit.


2.17 Calendar of the Thirteen Moons and Maya Kines


One of the paths that the lost viryas encounter in their spiritual quest is the path of the Mayans, of the
tzolkin, the thirteen moon calendar, which promotes a new law of time. Launched into the world of
illusion by Jose Arguelles who at the end of his life was killed by the demons of matter, if they had let
him finish his mission he could have completed the worldwide CREST project he had planned. This
movement is directed from Shambhala although it allows to know the designs of the soul and the
designs of the planetary collective unconscious, it was originally created to


31


158


to trap thousands of lost viryas in the new time that the demiurge has planned to project with his
second intention as we have already mentioned above. The system of the Maya kin along with its tones
is an aspect of the kalachakra, to confuse and keep many in illusion, it never tells the lost viryas how to
free themselves and how their microcosm works, apart from the fact that in its schemes it uses the tree
of the Hebrew cabala to make analogy with the macrocosmic spaces created by the ONE, this
movement as many others we have mentioned before were directed and supervised by the great
universal white brotherhood, which we already mentioned and is the occult hierarchy of the Earth. The
awakened virya can use these tools as many others that exist (tarot, astrology, numerology, I-Ching,
runes, etc.) as part of his personal strategy to know certain designs of his soul and then be able to resign
them using the hyperborean wisdom.

Currently there is a conflict between the modern Maya of Arguelles and the traditional descendants of
the Maya about the 2012 aspect and the interpretation of the calendars, but what they do not know is
that both groups are trapped in illusion and confusion as they are lost viryas, due to the degradation of
the real knowledge which was intentional as we already mentioned in the section of the red path and
that it was a secret agenda that came from Europe.


This movement is based on the lunar and solar calendar, with a day out of time, which is July 25th, also
the thirteen moons movement promotes a new time discarding the current Gregorian calendar and its
predecessor the Julian calendar. Although it promotes the manifestation of an own time as it is also
taught by the hyperborean wisdom, it is not being used to liberate, but to enslave, because it never
tells the lost viryas how to create their own time to escape from the material prison, nor any technique
of liberation. It only shows them how to continue flowing with the current time, but under a different
perspective of the reality of the same time, programming in the mind a new illusion of the material
world, of the maya, to use the viryas in the great leap, without ever realizing their enchainment.


Figure 4: Hunab Ku (Shambalic symbol used in the new age movement of the thirteen moons
representing the demiurge, we can observe the spiral that is part of the spiritual chaining and the black
and white colors represent the duality of the created soul. The spiral is one of the symbols


32


159


of Shambhala. This symbol especially has the power to trap the unconscious of the virya lost in the
evolutionary spiral proposed by the Traitor Gods).


In Figure 5 we can observe that the study of the castles that are made with the Maya kin, which is the
study of the designs of the soul for the life of each lost virya hides the dextrorotatory swastika which the
demiurge used to project the creation, operation that we explained in depth in the interpretation of one
of the tables of destiny of the Hopi Indians in Chapter IV.- The cultures of Mesoamerica-North America
and the white Atlanteans.


Figure 5: Dextrorotatory swastika hidden in the study of the castles (soul design) in the calendar of the
thirteen moons, unconscious programming towards the future and evolution.


We can observe in the following figures (6-7) the tapasign of the snail design that explains the
hyperborean wisdom, we see in this tapasign the unconscious programming of thousands of viryas to
accept the evolutionary system of Shambhala. The snail design is the one that controls the designs
(plans) of the created soul and the lost virya who observes figure 6 unknowingly introjects and reaffirms
in his unconscious the evolution of his soul.


One of the things that is sought with the movement of the thirteen moons is the development of the
noosphere, which is handled under the concept that the noosphere is the evolution of the universal
consciousness, the next step of human evolution, as if humanity was going to evolve towards it, which is
a lie, which is a lie since according to the knowledge of hyperborean wisdom delivered by the Loyal
Gods, the psychoid archetypes of the planetary collective unconscious have always evolved collectively
unfolding in matter, the soul and group consciousness has always existed since the demiurge molded its
creation.


33


160


Figure 7: Evolutionary snail design explained by hyperborean wisdom.


We are emphasizing the issue of the thirteen moons quite a lot because many movements of 2012 have
been derived from it including Hollywood movies since the book of the Arcturus Probe was written. In
the book we can see all the lies that are written about the Loyal Siddhas, and even the Traitor Siddhas of
Shambhala put themselves as heroes and great warriors, they destroy all the truth about Hyperborea.
There are other things within the thirteen moons like the telekoton a telepathic "game", but with the
analysis done so far we have touched the key points of the world conspiracy.


34


161


2.18 Other movements (René Mey, SCIENTOLOGY, Hebrew Kabbalah)


There are other movements although we will not mention them all, we will touch on two important
ones, the first one is the movement that René Mey currently brings, with all the wonders that he
mentions to do in his film Him in Spanish is called Mas Alla de la Luz, the movement that he brings and
its real mission is to anchor the energy of Chang Shambala in certain geographical areas to block the
sign of the spiritual origin of each lost virya, He gathers thousands of people under the argument of
helping them in their problems or illnesses, with an apparent energetic healing the virya is hypnotized
in an unconscious way and some lost viryas in which he achieved more influence are invited to the
movement of "peace". The reality is that he is one of the demons of matter as many lost viryas will
meet on their way. His main mission is to put viryas to sleep and block the sign of origin. After that, to
steal their energy and to give false hopes. But never to speak of liberation. It also promotes the
evolution of the soul and is a key part of the 2012 agendas. Besides he never reveals and will never
reveal his techniques because logically he knows who he works for.


Another movement we want to touch on is the scientology movement, registered as a religion to
apparently protect the "knowledge" created by Ron Hubbard, currently this religion is totally controlled
by the secret agencies of the synarchy, although its greatest influence is in the United States, America
and Spain are not excluded from this secret synarchic agenda. The main techniques of scientology are
based on dianetics, where thousands of followers are sought to reach the levels that are called OT
(operating thetan), thousands of followers are sought under the lie of raising the planetary
consciousness to another level, the same perfection of the soul that seeks ascension but scientology
seeks it in their religion, Apart from enslaving through debt the lost viryas under the enormous costs of
the courses, they seek to make the virya sign a reincarnation contract for thousands or millions of years,
without ever revealing to him the true secret of his spiritual slavery and thus trapping the adept in the
wheel of samsara without ever freeing himself. The only thing that resembles a little to the hyperborean
wisdom is that the adept believes that Xenu an evil being who is the greatest enemy and trapped the
spirits/beings/thetans in bodies through millions of years and little by little was perfecting the prison, it
is very similar to the concept of the demiurge. The problem of scientology is that it has half-truths (as
many that are exposed in the different movements that we have explained throughout the text) and is
totally controlled mainly by the CIA, we have many famous followers, such as Tom Cruise or John
Travolta within it. Another thing is that the follower is invited to join the Sea Org which is the elite
branch of scientology. The follower has to leave everything to enter the Sea Org and have the privilege
of being on their ship which is on the high seas and is where initiations and courses are given. MONEY


We have some websites that are only dedicated to promote Hubbard and his scientology based on
rational thinking like www.grupoelron.org that expose all kinds of esoteric or mystery topics and at the
end they end up saying that they are all spirits of error, the reality is that the spirits of error are them
channeling if they do Hubbard who is in Shambhala and is an ascended one like Saint Germain and
many others that the lost virya will find in his path. Hubbard was an envoy from Shambhala to put to
sleep mainly Americans, since they are in the


35


162


the darkest zone of the kaly yuga that explains the hyperborean wisdom. We will not elaborate on this
secret of the kaly yuga since the lost or awakened virya can find it in the text of the OCTIRODAE
website "The Secret History of the Thulegesellschaft" by Kurt Von SUbermann or in the Fundamentals
of Hyperborean Wisdom by Nimrod de Rosario.


Here we will not make a complete development of the Kabbalah and how the shadow sphere (individual
unconscious connected to the planetary collective unconscious) is programmed to the evolutionary
system of the demiurge by using the letters and numbers of his system, to deepen the subject we
recommend the text The Tree of Navutan of OCTIRODAE Spain which can be downloaded from the
website.


There are many other techniques and movements that we do not mention here such as aromatherapy,
work with angels, thanatology, new age toltecas, chiromancy, aromatherapy, acupuncture etc. because
he or the lost virya after the current explanation should be able to intuit which things can help him as
knowledge in his personal strategy of liberation and which ones enslave him.


2.19 Synarchic Texts


There are currently countless texts that promote the ascension and evolution of the soul, most of them
are designed to take advantage of the nostalgia for that lost world beyond the stars that the lost viryas
feel in their confusion for that lost world, but we will not mention all those texts but we will talk about
some that are key in the strategy of the Traitor Siddhas, texts that sooner or later will reach the hands
of the lost virya in their journey through the illusory world of maya. One of the first of the texts that
the White Brotherhood and the Freemasons introduced in today's society were the 4 volumes of
metaphysics of Conny Mendez as a global secret agenda for Venezuela, an agenda that is still on its
way under the power of the politicians in power, the White Brotherhood and the Freemasons.


When the Traitor Siddhas decided to accelerate the evolution process of humanity many books
emerged, most of them were channeled, the first ones we can find are the books of Ramtha, a
supposed Lemurian who channeled JZ knight, later based on Ramtha's knowledge they created a movie
called "What the Bleep Do We Know". Subsequently the Kryon books emerged, The Urantia Book
supposedly given to mankind by evolved beings which expands the universe view and reinforces the
jesus-christ archetype. The lost virya on his way of searching in the outer labyrinth will come across such
readings. Other books that emerged were the Pleiadian books by Barbara Hand Clow and Barbara
Marciniak, these books reveal half-truths and most of them promote evolution or the energy of love
from which the Traitor Siddhas and the demiurge also benefit. A lot of information in those books is
related to the information found in books like "The Gods of Eden" or the complete series of Sitchin
Zecharia, these relations between all those books that David Icke also promotes and that are based on
the reptilian beliefs, were designed that way, since the emergence of those kind of books is part of a
worldwide agenda.


36


163


secret. Secret agenda that seeks to take advantage of the numbness of the lost viryas and the nostalgia
they feel in their astral blood for the lost spiritual origin. All these books promote the evolution and the
"perfect" creation of the demiurge THE ONE and seek to exploit the energy of the lost viryas for the
benefit of the evolution, if the reader analyzes those texts, and others that we will talk about later he
will realize that most of them do not say how to free themselves, they do not say how to escape, they
only increase the perception of the illusion of maya, little by little they envelop the virya so that he gives
up his spirit and fuses with the demiurge. Although there are some books of creative visualization like
the book of the secret, or the Pleiadian exercises of Amorah Qua Yin, or many other books of
meditations to "elevate" the frequency or awaken the vehicle of ascension or Merkabah (Figure 8),
most of them are books with Shambalic teachings to perfect the soul and in that perfection the
extraterrestrial spiritual races end up totally succumbing to matter.


Few know the true meaning of the levogyric swastika the most forbidden sign in the world in figure 9
we can see an allegorical image of its use to block the evolution of the Hebrew evolutionary
archetype and its six-pointed star proposed by the Traitor Siddhas. This swastika which is a
degradation of the sign of the spiritual origin has the power to accelerate the macrostructures of the
world of maya until its final perfection putting in trouble the Traitor Siddhas in chapter XVIII this
proposal is raised. For this reason the sign was forbidden after the second world war and it was when
the sinarchy began to distort history in an ideological war that still continues, starting with their
companies and actors of cinematography (Disney, Chaplin, etc).


Many of these books talk about the luminous and the dark ones but they do not say who they really are,
they talk about and promote the ascension to the 4th and 5th dimension, but the truth is that the light
and darkness that most of the lost viryas believe in come from the same creator, the demiurge. They
speak of thousands of lies such as service to self that the dark ones promote or service to others that
the light ones promote and they say that when ascension comes there will be a division between the
two sides.

They promote these kinds of things so that the lost virya does not inquire into other matters and
believes that doing the greater good that the same social system and the spiritual beliefs of Shambhala
propose to him are the best there is. The Traitor Siddhas are very cunning in making people believe that
there is duality and that the dual energies are different or of a different origin, that is why they have
distorted history so much that many things spoken of in this text will clash with the current beliefs of
the lost virya.


37


164


Figure 8: Merkabah front view is a six-pointed star.


38


165


Figure 9: Levira swastika resigning the evolutionary sign proposed by the Traitor Siddhas (We
recommend the lost virya to read the Crystal Book of Agartha - The Runic Martial Yoga to understand
the mystery of the hyperborean swastika).


We have thus thousands of books that many agents of the synarchy have intentionally written or that
many lost viryas have written in their ignorance of the true cosmic war, the most interesting of those
texts as in the book "The ONE BEING" recently sent by the Traitor Siddhas totally degrades the image of
"Kristos Light" image that has been totally sabotaged, distorted and reprogrammed in the lost viryas
throughout history by the agents of the synarchy and that has led to the destruction or annihilation
by the Traitor Siddhas to thousands of awakened viryas for discovering the deception, Kristos Luz was
an angel of fire like many others that have come, sent by the unknowable god, that envoy was also
known as Kristos Lucifer or representative of the Uncreated Light. The ancient Mesoamerican peoples
knew him as Quetzalcoatl or Mixcoalt. We know that this statement will clash with the beliefs of the lost
virya who reads this text since it goes against all beliefs or sounds crazy, but the truth is that the
demiurge imitated with jesus-christ the same thing that kristos-light did in Atlantis.


The biggest mistake or sin within this matrix is that the spirit remembers, that the sleeping viryas
become awakened viryas and even worse would be that they could transmute into Siddhas, the demons
must prevent this from happening and at all costs use thousands of resources to destroy the past, that is
why the books we are mentioning seek that the lost virya see into the future, towards ascension and the
new humanity but never remember the primordial betrayal and much less know that their spiritual
volitional energy is exploited for the benefit of evolution.


39


166


2.20 The Inverted Mirrors of OCTIRODAE


Before being able to expose the mirrors of OCTIRODAE it is important to mention that according to the
knowledge provided by hyperborean wisdom, in the reality of maya all the psychoid archetypes or the
archetypes of the planetary collective unconscious are inverted in the "outer" world that

We call "real", this means that reality is a mirror, or reality acts as a mirror. When the OCTIRODAE
movement led by the Loyal Siddhas emerged in the reality of maya the energies of the planetary
collective unconscious were going to manifest an opposition or inverted and distorted versions of the
OCTIRODAE movement. It was a risk that was known to happen and a risk that should be taken without
hesitation since many things are at stake if the Traitor Siddhas achieve their new evolutionary plan for
humanity since the tyranny of the chained spirits in this place intends to be implemented in other
spaces of macrocosmic significance, When we speak of spaces of macrocosmic significance, which is a
concept of hyperborean wisdom, we are speaking of other realms or worlds where they seek to chain
other uncreated entities in the thousands of illusory worlds of maya.


So by taking such a risk, movements emerged that instead of being managed by a spiritual mystique or
aligned to the mystique of OCTIRODAE plagiarized some symbols of OCTIRODAE such as the tirodal
rune, among other texts such as the Belicena Villca and basically appropriated them and this is because
the viryas of these movements are being totally managed by the psychic subject, their personality
masks and unconscious energies based on their beliefs, dogmas and that seek to deploy from the
individual unconscious the myth of believing themselves to be a "leader" or the "great leader" or
"chosen one", being that each one chooses himself and must seek his own liberation. Some of the
movements that we can see as inverted mirrors of OCT IRODAE are veganism, the temple of the Gods
and many others that may emerge which will seek to benefit from the hyperborean wisdom. This is not
intended to create karmic links or conflicts between OCT IRODAE and these movements.

Because the reality is that the enemy of the chained spirits seeks to divide the viryas by their soul
differences, creating elitism and segregation among them, making them forget that this is a war of all,
only someone who with his spiritual vision, with his gnostic vision understands the current situation will
understand that the enemy always uses the motto of divide and conquer.


The hyperborean wisdom is not for sale, it is not used for profit, only someone with his spiritual vision
will understand that it is a free knowledge and that it seeks to destroy the lies and the falsehoods
that have been established in the world, that is why it has always been persecuted and attacked and
it will continue to be so, its followers will invent lies and defame them, they will be smeared in acts
that the same synarchic system will carry out to discredit its real message, so that no one remembers
the primordial truths of the trapped spirits and the extraterrestrial origin of the lost viryas. This has
happened to many peoples of the past, such as the Greeks, the Spartans, the Aztecs, the Incas.


Clearly the hyperborean wisdom speaks that this knowledge is NOT a belief or cult like any other, nor
is it based on reason although its texts are not easy to understand for many lost viryas, no one said
that the liberation of the chained spirit was easy. The wisdom


40


167


seeks to dispose the spirit to remember, to remember who it is and to know its present situation and
the cause of its enchainment in matter.


It is important that the lost or awakened viryas or viryas who read this text understand that the
OCTIRODAE movement does not seek to manipulate the masses as the synarchy does; what it seeks is to
transmute individually or racially and that from this movement study circles are generated throughout
America and Spain. The international synarchy together with the Traitor Gods seeks to manipulate the
lost viryas using all possible means for the realization of their evolutionary plan.


Chapter XVIII "OCTIRODAE's strategic objective" provides a more in-depth explanation of the subject
and what the strategy seeks to achieve.


Author's note:


Millions of viryas are being dragged by the movements of 2012 which seek the evolution of the current
religions which have already lost power and are using the archetype of Jesus-Christ to evolve under
different faces that are disguised under the movements of 2012 where the perfection of the soul
created for the evolution of a new humanity is sought, sinking more the spirit in the illusion of matter,
leading to its disappearance by merging with the demiurge.

and their creation, the Traitor Siddhas seek to make many believe that evolution is the greatest good,
they use scientific, religious, esoteric and other means to convince the lost viryas and put them to sleep.
They seek to erase history, distort it, erasing any vestige of the primordial war and the chaining of the
extraterrestrial antimatter spiritual races, they seek to sink them in the mire of matter, only the
awakened spirit and conscious of its current situation understands that oblivion and evolution are the
worst misfortunes.


The most difficult mission for an awakened spirit is to enter a hell of matter, where all the spirits asleep
in that hell see everything as heaven, as something beautiful and perfect, as something that the creator
of matter made, as something that has a divine order, without knowing it, the spirits in that situation
believe they are awake but they are not. The most difficult thing even for an awakened spirit is to have
infinite courage to endure that those who are equal to him, attack him, call him crazy, want to trample
him, crumple him, destroy him, see him as something bad and horrifying, without knowing that an inner
enemy uses them to attack the awakened spirit who only seeks to give a message from the eternal and
uncreated realms, where evolution does not exist, where pain does not exist, because love and hate
generate pain to the chained spirits by exploiting their infinite energy for the benefit of evolution,
history of those realms that the owners of hell want to erase at all costs, to keep the captive spirits
asleep in the material prison.


To give a message to bring out of the material mire the spirits trapped in the illusion of humanity, is not
a mission that anyone would dare to undertake unless he really in his desperation sees his own totally
lost and loves them too much, but not with the heart, but with the spirit, an eternal love that is not
known in the world of the material forms of illusion, of the maya, since that


41


168


implies for a free spirit to renounce his own freedom by chaining himself in the world of forms in order
to give a message and with that message to declare total war on the executioners.


The awakened spirit however knows that his message will not be well received or understood by many
due to the spiritual confusion they have, because many will not understand that all that exists in
creation are copies of other realms, of the true God, of the unknowable, many will not understand his
struggle and his message, but with only one that he has managed to rescue will be a great advance
until the last of the captive spirits in the material prison can leave to his original kingdom.


The day will come when the Gods and Goddesses trapped in matter, awaken in one of the thousands of
illusory worlds, realize the Great Deception, when that happens they will claim and fight first inwardly
for their liberation, by claiming their freedom with their spiritual blood to the heavens of the
unknowable, the Gods Loyal to the eternal spirit will return and invite the chained spirits to fight one
last time for their freedom and the final battle will begin.


2.20 Dialog


The following dialogue is exposed as the final part of chapter 2 to expose the real plans of the
executioners of this prison. A dialogue between the two groups that have enslaved us here.


Year 2004


Chang Shambala (Universal White Brotherhood, Occult Hierarchy of the earth, demons of matter,
Traitor Siddhas):


How are you doing with the agenda in the Americas and Spain for our implementation of global
governance?


International Synarchy:


We are doing very well, after inventing the story of the attacks to the twin towers and the war against
terrorism, everything is advancing marvelously, we have already destroyed almost all that was left of
socialism, in America and Spain, some are resisting in the countries of North Africa and the
Mediterranean area but we already have an agenda for them, our infiltration forces have already
started to work in those countries, knowing their culture, language and social structure, in a few years
we will be able to destroy and overthrow those governments inventing the usual story, that they are
dictators and that the whole world population believes our bought media like CNN, even though those
governments work for those wretches of the Siddhas of Agartha, we cannot allow socialism to take the
masses out of poverty and we cannot allow people to become nationalists, much less to become
spiritually liberated and escape from matter, we must continue making them believe that our capitalist


and communist systems are the best that exists, also our spiritual movements, we must make them
42


169


believe that they are the best that exists.


43


170


under the 2012 affairs are going wonderfully in Spain and America, the population will never suspect
that behind the political movements there is always a hidden spiritual part as part of our agendas, they
still believe that they are separate systems. Now yes, our world government under a false peace is
almost a reality. Soon we will be able to give all economic and political power to God's chosen race, the
Jews, they almost own all the private banks in the countries.


Shambhala:


We must not be confident, we still know that there are great nationalist forces working for the Siddhas
of Agartha in South America, even though we destroyed and infiltrated Peronism in Argentina and
confused everyone with the Pinochet and Allende affair to bring down nationalism in Chile along with
all its servants, we do not want surprises, they need to eliminate the root of the problem, therefore,
most likely they will try to ask for help someday, if that happens, we will have to eliminate them.

Our evolutionary plan cannot be delayed. Much less the arrival of our messiah who will rule them all.


Year 2007
Shambhala:


We like the way things look down there on Earth, if we achieve world government, we will be able to
sacrifice millions under the fire holocaust we have planned to erase now if forever any trace of the
uncreated realms of the unknowable and thus be able to use the Earth project in the whole galaxy
created by the ONE. We have noticed since some years ago strange energetic movements in some
countries like Mexico, we need to prepare a special agenda for them.


International Synarchy:


Nothing can stop us. Much less now than no one, at least in this dense material plane. The agenda we
have planned will be based on one of our branches to generate free money from the social systems
without the need of taxes, we are talking about drug trafficking, if it has worked in Colombia, it will
work in Mexico and from there we can transfer the same strategy to other countries in America. In
Spain we have most of the young population controlled by alcohol and drugs, there are more
unemployed and our spiritual movements are strong, many people have already believed the 2012 and
ascension issue, we have many agents disinforming with the new world order issues and the reptilian
issue, even though part of our agenda was to wake them up a little, to control them and convince them
that our system based on peace and love is the best there is.


In Mexico we have the idea of sacrificing thousands to prevent the energy that could awaken many
from increasing, we will use those sacrifices to convince those we catch in our spiritual movements
that the deaths are due to a change of frequency, that it is because they are


44


171


We will convince them that they must come closer to god and many will either reinforce their faith in
religion as they have always done and as we have controlled them for over 500 years or many will seek
other paths that we have already planned, with all our new age issues. We will send all necessary agents
from Europe and Asia. We will also see to it that Mexico becomes an economic powerhouse after you
sacrifice the people you asked for. We already have over thirty years of infiltrating weapons, creating
corruption and doing social experiments with them as well as many other countries.


We will use the same agenda in all the countries of America. Until we have been able to erase or confuse
as much as possible any vestige of the origin of the spirit, of the celestial origin.


Year 2011
Shambhala:
What is the current status of the situation?
International Synarchy:


The confusion in the world of the extraterrestrial races spirit chained in matter is increasing, which is
giving us a great advantage to manage the planetary consciousness of the masses at our whim, most of
them believe that the soul and the spirit are the same. There are beings that have realized that there is
a world conspiracy, they talk about the new world order, the world bankers, and the wealthiest families
in the world, but they will never know the truth of their slavery, most of them believe that with love the
frequency of the planet will increase and their problems will end, most of them believe in the peace
that we are proposing and that we are all one. We never thought we could achieve such a goal of
indoctrinating the captive spirits in such a way, most of them have been left with matters of the heart
so they will never remember that they have a blood memory. Much less will they be aware of their
astral blood and infinite self. We are achieving that our archetype of jesus-christ evolves to another
level, under different faces in the evolutionary movements of 2012, we have achieved almost the total
judaization of the races with divine hyperborean lineage. Nobody is capable of revealing themselves
even ideologically and the best of all is that nobody knows of the existence of our organization, most
believe in the Illuminati, but they do not know that this is disinformation and only a branch of our
organization. The best of all is that we have managed to convince them that Shambhala is the most
beautiful thing in the world and that Agartha is the capital of Shambhala, our agents of the great
universal white fraternity have achieved their goal. A few who have discovered that they are not the
same (Agartha, Shambhala) and discover certain branches of paganism, have been convinced of our lie
that the fight for the control of the world is between the illuminatti and the luminari. We have managed
to confuse even the most skilled.


The youth totally idiotized with our drugs, the increase of obesity, the love of usury, sports, media and
programming from a young age in the institutions


45


172


educational has been successful. We have almost achieved the TYPO of human being that we want to
inhabit our society. Let them forget their past and look towards the future, towards a better
modernized society, until we manage to totally erase the conflict of the celestial origins. If someday
some spirits become aware of our organization they must believe that it is only a political organization,
but never know that the synarchy also dwells within them, in the inner cultural programming, they must
never discover that they have an inner prison that chains the SELF in the world of material forms.


If some spirits would wake up we would have to exterminate them as we did with the Cathars and many
other peoples for their heresies, for remembering the true conflict of the origins and the uncreated
kingdoms, we cannot allow them to know the difference between Christ-Light and Jesus Christ, they
must continue believing that they are the same, They must continue to believe that Jesus Christ is their
savior and Lucifer, Anael and all those envoys that have come down from the uncreated realms are the
bad and corrupt ones. We have managed to totally distort the true history since Atlantis. Even the last
purest people left in America were forced to stop believing or taking different beliefs from their
liberator god, from the envoy of the unknowable, the feathered serpent they called Quetzalcoalt, we
have managed to make them forget that history.


Making a recount of our agenda we can Say that since our first agents of the universal white
brotherhood began to launch the 2012 issue, the first thing we had were the channelings directed by
you from Shambhala to be able to write books in this reality, such as the books of Kryon, Ramtha,
among others. In this way we were able to push our great gurus and servants in favor of our
evolutionary plan, great agents that contributed to this change were Drunvalo Melchizedek, Deepak
Chopra, Sai Baba, among others. After we launched that agenda we could fully deploy the 2012 myth of
the planetary collective unconscious with the issue of the harmonic convergence in 1987 and in this way
we trapped millions without knowing it in our next great leap for humanity, to achieve this end we used
the masculine and feminine feminine duality with which the microcosm is created, we divided the 22
voices of the creator demiurge, in the 11:11 issue, to anchor the necessary energies for the different
agendas that we already had planned.


In this way we used a lost virya named Jose Arguelles to whom we gave an aspect of the kalachakra key
so that he could complete and modify the ancient Mayan knowledge after having learned it from some
traditional masters, so he could create the calendar of the thirteen moons which allows to know the
designs of the created soul, that after discovering the deception we had to eliminate it. Most have been
hypnotized with our magic and have believed the story of Velatropa 24 and everything he wrote in the
book of the Probe of Arcturus. Best of all, he used and sabotaged the nickname of Wotan (Votan) the
siddha whom hardly anyone remembers anymore. That forgotten name of Odin.


Thus we have since those dates many who believe they are awakening and who have convinced
themselves that there will be ascension, not knowing that they are being dragged along by an energy
that we deploy, to trap millions unconsciously.


46


173


Just as we experimented in Venezuela with our special agent Conny Mendez and her metaphysical
books, so all our agendas are already deployed in America and Spain. We have sent disinformation
agents and druids like David Icke, to reinforce the belief in reptilians and we have succeeded in getting
him to defame and confuse many by explaining his theories about Nazis and ancient cultures.

We have made a breakthrough in our confusion and misinformation with the aspects and agendas that
the Loyal Siddhas deployed in the past in many countries such as Germany.


Most of the spirits sohere chained in matter believe that white magic and black magic are different
things, but they should never discover that they are the same and you control all those energies from
Shambala with the kalachakra system and thanks to the tipheret sign that the demiurge gave you,
thanks to the creation of the system those Gods that call themselves Loyalists or liberators, they could
not stay any longer on the planet, so we closed communication with those who could be liberated or
reoriented, Most people will never suspect that most of the ships are from our governments and
Shambala, the ones contacted by extraterrestrials are following our plans or being deceived as we had
planned, neither should they know that all this disinformation is part of our agenda.


Chang Shambala:


The same strategy to discredit socialism that they used with the president of Spain, the president
of Venezuela and false Peronism with the president of Argentina must be used against any
movement planned by the Siddhas of Agartha.


International Synarchy:


Now that we have managed to distort the true image of nationalism and socialism with a nationalist
spirit, people must stop believing in them, they must never know that we have used the name of
socialism to hide our capitalism and communism.


They were right in what they had predicted, in Chile there was a plan to ask for help from the Siddhas of
Agartha, but we managed to prevent that movement in time by shooting down the FACh plane in which
several members of the government, media and military were traveling to the Juan Fernandez
Archipelago. We already started to infiltrate the communists in the student movements.


Chang Shambala:


We will send the relics of Pope John Paul Il to Mexico worked with our black magic to put to sleep the
Mexicans who might wake up. You must continue believing in the religious institutions that you
founded, if this strategy does not work, sooner or later when you stop believing in religions you will fall
into the new paths that we are creating so that the Hebrew archetype of Jesus-Christ evolves under the
faces of all the movements of 2012 and the new era. We will also send our best agent to talk about
peace and progress, to talk about evolution, we will send the Dalai Lama. We will use these two
strategies to control the unconscious energy of


47


174


thousands of Mexicans who are on both paths, those of the old school who believe in the Catholic
religion or Christianity and those of the new school who are already in some 2012 movement.


International Synarchy:


As Mexico is the spearhead for the whole strategy of the militarization of America and you want to be a
world power, we place you within the hierarchy of the new emerging economies, but in exchange we
ask you for the human sacrifices that you asked for to clean and modify your spiritual sign of your
extraterrestrial origin, so we can modify your genetic code and create the loving TYPO without rebellion
that we want you to be, we will do it with all the agendas we have scheduled to distract you during all
this year. The violence agenda already started some years ago and it looks good, we will also doa
meeting with the president of Argentina and the president of Mexico to launch the same agenda over
there. After that we will do a joint agenda under the face of the fight against drug trafficking with
certain key countries. If the strategy worked in Colombia it will also work in Mexico.


We are also planning to build in Brazil the replica of Solomon's temple as requested to anchor the
necessary energy from Shambhala and to be able to annul the energy left by those damned Nazi
hyperboreans, energy that we have not been able to eradicate. We need to continue distorting the
truth about the second world war and continue psychologically programming the new generations with
poor education and television.


End of dialog


The lost or awakened virya who reads this text should be aware that one day a defamation will be
raised against us, of what is written in this chapter and in the complete text, just as many books were
destroyed in the past, this hyperborean text will not be the exception, that is why we ask the reader to
pass on this chapter that was made public so that more people may possess it, not without first
knowing and discerning to whom it is going to be passed on, it is useless to have so much spiritual
knowledge if it is not used wisely, it is not necessary to spend on weapons, gunpowder, The runes,
spiritual weapons par excellence of thousands or millions of awakened viryas are enough to destroy the
3D material prison, as mentioned above and explained in more detail in chapter XVIII, if the awakened
viryas spin the levorotatory swastika this would accelerate the macrostructures of the maya to their
final perfection and the Traitor Siddhas would be forced to intervene as in other epochs which would
unleash the final battle. Although the reader knows that some Jews control the world banking, there is
division in them and many of them could also be sacrificed by their priests if the planned fiery holocaust
comes to fruition and this is mentioned very clearly in the crystal books of Agartha. We hope that the
lost virya can be guided to awakening with this chapter and the awakened virya as a warrior of the
eternal will use it as a weapon to destroy the lies and darkness that have the extraterrestrial spirits
asleep in matter.


48


175


Sacred Rune Tyrodal


(Rune given by the Loyal Siddhas to the Order of Tyrodal Knights of the Republic of Argentina)


Sacred Rune Tyrodal Rune of Victory


(Rune given by the Loyal Siddhas to the Order of Tyrodal Knights of America and Spain).


Both runes were given to two different pontiffs, when we speak of pontiffs we do not speak of
religious matters as handled by monotheistic religions, but of the links or bridges between the
viryas and the Siddhas.


49


176


The
Mysteries
Of
Agartha


From Ginnungagap, the Fire of
Muspelheim and the Ice of
Niflheim


From the Crystal Books
of the Library of Agartha


The Mystery
of Agartha


Anonymous


Revelation of the Loyal Hyperborean Gods The
Unknown Superiors


178


THE S.S. LEADER
TWO STATEMENTS FOR ANALYSIS


A- "When the VIRYA becomes a "charismatic collectivity", that is to say, when the
"charismatic link" is established between him and his fellow men, in the manner
of a Hyperborean Mystique: HE RISES FROM THE MERE HUMAN LEVEL
TO THE SUPERHUMAN OR DIVINE".

B- "When man (pasu and lost virya) becomes a "psychological crowd", that is to
say, when he participates in a collective soul or egregore, he DESCENDS
FROM THE HUMAN LEVEL TO THE ANIMAL LEVEL".

C- THE S.S. LEADER PROVES STATEMENT "A".


Let us bear in mind a previous warning. A value judgment must be established from
statement "A" that definitely dissuades the comrades from employing, not even by
mistake, the degrading praxis of the Psychology of the crowds that the synarchy
employs and encourages. Whoever does not address the people (VOLK) mystically,
with a hyperborean vision of the world, will inexorably fall prey to the demonic
egregors and will become unraveled in the synarchic "plan"!


There are many ways to lead the peoples, but only the Hyperborean Mystique
guarantees their Liberation from the evolutionary and deterministic Law that governs
the satanic world of matter. That is why the H.H.S. has dedicated enormous efforts in
the formation of an elite of charismatic leaders capable of acting according to the
principles of the Hyperborean Wisdom. We will say two words about this elite.


Although it is still too early to judge the definitive results of so many efforts, we can
already consider the achievement of a truly hyperborean type of S.S. LEADER in the
WAFFEN S:S. a success.


The "raw material", i.e. the viryas, are initially recruited in the Ordenburg and selected
as highly qualified elite elements to receive the hyperborean initiation in Wewelsburg.
There, after a more rigorous selection, they are placed under the care of special
instructors belonging to the penultimate circle of the Thule-Gesellschaft. The first step
of their initiation is to "perceive the Minne", a marvel that is achieved after a great
effort of purification. The "memory of blood" puts them, finally, in conditions of
mutation and they can thus receive the initiation, an experience which, in itself, is
indescribable but which, nevertheless, produces a permanent and _ irreversible
modification in the viryas susceptible to be perceived by all and to which we will refer.
The virya, after initiation, has transmuted his lower nature of pasu and is now an
authentic hyperborean hero or "re-oriented virya". He is not yet a Siddha, but he will
never yield to the animal tendencies of the pasu. The initiation in Wewelsburg has put
him in metaphysical "contact" with Kristos-Lucifer and from that transcendent
experience he will tend, in the world, to conform a Luciferic archetype, of solar hero or
warrior monk. He will be a "Christian knight", in a much deeper and mystical sense
than the one usually given to these terms. Because this "coming into contact" is a
mystical ecstasy in which the S.S. comrade achieves Individuation (Selbst) and the
consciousness of the Vril. From then on he is already a "charismatic leader" fit to serve
the people, the Reich and the Fuhrer.


179


The psychological profile of this type of S.S. Leader will certainly be considered as
"not very human" and even "inhuman", but this is due to the great racial purity of the
viryas who form, as we have already said, a Luciferic archetype, an imitation of
Kristos-Lucifer. In fact, the S.S. Leader already appears as "strange" and "cruel" in the
judgment of profane observers. But these profane ones, degraded and softened by the
decadent customs of the Kaly Yuga, cannot appreciate the beauty and APOLINE
fearlessness of the S.S. Leader.


In reality the racial purity of the S.S. Leader, without the animal tendencies of the pasu,
makes him a superhuman being, a true prototype of the liberated and transmuted virya.
Thus, an objective judgment on the virtues of the S.S. Leader can only be made on the
basis of a "hyperborean vision".


For our part, here is our opinion: We have seen the S.S. Leader act charismatically in
the crowd. His voice sounded energetic and irresistible, awakening in the listeners the
reminiscence of that common memory which unites us all in the eternal return. And we
have seen the viryas immediately obey the H.H. Leader, moved by the charismatic
bond that they perceived intimately. We thus proved that the S.S. Leader awakened in
the viryas the "knowledge of the fact of hierarchy", with the result that they, each one
of them, KNEW that the S.S. Leader was SUPERIOR, BEFORE OBEYING and, what
is important, they did not participate in any gregarious impulse.


The S.S. Leader we have evoked conducts himself according to the laws of
Psychosocial Strategy. The First Law says that, in leading crowds, FIRST the egregore
must be controlled and THEN the Hyperborean Mystique must be applied.


Fraction of the S.S. "Psychosocial Strategy Manual".


wm &


1. Hakenkreuz B. Sonnenrad


5, WY UW


C. Sig-Rune D. Ger-Rune E. Wolfsangel


“+5 4 >,


F. Wolfsangel G. Opfer-Rune H. Eif-Rune
(variant)


YA TFT


L Leben-Rune Jj. Toten-Rune K. Tyr-Rune


Hy OK OS


L. Heilszeichen’ M.Hagall-Rune N. Odal-Rune
Runic Symbols Used by the SS


Runic Symbols used by the S.S.


180


THE 8 + 1 MAJOR HYPERBOREAN ARCHETYPES


1
THE ETERNAL A-MOR


2
THE ESSENTIAL WAR


3
THE SUBLIME ART


4
MAGICAL NATURE


5
THE DIVINE WHITE RACE


6
THE UNIVERSAL EMPIRE


2
THE SUPERHUMAN HERO


8
HYPERBOREAN GNOSIS
THE ULTIMATE WISDOM


-9-
KRISTOS-LUCIFER,


WOTAN-ODIN AND THE LOYAL SIDDHAS


HYPERBOREAN GODS-GUIDES
AGARTHA-Asgaror


HYPERBOREAN METAPHYSICAL CITY


181


THE MYSTERY OF THE SELF


The SchwarzeSonnenmensch, the Hyperborean God-Man, the
Ubermensch, the Whole-Man, the Absolute Individual, is
Beyond Good and Evil; it is A-moral. Its only ‘moral' is Honor.
Beyond "Spirit" and "Matter": <<The Ultimate Dualism>>.


Nature (Prakriti) is ‘Good' (Shakti-Hyperborean Potency) when it
responds to the Will of the Hyperborean Spirit (Purusha) and is
Mala' (Maya-Illusion) when it responds to the Will of the Spirit of the
Demiurge (Atman).


The VRIL is INDESCRIPTIBLE. IT IS PURE POSSIBILITY.

It is Venus, the Uncreated Astro. The Green Ray of

Hyperborea. It is The Golden Cord. The Loyal Gods of

Agartha.

It is Luciferic-Kristianity. The Gallant Lord of the Uncreated Light. It
is Pluralistic Paganism, Polytheism. The Uncreated Runes of Wotan. It
is National-Socialism. The Magical Reich of the Fuhrer.

It is The Hyperborean Sphere Spirit (Extra-Universal) in an Aryan
Body (Vraja-Runic DNA). The Non-Existent Flower - The Only Real
One.


The Absolute SELF in the SELBST (and in the EHRE
Sphere) is Beyond Good and Evil

Beyond the Mood Subject (Rational Subject - Emotional Subject)
and the Physical-Biological Subject (Instinctive Subject)
Beyond Light and Darkness

Beyond Sanctity and Perversion Beyond

Christianity and Satanism Beyond

Communism and Capitalism

Beyond Atheism and Monotheism (AND Pantheism)
Beyond Dualism and Monism

Beyond Virtue and Vice

Beyond Attraction and _  Repulsion

Beyond Activity and Passivity Beyond

Sound and Silence

Beyond Harmony and Imbalance Beyond

Nirvana and Samsara

Beyond Devayana and Pitryana

Beyond Heaven and Hell Beyond

Gods and Demons

Beyond Life and Death Beyond

Boreas


I AM AT THE ORIGIN. My Honor is called Loyalty
Comrades: SEAN!


182


THE MYSTERY OF "THE DOOR OF VENUS".


The Cosmic Reality of the Exit and Entry of Creation -Imitation- Demiurgic The
"Solar System" is a Micro-Macrocosmic Model


Microcosm = Macrocosm (before the coming of the Hyperborean Spirits)


Physical Plane: Sun: Aspect Logos: the Verb -> Metaphysical Plane: Spirit-God - Demiurge
the One (Spiral - Functional Matrix of the Law of Evolution - Manu Archetype)
- Elix) Transcendent Time (Consciousness-Time Aspect: the Eye - Kronos)


Physical Plane: Moon-> Metaphysical Plane: Soul: Transmigrating Soul-Subject-
Monad Transmigrating in the Transcendent Time


Physical/Metaphysical-Animal Plane: Earth-> Body: Physical-Biological Subject in
Transcendent Time - Design of Design: Pasu-"Ape-Serpent".


Microcosmos = Macrocosmos MENSCHLICHER MIKROKOSMOS = GOTTLICHER MAKROKOSMOS
| ------------- >Hyperkosmos (after the Fall-Descent of the Hyperborean Spirits)


Physical Plane: Sun: Symbol of Optical Autonomy - Aspect Logos: the Verb-
Kalachakra-> Metaphysical Plane: Spirit-God-Demiurge the One: The 7D/s / The 10
Archetypes: 7+3 (Spiral-Functional Matrix of the Law of Evolution-Archetype Manu-
Elix) Transcendent Time (Aspect Consciousness-Time: the Eye - Kronos)


Physical Plane: Moon (without Kalachakra) -> Metaphysical-Animal Plane: Soul:
Transmigrant Monad-Animal Subject (from 4 to 6D) (Rational Subject: Demiurgic
Aspect: Beauty or Active Intelligence in the Archetypal Plane - Cultural Subject and
Emotional Subject: Demiurgic Aspect: Love or Wisdom in the Superstructures of the
"outer cultures")


Physical/Metaphysical-Animal Plane: Earth-> Body: Physical-Biological Subject of 3D
(also 1 and 2D) - Immanent Time (Conscious Subject: Demiurgic Aspect: Will or
Power incarnated in a "Sacred Race") - Pasu "Ape-Serpent" Recharged - The Aryan
"Bird-Saurian" Inheritance - Virya asleep - the lost Self in the Conscious Subject -
Symbol of Origin - Labrelix - Kalachakra


Physical Plane: Venus - Morning Star / Evening UUUU> Metaphysical-Runic
Plane: Hyperborean Spirit Symbol "Sphere" - The 8-Pointed Star - The
Remembrance of the Self, of Identity; of the Self, of the Will - Remembrance of
Blood: The Minne - Remembrance of A-mort: the Original Couple -
Remembrance of the Divine Origin, of Thule, of Valhalla, of Agartha.


183


Microcosmos = Hyperkosmos - Absolute Orientation


Physical Plane: UUU> Metaphysical Plane: Strategic Opposition to All
Aspects of the Demiurge The One; Creator and Creation-Imitation


Plane _ Physical: UUUU> Plane Metaphysical-Runic: SOUL:
SupraConscious - RED "of Scorpio" - Timeless Self-Time -


Kairos - Archetypal-Cultural Indeterminacy - Optical Isolation


Plane _Physical/Metaphysical-Runic: QHUUUU>~=BODY:
Supra-Physical-Biological of WHITE Race "Bird-Saurus" - 8
HyperD: The Origin - The


Infinito Actual - Arquémona: Infinite Strategic Encirclement


Plane Physical: Venus as "Gatel> Plane


Metaphysical-Roundic: SPIRIT: Hyperborean - I) Kd


THYRODAL KNIGHT : the Self
Isolated Selbst Oriented. The Right Angle - II) THYRODAL


PONTIPH : Transfinite Bridge, the Awakened Self in the Selbst.
The A-MORT: EL-ELLA, ELLA-EL: NOS. The Octagon and HD)


SIDDHA prrsprxin te : THE BLACK SUN - HYPERBORNE -
THE GREEN RAY - THE ETERNITY - THE INFINITE - THE
FREEDOM (4


ABSOLUTE - PURE POSSIBILITY - VRIL


AS THE DEMIURGO IS: FATHER GOD (Demiourgos Spiritus) -THE
EYE, THE VERB, THE ARCHETYPES-; AND MOTHER GODDESS
(Mater-la) -THE GRAVIS ATOM, PERMANENT-SIMENT ATOM;


THE SPIRITHYPERBOREAN IS: THE UNIQUE EYE OF
WOTAN, THE TONGUE OF THE TIRODAL BIRDS, THE
LUCIFERIC GRACEFUL WILL ANDTHE VRAJA_ CON-
FORMATION OF THE WHITE RACE.


184


VENUS


8th 'Green' "Planet" of the Solar System
ITS CULTURAL CHARACTERISTICS (of the materialistic science of the Kali Yuga):


Morning Star - Morning Star Before Day (Manvantara), Evening Star - Evening
Star Before Night (Pralaya); The Green Ray - Ginnungagap > ETERNITY


OUTSIDE MATERIAL ORDER


Outside: The Uncreated Hell of Fire-Muspelheim; Extremely High Temperature;
Extremely High Pressure; Extremely Dense Carbon Dioxide Atmosphere; Clouds
of Sulfur Dioxide and Sulfuric Acid; Volcanism; No Plate Tectonics; No Sunlight
Arrival; No Magnetic Field; No Oceans and No Sunlight.

Liquid Water; "Will of Firel > TERGUM HOSTIS or HOSTILE BACK


Interior: Absolute Orientation; The Uncreated Hell of Ice-Niflheim; “Heart of Icel
> VULTUS SPIRITUS OR SPIRIT FACE


extraordinarily slow and retrograde DUUUUUUU ORIGIN-ORIENTED IN
STRATEGIC OPPOSITION TO TRASCENDENT TIME


It always presents the same Face to the Observation; Rotation Axis parallel to the
Translation Axis, "Perfect Circumference of its Orbit": No Seasons, Equal Time


all the (UUU> INFINITE CLOSET


Size Equivalent to that of Planet UUUUU> The "Negative" polarity in the Selbst-


Venus; the HYPERBorean Inheritance: ODAL, the One Eye of Odin; which is
Opposite.


to the "Positive" polarity in the Self (that of C. G. Jung)-Chang Shambala
between the Sun and the Earth; the DEMIURGIC inheritance: the Yod Point


Its position in the solar system corresponds to it as planet "5" (To the Ist Chakra
Muladhara corresponds Saturn-Kronos; to the Earth the 4th Chakra: Anahata "The
Sacred Race" and to the Sun corresponds the Seventh Chakra: Sahasrara "The
Optical Autonomy"(\> the Fifth Chakra: Vishuddha "Kali" (16 "Petals"-Rays;


they are the 13 + 3 Runes); in the Throat, the Labrix of the Goddess of Death
mutates it into VOX.


LUCIFERIS; and the Rune SIEG( $ ) -The Ray, The Tongue of the Birds- links
it first with the Ajna Chakra as the One Eye of Wothan and then "backwards"
with the Reptilian Brain and with the Non-Existent Chakra of the NUCA: THE


"GREEN GATE OF venus? . The Right "number 5" (Runic - the True
Quintessence) is the expression of the Rune KENAZ( V ) - The Torch of Cold Fire


- in the Context of the Rune ODAL (& ) as ARCHEMON where the Secret of the
RIGHT ANGLE is Resolved within: the Passage to the Tau Square, and the Outer
Labyrinth of Wotan is Resolved in Synchrony: Tyrodinguiburr.


185


Other cultural denominations of "The Gate of Venus", (THE CURRENT
INFINITY, THE ORIGIN):


-Eighth Sphere: "Runic 8", "Evil Astral"; Beyond the 7 Heavens, the 7
Dimensions / 7 Planes of the Universe, 7 Universal Laws, 7 Levels of
Consciousness, 7 Spheres / 7 Purposes of Shamballa, 7 Chakras, 7 Days of the
Week, 7 Colors of the Rainbow, 7 Sacraments, 7 Musical Notes, 7 Deadly Sins, etc.
Beyond the Soul Subject: Tripartition of the Sphere of Light-3 + Quadrangularity
of the Sphere of Shadow-4 = 7


-Daath:_Sephira 11 "that is not Sephira", "Dark Night of the Soul", "Infinite
Blackness of Self", "One Self (The Unus Mundus) versus The One: 1 Vs The 1";
Beyond the 10 Universal Archetypes, 10 Sephiroth, 10 Commandments, 10
Fingers of the Hands and Feet, etc.


-Gate 13: "The Center of the Black Sun", "The Dangerous Post", "The 13
Uncreated Stars", "Friday the 13th", "The Odinic Gate"; Beyond the 12 Months of
the Year - 2 Cycles of 12 govern day and night-, 12 Petals of the Anahata Chakra,
12 Tribes of Israel (Copy of the Aryans), 12 Apostles of Jesus (Copy of the Olympian
Gods, Aesir, etc.), 12 Signs of the Zodiac, 12 Signs of the Zodiac, 12 Signs of the
Zodiac, 12 Signs of the Zodiac, 12 Signs of the Zodiac, 12 Apostles of Jesus (Copy of
the Celestial Jerusalem, etc.), 12 Signs of the Zodiac, 12 Signs of the Zodiac.), 12
Signs of the Zodiac, 12 Gates of the Celestial Jerusalem, etc.


-The Aryan Number "23" or "5" "The Right Angle", "The Chromosome Pair", "The
Vv»): Chromosome Pair".


Key", "The Kenaz Rune", "The Odinic Paradox - Dagaz Rune"; Beyond the Spiral,
composed of 22 Bijas: 22 Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, 22 Major Arcana of the
Egyptian Tarot, 22 Paths of the Sephiroth tree, etc; Beyond the 4 Seasons, the 4
Cardinal Points, the 4 Winds, the 4 Elements, the 4 Ages, the 4 Pillars of the
Universe, etc.


-The Rune "' 25""_ XXV.


THE RUNE VENERIS * ( The Rune


IX


“IK


Nonexistent , the Rune of Odin, the Rune of Wyrd-@rlég,
the Rune of Origin, which is added to the 24 runes of the FUTHARK, the Seat of
the GRAAL), THE THRONE OF THE UNIVERSAL EMPEROR WHO WITH
THE POWER

OF THE RUNES Resigns to the "Council" of the Demiurge (the 24 Wise Elders of the
All the Systems of the "Great White Brotherhood") and Orders the Knights Loyal

to KRISTOS-LUCIFER


Odd Numbers: Male; Even Numbers: Female
Spiritual Numbers: 5, 8, 9, 11, 11, 13, 23, 25. The Unknowable God Hk = 8-11


186


Archetypical Numbers: 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, 22, 24


187


THE ETERNAL SYMBOL OF "THE GATE OF vans THE RUNE
VENERIS IS THE RUNE


mem , THE GOLDEN RUNE, THE RUNE OF ORIGIN, AND IS
EMBODIED IN THIS SOLAR SYSTEM BY THE "CELESTIAL BODY" OF
THE SAME NAME, BUT REFERS TO AN_ EXTRA-UNIVERSAL
HYPERBOREAN METAPHYSICAL REALITY; THEREFORE HYPER-
POLY/MULTI/DIMENSIONAL. THIS IS THE IRREFUTABLE MATERIAL
PROOF OF THE DIVINE ORIGIN OF THE SPIRIT: 7HE GRAAL; THE
TERRIBLE PRESENCE OF THE BLACK SUN OF KRISTOS-LUCIFER
FROM "BEHIND VENUS".


THE GOLDEN CORD AND THE ORIGIN ARE THE COSMIC-
HYPERBOREAL TRUTH FOR THE VIRYAS WHO FEEL THE MINNE, THE
BLOOD MEMORY WHICH REMEMBERS THEM THAT THEY
PARTICIPATE IN THE ETERNITY OF THE UNCREATED. THEREFORE,
WHATEVER THE AXIOLOGICAL CONTEXT OR THE DEMIURGIC PLANE
OF SIGNIFICATION WHERE THE ORIGIN OF THE HYPERBOREAL
SPIRIT IS "REMEMBERED" (THE INFINITE IS ACTUALIZED), "THE
DOOR" WILL BE A REALITY WHERE THERE IS A VIRYA THAT
AFFIRMS IT OR MORE VIRYAS THAT COINCIDE IN NON-CAUSAL
SYNCHRONY, BECAUSE IT REFERS TO THE UNCREATED ORIGIN OF
THE SPIRIT CHAINED TO MATTER. OBVIOUSLY THE AXIOLOGICAL
CONTEXT, ITS CULTURAL STRUCTURE AND ITS ARCHETYPAL
MATRICES WILL DIFFER ACCORDING TO THE COSMIC WORLD-STEP
IN WHICH THE VIRYA IS SITUATED AND FROM WHICH HE CLAIMS
THE LOST DIVINITY.


THEN, BEING WHAT THE ACTUAL INFINITY ACAUSALLY GENERATES,
THE "CULTURAL" CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SPIRITUAL AND
ETERNAL WILL BE REPRESENTED BY THE ARCHETYPAL MATRICES
WITH EXTRA-UNIVERSAL EXTREMES -VERTICES; SINCE IT IS THESE
ARCHETYPAL FORMS THAT ARE THE IMAGES-MYTHS OF THE
RECHARGED DESIGNS THAT IMPACT ON THE ETERNAL SYMBOLS
(RUNES) AND ON THE ORIENTED HYPERBOREAN SPIRITS (PONTIFEFS,
SIDDHAS), AND WHICH THEY THEMSELVES ARE THE ONES THAT ARE
THE MOST IMPORTANT, SIDDHAS) AND THOSE THAT THEY
ACTUALIZE AS "ARCHETYPAL CONTEXT OF THE MYTH-LIKE
ORIGIN" WITH ESSENTIAL HOSTILITY TO THE WORLD OF THE
DEMIURGE, TO REPRESENT THE "UNCREATED REALITIES", TO
STRATEGICALLY MANIFEST THE LUCIFERIC, LIBERATING, RUNIC,
PURE AND IMMACULATE OF THE LOYAL GODS OF AGARTHA: THE
LORDS OF UNCREATED LIGHT, OF TOTAL WAR, OF GRACIOUS WILL
AND ABSOLUTE GUIDANCE. VENUS IS THUS "AT THE SAME TIME"
LUCIFER, WOTAN, LILITH, FRYA AND THE SELBST.


ft


Wau


188


THE MYSTERY OF THE TRACKS


"The Mystery of A-mort is experienced in seven different ways by man, and that is
precisely the reason why the Hyperborean Wisdom foresees seven initiatory ways of
liberation. According to the way in which the Mystery of A-mort has been gnostically
perceived will be the Way of Liberation adopted and that is why it is usually spoken of
a "Way of Mutation" or "of the Ray"; of a "Dry Way" or "Way of the Right Hand"; of a
"Wet Way" or "Way of the Left Hand"; of a "Way of Strategic Opposition" or "Way of
the Warrior Gnosis for Absolute Orientation", etc."
The Mystery of Belicena Villca


The Left Hand Pathway (Right Brain Hemisphere) Dionysian is:
Kaos-Destruction-Liberation Alchemy:

Solve, Spiritualize Matter Attitude:

Lunar -Red Moon-.

God: Lucifer-Dionysus-Loki-Shiva

Symbolism: The Saurian Over the Ape

Goddess: Lilith-Ariadna-Sigyn-Kali

Quality: Willpower

Color: Black -Nigredo-.

Gate of Agartha/Venus: Cro-Magnon-Atlantean. In the Nape: Reptilian
Brain in Connection with Ajna Chakra and Vishuddha Chakra Danger:
Playful Deviance

Initiatory Rune: Odal (Double Sieg)

Examples: The Viryas Friedrich Nietzsche and Nimrod of Rosario.


The Right Hand Pathway (Left Brain Hemisphere) Apollonian is:
Kosmos-Construction-Transmutation

Alchemy: Coagulate, Materialize the Spirit

Attitude: Solar -Black Sun-.

God: Kristos-Apolo-Baldr- Vishnu

Symbolism: The Eagle Over the Serpent

Goddess: Allouine-Daphne-Nanna-Lakshmi

Quality: Courage

Color: White -Albedo

Gate of Agartha/Venus: Nordic-Polar. In the Sunya-Vacuum over the
Sahasrara Chakra

Danger: Sacralizing Deviation


Initiatory Rune: Hagal (Double Tyr)
Examples: The Divyas Richard Wagner and Miguel Serrano.


189


The Way of Heaven -which is no longer "Way"- (Whole Brain and Beyond)
EN: Hyperborea

Increation; Creation/AntiCreation

Kosmos/Kaos

Construction/Destruction

Transmutation/Liberation

Alchemy: Solve/Coagula

Attitude: Polar and Venusian -Green

Lightning -God: Kristos-Lucifer; Wotan

Symbolism: The Vril on the Spiral

Goddess: Allouine-Lilith; Freyja

Quality: Victory

Color: Red -Ruby

Gate of Agartha/Venus: All

Initiatory Rune: Veneris (Double Swastika: Levogira and
Dextroégira) Example: Siddha Adolf Hitler, the Last Hyperborean
Avatara


Dionysus Apollo


*The Middle Way Corresponds to the Gate of Agartha/Venus ‘Tar’ of the EAST
(K'taagar/Catigara) and to the Aryan Lineages of the Mongols, Japanese -Ainus-,
Chinese -Tocari-, Khmer, etc.; to the Ancient Tao, to the Buddhism of the Origins,
etc.


*Another Gate of Agartha/Venus is that of the CAUCASUS, on Mount ELBRUZ.


190


The Demiurge YHVH-Satan -Imitator- (Jesus Christ-Baphometh) is:
Cosmos/Caos-"Universe" (Big Bang to Big Crunch: Manvantaras and
Yugas) Creation/AntiCreation.

Construction/Destruction

Sephiroths/Qliphoths

Devas/Asuras ("Right Hand/Left Hand" Paths) Alchemy:
"Solve"/"Coagula", the Eternal Return of the Same Attitude:

Solar (Golden Sun) and Lunar (White Moon)

God: God the Father-Zeus*-Brahma

Symbolism: The Spiral (The Snail and The Serpent).

Goddess: Mater-la

Quality: Defeat (Of the Hyperborean Spirit) Color:

Brown (The Mixture of All Colors) Gate of Venus:

None


Initiatory Rune: No Runes


*Zeus in some planes of meaning can be considered the Unknowable God, Wotan or Lucifer.


Appendices:


I- In the 2nd Dissertation Part 2 is developed the theme of the two kinds of Loyal Gods:
Aesir and Vanir.

So you can have an Aesir-Apolylinear (Warrior-Builder), Aesir Dionysian (Warrior-
Destroyer), Vanir-Apolylinear (Mage-Builder) or Vanir Dionysian (Mage-Destroyer)
Tendency.


IT- In Section T-The Last Step of the Awakened Virya, of the Ist Introductory Volume -
Hyperborean Metaphysics - of the Fundamentals of the Hyperborean Wisdom, the Two
Lines are defined:

"The Spirit-sphere, indeed, can already be unchained, reversed, returned to normal.
But such reversion can be accomplished in two ways, and so the awakened virya must
decide.


The Dionysian Way - One way is to reverse the original process of betrayal: THIS IS
ACHIEVED BY THE AWAKENED SELF VOLUNTARILY ENTERING THROUGH
THE EYE OF FIRE AND BECOMING "ABSOLUTE SELF" WITHIN THE NORMAL
SPHERE, RETURNING TO THE FORM OF THE

FIGURE 2. In such a case the Spirit-sphere, now "Normal", can leave the Universe

of the Demiurge and return to the world of the Unknowable.


The Apollonian Way -But there is also another possibility: THAT THE REVERSION
OF THE SPIRIT TAKES PLACE ON THE MICROCOSM OF THE AWAKENED
VIRYA, TRANSMUTING ITS SUBSTANCE INTO VRAJA AND CONVERTING VIRYA
INTO

IMMORTAL SIDDHA. In figure 36 it can be seen how the Tergum hostis begins to
expand through the spheres of the awakened virya, TRANSFORMING HIS BLOOD
INTO FIRE. It is then that the awakened virya is engulfed in the BERSERKR FUROR
that no enemy can resist, when he becomes a warrior of Wotan or an Initiate of the
Black Order SS."


191


FUNDAMENTAL DIFFERENCES


Just as an Anarch (Absolute Individual-Magical Idealist) is not an "anarchist" (chaotic,
pseudo-idealist, utopian and gregarious), an Eagle (Hyperborean Initiate) is not a
"feathered serpent" (sinarch initiate).


Chang Shambala/ Primordial Tradition". Agartha/Hyperborean Wisdom


Ex: The Brahman René Guenon


Ex: The Ksatriya Julius Evola


Synarchic Initiation -Modern-.


Jewish Collective Unconscious


Hyperborean Initiation -Traditional-.


Aryan Collective Unconscious


Intellectual Sphere El Aguila
The Feathered Serpent Intellectual Sphere
Fear of Madness Soulful Pure Madman (Metaphysical)
Priest Spiritual Warrior - Ativarna Siddha
Siddha Traitor Controls the Leal Berserkir
Shepherds
Emotional Sphere El Oso Emotional
The Lion (or The Goat) Sphere


Fear of Death "Warrior"
Anima


Shepherd controls the Egregore
Instinctive Sphere


The Sheep (or The Black
Sheep) Fear of Violation


Egregore-Group Soul


Assassin (Metaphysician)
Hyperborean Pontiff


The Absolute Self in the Selbst
El Lobo


Instinctive Sphere
Rapist (Metaphysical)


Knight of Self


PREFIERO VIVIR
UN DIA COMO UN LOBO


“t


Pree
ees
wy OY


QUE CIEN ANOS
COMO UN CORDERO


192


THE MYSTERY OF HE-SHE, SHE-SHE, SHE-SHE, SHE-SHE;


WE


HE-SHE, SHE-SHE; WE ARE NOT THE "4ANDROGYNOUS".


THE ANDROGINO (Andrés: male-Adan; Gyné: female-Eva) IS THE ANIMIC
ENTELEQUIAL FINALITY OF THE PASU IN SAMADHI: HIS FUSION WITH
"GOD", THE DEMIURGO, THE HERMAPHRODITE ONE, HIS CREATOR, IN
THE BEGINNING WHICH IS EQUAL TO THE END.


The Demiurge Baphometh (H R Giger). Abraxas and the Pentagrams of Good and Evil.
It is the Chimera. The Draconis Mundi-Dragon Archetype-, Unites the Archetypal
Duality: I- The Goat Archetype, Satan Aspect, is the Oliphoth Tree of the Jewish
Kabbalah.

They are Taumiel, Jaigidiel, Satariel, Gamjikot, Golajab,

Tagirion, A'arab Zaraq, Adramelech, Gamaliel and
Nehemoth.


God the Father (YHVH), Son (Adam
Kadmon) and Holy Spirit (Shekinah-Ruach
HaKodesh)
2- The Lion Archetype, Aspect Jehovah, is the Sephiroth Tree of the Jewish Kabbalah.
The Central Pillar is "Balance" (Kether, Tiphereth, Yesod and Malkhouth).
The Left Pillar is "Severity" (Binah, Geburah and Hod).
The Right Pillar is "Mercy" (Hokhmah, Chesed and Netzach).


193


HE-SHE, SHE-HE; THIS IS THE HYPERBOREAN SPIRITUAL FINALITY OF
THE VIRYA IN HIS REUNION AT THE ORIGIN WITH THE DIVINE
PARTNER IN THE KAIVALYA: HIS SEPARATION FROM THE MATERIAL
UNIVERSE OF "GOD," THE DEMIURGE-THE ONE, HIS ADVERSARY. THE
AS AND THE ASYNJA-THE ABSOLUTE MAN AND THE ABSOLUTE
WOMAN-UNITED AND SEPARATED FOREVER IN THE DIVINE COMEDY
OF THE LOVELESS A-MOR.


Calavera Roja (Vajra's) and her
Valkyria El-Ella, Ella-El; Nos


Vlad Tepes and Mina in the
Origin He-She, She-He; We


194


THE MYSTERY OF THE WHITE RACE


The VRIL is possessed only by the WHITE
RACE; THE WHITE RACE IS Materialized
VRIL.


Odin in the Center; the Eagle, the Bear, the Wolf.


*THE HYPERBOREAN ARYAN WHITE RACE ACTUALIZES THE BLACK
(WOLF), THE HARD (BEAR) AND THE COLD (EAGLE-LIZARD) IN ITS
EXTREME ARCHETYPAL MATRICES OVERLOADED WITH THE PASU
DESIGN: THE BLOND OF THE HAIR (THE GOLDEN CORD; THE GOLDEN
AGE; THE AURUM POTABILE), THE WHITE OF THE SKIN (THE PURE,
THE INNOCENT; THE A-MORT FOR THE POLAR AND THE REJECTION
OF THE SOLAR LOGOS), THE BLUE-BLUE-BLUE-GREEN IN THE EYES
(THE ETERNAL SKY; THE GLACIAL ICE; THE EMERALD OF THE
GRAIL), THE SUPREME PERFECTION OF THE PHYSICAL FEATURES
(THE SUBLIME OF THE GODS), ETC.; HONOR, COURAGE,
FEARLESSNESS, WILL AND LOYALTY IN THEIR PSYCHIC ATTITUDE
MAKE EVIDENT THE MARK OF KRISTOS-LUCIFER: THE SYMBOL OF


ORIGIN, THE SIGN OF VRIL.


The One Eye of Wotan/Odin/Navutan, looking at the Universe from the Green Gate
of Venus, accompanied left and right by his two Eagle-Lizards: his two Wolves, Gere
and Freke ("Glutton" and "Voracious"), and his two Ravens, Hugin and Munin
("Thought" and "Memory").

The Pineal Gland (Ajna Chakra-Third Eye) Oriented to the Origin generates the
SINGLE EYE OF AS WOTAN


195


"The form in which that which exhibits an image, but does not belong to the archetypal order of
creation, as infinite, is represented can be expressed as follows: AN ARCHETYPAL FORM IS
GENERATED THAT DUPLICATES THE IMAGE AS THE EXTREME OF A
REPRESENTATIVE DESIGN, WHOSE ONTICOTEMPORAL SERIES GRANTS IT


UNIVERSAL EXISTENCE."


2nd Dissertation-Part 2
ANIMAL-HUMAN DESIGNDIVINE MAN


DESIGN


MXM = =6KXX Oo &


SPIRAL DNA RUNIC DNA OF AWAKENED VIRYA
OF PASU AND SLEEPING VIRYA AND OF SIDDHA BERSERKIR


THE AS WOTAN - THE RUNIC KRISTOS OF ATLANTIS
THE ALMIGHTY - THE SUPREME CREATOR


196


THE MYSTERY OF THE RUNES


<<ALL RUNES ARE ANGLES, STRAIGHT LINES... AND
BEYOND>>>.

The RUNE KENAZ (FIRE-FEUER/CONTROLLED MUSPELHEIM FIRE) in
ALL RUNES (except ISA):


PP PR RC


rea age re Ansuz Raidho Kenaz Gebo Wunjo


2 2 2 1 4 1


NAL OL EY S


i ia ia a eo ain Eihwaz rege a hi Sowilo


. BM  PoMR


Tiwaz Berkano Ehwaz Mannaz Laguz Ingwaz Dagaz Othala
2 3 = 1 4 4 5


THE ISA RUNE (UCE-EIS/NIFLHEIM) IS FRYA-LILLITH, THE GODDESS OF THE
ICE, THE ORIGINAL COUPLE. THE RUNE 11 (or 9 in the New Futhark) IS
THE BRIDGE, THE ROUND CAPILLARY THAT "OPENS" THE RIGHT
ANGLE TO THE TOOTH OF THE HYPERBORNE GODDESS.


THE ISA RUNE IS THE NADI SUSHUMNA THAT UNITES THE VIRYA
WITH THE GREAT HYPERBOREAN ANCESTOR, BEYOND THE TWO
DEMIURGIC SERPENTS IDA AND PINGALA, TRANSMUTING THEM INTO
TWO ISA RUNES: THE TRIPLE GODDESS FRIGG, FREYJA AND HEL. IT IS


THE HAGAL RUNE: THE TOTAL-MAN


197


IRMINSUL: THE UNIVERSAL COLUMN THAT
LINKS THE HYPERBOREAN INITIATE (THE
TWICE-BORN) WITH THE ORIGIN, WITH THE


DOOR OF VENUS.
<<ALL RUNES HAVE 3 MEANINGS>>.
1) Noological-Spiritual -Wotan/Odin-. Deus Providence
2) Psychological-Archetypal -Henir/Vili- Homo Will
3) Physical-Biological -Lédur/Ve- Nature Destination


Ask ("ash", the male) and Embla ("elm", the female): the First Human Archetypal Aryan Couple


The Divine Society and its 3 Functions:

1-Sovereignty: The King-Judge (Tyr), The Magician-Priest
(Odin) 2-Strength: The Warrior (Thor)

3-Production: The Suppliers (Freyja and Freyr).


THE EXTASIS OF THE INCREATED  VRUNA IS
HYPERBORNEAL LIBERATION; THE UNDERSTANDING OF
THE ARCHETYPICAL RUNE IS IDENTIFICATION WITH THE
COLLECTIVE ARIA SOUL; AND IN SYNCHRONY WITH BOTH:
THE TRANSMUTATION (OR THE RETURN TO NORMALCY) OF
THE INDIVIDUAL VIRYA (OR DIVYA) INTO SIDDHA; OF
MATERIA GRAVIS INTO VRAJA DIAMANTINO, OF MAN INTO
GOD.


OUR TRIAD OF _ SPIRIT, SOUL AND _ RUNIC_ BODY,
BIRD/SAURIAN-WHITE-RACE DESIGN WILL DEFEAT THE
TRIPLE DESIGN OF OPHIDIAN-JEWISH-ANTIRACE,  APE-


198


FNPFR<


F U THA R K= THE GREATEST MYSTERY OF THE
MULTIVERSE


Diagram of the Demiurge and the Traitorous Hyperborean Gods

Fehu-> Primordial Chaos (The One); The Beginning: Big Bang. The Father Aspect of YHVH.
Father, Fecundar, Facer, Fire, Phallus. The Archetypal Origin of the Universe.

Ur-> Matrix; Atom Design (Gravis). The Mother Aspect of YHVH. The Origin of the
Universal Mater-la, the Womb.

THorn-> Monad-The Androgynous; Demiurgic Archetypes. The Son Aspect of YHVH.
Ansuz-> Coming of the Hyperborean Gods, Betrayal-Alliance with the Demiurge.
Divine Inheritance for the Evolution of the Animal-Man.

Raidho-> Wheel of the Eternal Return of the Same: "Order", "Cosmos". Law.
Kenaz-> The Hot Fire of Creation; Entelechy; The End Equal to the Beginning: Big
Crunch. Primordial Chaos (The One).


Scheme of Kristos-Lucifer and the Loyal Hyperborean Gods
Fehu-> Uncreated Kaos; Unknowable Divine Plane. The Origin. Ginnungagap.


Ur-> Divine Matrix; Divine Atom Design: Vajra. The Cow Audhumbla.

THorn-> He-She, She-He; Nos. Inner Spiritual Orientation - Outer Essential
Hostility; Hyperborean Archetypes. The Giant Ymir.

Ansuz-> Coming of the Hyperborean Gods; Total Loyalty-War to the Demiurge and
the Traitor Gods. Divine Inheritance for the Transmutation and Liberation of the
God-Man. Odin, Vili and Ve.

Raidho-> Wheel of the Eternal Return to the Origin: Order, Kosmos. Honor.
Kenaz->The Cold Fire of Increation; The Right Angle; The Origin.


aN


Valknut
The Mark of Odin: 3 times 3= 9


The 24 Runes of the Ancient Futhark have their equivalence with chromosomes.
Chromosome 23 is the Rune Dagaz, the SupraArchetypal Odinic Paradox; while
Rune (24) Odal is The Ancestral Source - The Odd, Od, Wod Power.

The Mission of the Virya/Divya is to Runify his DNA up to the Rune (25)
Veneris: The Hyperborean Ubermensch Beyond the Stars, in Gimle.


199


THE HYPERBOREAN FUTHARK $
OF THE GOD WOTAN, GOTT WOTAN, TIR-ODAL, TIR ODIN
In the New Age of Baldr (Aquarius): The Age VENERIS.
THE 13 + 3 UNCREATED RUNES


Aettir del Fuego - Will


The Ist Uncreated Rune Archetypal Fehut -Fe/Feoh-

Archetype Fire (Uncontrolled). Hyperborean Uncreated Kaos.
Archetypal Meaning -> Cattle -Asynja Freyja-; Wealth -Mobile-.
*Rune Perthrob -Peorth-: Aryan Destiny in the Created. The Wyrd-Orlég.
Archetypal Meaning-> Stone; Fruit Tree.


The 2nd Archetypal Uncreated Rune ur -Uruz/Uram-.

Archetype Water. Divine Matrix. Aryan Instinctive Will.

Archetypal Meaning-> Bison -Bull, Cow-; Power

*Laguz Rune -Logr/Laukaz-: The Primordial Aryan Vital Energy. The Aryan Collective
Unconscious. Archetypal Meaning-> Water; Aquatic Leek.


The 3rd Archetypal Uncreated Rune Thorn -Thurs/Thurisaz-.

Earth Archetype. Aryan Divine Power. Hostile Back. Aryan Pure Emotion.
Archetypal Meaning-> As Thor -Giants-; Hammer -Spine-; Strength

*Wunjo RuneP -Wynn-: Camaraderie between equals of the same Aryan Race.
Archetypal Meaning-> Happiness -Well-Being-; Child


The 4th Archetypal Uncreated Rune Riel -Oss-

Archetype Astral Blood -Ether-. Hyperborean Gods. Spiritual Face. Pure Aryan
Reason. Aryan Conscious Will.

Archetypal Meaning-> As Odinn; Gods -Ases-; Magic

*Rune Mannaz ¥4 -Madhr-: Semi-Divine Humanity. The Aryan Collective Consciousness.
Archetypal Meaning->Man


The 5th Archetypal Uncreated Rune RaidhoR -Reith-
Archetype Air. Cosmic Order. Aryan Cultural Will.
Archetypal Meaning-> Riding -Chariot-; Rhythm.

*Rune Jera® -Jeran-: Cosmic Cycles. Universal Aryan Archetypes.
Archetypal Meaning-> Year (Good); Harvest.


The 6th Archetypal Uncreated Uncreated Rune Kenaz < -Kaun-

Eternal Fire Archetype (Controlled) - Muspelheim. Knight of the Self.
Aryan Transcendent Immanence.

Archetypical Meaning-> Torch; [lumination -Knowledge-.


The 1st Triple Uncreated Noological Rune ORAl(Double Sieg)
a The Encirclement. The Defense. The NON-BEING of the
Traitor Gods.
The Separation. Destruction.
Archetypal Meaning Sieg -Sowilo/Sigel/Sun- -> Sun -Victory-; Ray -Verb-.
Archetypal Meaning Odal -Othataz- -> Inheritance -Homeland-; Ancestral Legacy


200


Aettir del Hielo - Courage


The 7th Archetypal Uncreated Rune Ing? -Ingwaz-.

Pure Aryan Race Archetype. Runic DNA by Paternal Inheritance.
Archetypal Significance-> Ing -the Superior Man-; Sexual Magic

*Rune Berkana B -Beorc-: Runic DNA by Maternal

Inheritance. Archetypal Meaning->Abedul, Fir Tree


The 8th Uncreated Archetypal Rune Nauthiz* -Naud/Nyd-

Archetype Aryan Resistance. The Need to Understand the Use of Fate in Favor of
Self and Comrade. Superhuman Patience.

Archetypal Meaning-> Fatality -Necessity and Slavery-; Friction

*Rune Ehe/ Ar¥ : The Satisfaction of Understanding the Use of Fate Against the Essential
Enemy.

Archetypal Meaning-> Magical Aryan Marriage; Abundance


The 9th Uncreated Rune Archetypal Uncreated Rune AlgizY -Elhaz-.

Aryan Eternal Life Archetype. The Positive. The Spiritual. Masculine. Yang.
Archetypal Meaning-> Moose -Ascent-; Bifrost Bridge -As Heimdall-.

*Rune Yr A : Archetype Eternal Death of the Non-Aryan. The Negative. The Material. The
Feminine. Yin.

Archetypal Meaning-> Descent


The 10th Archetypal Uncreated Rune Isa | -Is-

Archetype Eternal Ice - Niflheim. The Absolute Self in the Selbst.
Pontiff. Aryan Immanent Transcendence.

Archetypal Meaning-> Ice; Antimatter


The 2nd Noological Triple Uncreated Rune Hagal | : (Double Tyr)
TT The Bridge. The Attack. The Being of the Loyal Gods.

Integration. The Construction.

Archetypal Meaning Tyr -Tiwaz- -> Honor, As Tyr -Spear-; Law and Justice
Archetypal Meaning Hagal -Hagall/Hagalaz- -> Hail -Snow-; Life and Death


Aettir de la Sangre - Victoria


The 11th Archetypal Uncreated Uncreated Rune Thwazt -Eoh-
Aryan Multiverse Axis Archetype. Axis Mundi.
Archetypal Meaning-> Yew Tree; Column


*Rune WolfsangeAl - The Victory of the Aryan Wolf-Bear-Eagle.
Archetypal Meaning-> Aristocracy -Meritocracy -Racist Meritocracy-.


The 12th Archetypal Uncreated Rune Archetypal Dagaz x -Daeg-

Archetype Paradox -Odynic-. The Uncreated Light. The Day of the Spirit.
Archetypical Meaning-> Day; Awakening

*Rune Ehwaz "1 : Sleipnir, the Vehicle of the Gods. The Ride of the Present Infinity. Archetypal
Meaning-> Horse


201


The 13th Archetypal Uncreated Rune Gibur in X -Gebo/Gyfu-

Archetype Blood -Minne- (Weapon) Divine Aryan - Ginnungagap. Knowledge and
Wisdom of the Yggdrasil and the Nine Worlds. Siddha Berserkr.

Archetypal Meaning-> Gift -Empty-; "Be a God".


The 3rd Noological Uncreated Triple Rune Veneris (Double Swastika)


SHR The Origin. The Vril. 1 4M a Hyperborean Loyal God.

Increation; Construction-Destruction.

Liberation. Transmutation.

Archetypal Meaning Swastika-> Hyperborean Aryan Divine White Race
Hyperborean Aryan Archetypal Meaning Veneris-> Venus - Loyal Hyperborean
Siddha


THE 12 (13) HYPERBOREAN LINEAGES


Sign Rune Deity/s Element = Era/Vruna
Aries Ansuz Wotan/Freyja Blood/Fire Era Odal - Veneris
Taurus Ur Frigg Earth
Gemini Isa Skade Air
Cancer Kenaz Kvasir Water
Leo Thorn Thor Fire
Virgo Ingwaz Freyr (Eng/Nerthus) Earth
Libra Scorpio —Thwaz Tyr Air
Algiz Heimdall Water Hagal
(And Gibur Loki Ether Odal
Ophyuco)
Sagittarius Fehu Hela Fire
Capricorn Raidho Forseti Earth
Aquarius Dagaz Baldr Air Era VENERIS
Pisces Nauthiz Urd WerdandiSkuld Water Hagal Era


The 13+3 Uncreated Runes Correspond to the Sixteen (16) Combinations of the
Psychological Types of C G Jung. The Four Scales, the Eight Polarities:
Extroversion-Introversion; Sensation-Intuition; Thought-Feeling and Judgment-
Perception.


The Rune-Mother
Hagal


"The FUTHARK is ORDERED FROM LEFT TO RIGHT, that is to say, ACCORDING TO THE DIRECTION OF
THE INDO-GERMANIC ALPHABETS. Such sense was arranged by Wotan when he taught the Aryans

the use of the Runes JUST TO RESIGN THE ONTIC DESIGNATIONS.

The voices of all design, the archetypal matrices, on the contrary, have the real sense of RIGHT TO
LEFT, like the Hebrew alphabet." FSH


202


The Hyperborean Futhark


The 13+3 Uncreated


FNPF RK
ost YI


mM th & ok SH?


The Ancient Futhark of 24 Runes
+ Rune of Origin: VENERIS


NeFR<


The New 16-Run Futhark.
The Noological Runes are Hagal (as Veneris),
Sieg (as Odal) and Tyr (as Hagal).


FNPEFRE


KI +7
TBYTA


The Armanen Futhark of 18 Runes.
The Noological Runes are Hagal (as Veneris),
Sieg (as Odal) and Tyr (as Hagal).


oa Tae
ae 144%
TY A+


203


BASIC WARFARE


SHER


RUNE VENERIS


(DOUBLE SWASTIKA LEVOROTATORY AND
DEXTROROTATORY) THE CURRENT INFINITY


VS


FALSE INFINITY PSEUDO-INFINITY OUROBOROS
SERPENT


>I1<=XKeN


RUNE HAGAL (DOUBLE TYR
THE HYPERBOREAN WHOLE - I DESTROY (THE MICRO-MACROCOSM)


N
STAR CUBE ANAHATA


DE DAVID METATRON CHAKRA


204


RUNE TYR
SELF-SACRIFICE IN SEARCH OF HONOR


SAHASRARA CHAKRA
ARCHETYPAL PLANE/UNIVERSAL COLLECTIVE UNCONSCIOUS


ODAL RUNE
THE ONE EYE OF WOTAN
THE INFINITE FENCE


VS


YOD POINT


205


RUNE GIBUR AS SWORD OF WOTAN
VS


DUALITY/YING YANG


RUNE GIBUR AS A TRIDENT OF POSEIDON
VS


THE EYE OF "GOD ELIX OM SPIRAL
"ALL-SEEING". SNAIL


206


Hyperborea vs mit


Vitll=The Vril 666=Christ/Satan
8 Points, 8 Lines, 8 Intersections 6 Points, 6 Lines, 6 Intersections
The 13+3 Uncreated Runes The 12 Gates of the Celestial Jerusalem
Axis-> [X/Nine 999 Hagal Axis-> 7/Seven: "God"/The Demiurge
Wotan-Freyja: We The One
432,000 Einherjar: 800 each 144,000 Chosen:
of the 540 gates of Valhalla The "Saints" of Israel
Berserkers, Ulfhednars Angels and Demons
Kristos-Lucifer St. Michael Archangel -Samael-


The North Pole: The Polar Departure (Descent) from Agartha. Arktos: The Light of the
North


The South Pole: The Polar Entrance (Ascent) to Agartha. Ant-arktos: The Light of the
South


207


3RD INITIATION


2ND INITIATION


1ST INITIATION


208


DECLARATION OF ETERNAL WAR


THE HYPERBOREAN WARRIOR OF ORIGIN, DIE
SCHWARZESONNENMENSCH, FROM THE
SELBST-VENUS, THE EAGLE-GOD-MAN-
LIZARD-SPIRIT-MOUNTS THE PEGASUS-
UNICORN-OCTOPUS-SOUL-IN- ONE ARYAN-
BODY, AND TAKES ALL THE HEAVENS - AND
HELLS - BY STORM WITH THE INFINITE HONOR
AND VALOR OF THE GODS LOYAL TO THE
ETERNAL SPIRIT IN THE CONTEXT OF THE
FINAL BATTLE OF THE ESSENTIAL WAR FOR
THE SPIRITUAL TRANSMUTATION AND
LIBERATION OF THE MATERIAL SERPENT-
UNIVERSE OF THE DEMIURGE.


In the year 121 of the Hitler Era: The
Thousand Years of the Day of the
Spirit.

Meine Ehre heifit Treue


OUR HONOR IS VALOR VICTORY
OR VALHALLA


209


God-King Nimrod "the Defeated".
The First Hyperborean Hero


The Ziggurat of Borsippa, Act of War of
Nemrod the Hunter, General Ninurta and the Kassites of Aryan Race


210


ANNEX


HOMAGE TO THE GREAT ARGENTINE NATION


José de San Martin


”


The Ksatriya of Freedom


¢ "To the Army of the Andes remains the glory of saying: in 24 days we made
the campaign, we passed the highest mountain ranges, we concluded with the
tyrants and gave Liberty."


¢ "Comrades let us vow not to lay down our arms from our hands until
we see the country entirely free or die with them as men of courage."


¢ "TI declare that I neither owe nor have owed, ever, anything to anyone."


¢ "What my grenadiers are capable of, only I know, whoever equals them there
will be, whoever exceeds them will not."


¢ "In defense of the homeland everything is lawful except to let it perish."
¢ "The soldiers of the fatherland know not luxury, but glory."

« "Let us not expect rewards for our toil and sleeplessness."

¢ "For men of courage companies were made."

© "You will be what you must be, otherwise you will be nothing."


¢ "If there is victory in overcoming the enemy; there is greater victory when man
overcomes himself."


°« "If we are free, we have everything to spare."


°« "Let's be free, the rest matters nothing."


Hyperborean Strategy: Liberation and Independence VS Spanish Catholic Empire
Flaws: Non-Racism, Absence of an Elite, Influence of Freemasonry.


211


stuck its nose into it without it getting what it deserved. But at the end of
those ten years the international synarchy, in coalition with the vernacular
Cipayism, in the service of colonialism, crushed us ....... This intense
development of international politics, inside and outside the countries, has
imposed the need to create the instruments to manage it and thus the Great
Internationals have arisen. Capitalism and Soviet communism are but two of
them, apparently opposed but, in reality, perfectly united and coordinated. To
prove it, it is enough to renember 1939 when they allied to annihilate a third
party in discord, then represented by Germany and Italy. No less eloquent is
what happened at the Yalta Conference in which both imperialisms agreed and
coordinated their future activities of domination and exploitation. But the fact is
that everything tends to internationalize around it, which, in the last analysis, is
the triumph of communist internationalism. Freemasonry, Zionism,
international societies of all kinds, are but consequences of this internalization
of the present world. They are the hidden forces of the revolution as they are the
hidden forces of imperialist domination.

e "That is to say that we, in the face of imperialist power and the great
international synarchy managed by the United Nations, where communism,
capitalism, Judaism, the Catholic Church -which also enters when it is paid-,
Freemasonry, all those forces that have thousands of collaterals all over the
world are the ones that begin to act".


Eva Peron


¢ "I did not want nor do I want anything for myself. My glory is and will always
be the shield of Peron and the flag of my people. And even if I leave shreds of
my life on the road, I know that you will pick up my name and carry it as a flag
to victory".

e "... The reason is very simple: man can live exclusively for himself. A
woman cannot. If a woman lives for herself, I believe she is not a woman or
cannot be said to live..."


¢ "Foreign capitalism, foreign capitalism and its oligarchic and surrendered
servants have been able to prove that there is no force capable of subduing a
people who are aware of their rights. Once again, my dear descamisados,
joining the leader and conductor, we reaffirm that in Argentine life there is
no longer room for economic colonialism, for social injustice, nor for the
traffickers of our sovereignty and our future..."

¢ "With the ashes of the traitors we will build the Homeland of the humble".


¢ "Our homeland will cease to be a colony, or the flag will fly over its ruins".


Hyperborean Strategy: 3rd Justicialist Position VS International Synarchy
Flaws: Non-Racism, Absence of an Elite, Influence of Communism.


212


THE ARGENTINA OF
THE WHITE ARYAN
HYPERBOREAN ARYAN RACE
WILL NEVER SURRENDER
TO THE NEW WORLD ORDER
OF THE DEMIURGE JEHOVAH
AND THE TRAITOR SIDDHAS


In the Name of the Unknowable Father
of the Paraclete, And of Kristos-Lucifer


Amen!


213


ESOTERIC ANALYSIS OF THE ARGENTINE PSYCHOREGION


Archetypical Character: Feminine - Lunar - Psychic


Alchemy: Argentum - Silver Element:
Water, Humidity Number: 2, Duality


Archetypal Definition: The Archetypal Hell: Helheim (the Roots of the Yggdrasil: the
Heldrasil); Avernus, Hades, Tartarus, the Kingdom of the Narakas, Gehenna,
Jahanam


Dominant Archetype: The Black Goddess -Dark Goddess-, the Queen of Hell, the
Satanic Diva, the Terrible Mother.


Main God: Hela


Secondary Entities: The Norns (Grandmother-Mother-Daughter and Similar), the
Female Sphinx; the "Tricksters"; Demons and Devils of all kinds.


Psycho-Physical Characteristics: Satanism (Chaos, Deception, Mockery, Trickery, Lies,
Falsehood, Betrayal, Vile, Cowardice, Envy, Resentment, etc.); Mixture ("Crucible")
of the Residuis-Detritus of all the Races of the World.


Synarchic Framework: Qlyphothic Hierarchy


Hyperborean Framework: The Left Hand Way


Las Nornas -Parcas, Moiras-.


214


REQUIRED BOOKS


Nimrod of Rosario: Fundamentals of the Hyperborean Wisdom (13+ 1 Volumes), The
Mystery of Belicena Villca, The Dissertations (Ist and 2nd -I and II-), Secret History of
The Thule-Gesellschaft (by Konrad Tarstein). Translation of "Manual de Estrategia
Psicosocial" of the SS.


Gustavo Brondino: Hyperborean Vision of History, Treatise on Hyperborean Gnosis,
Eva Peron and the Order of Builders, Strategic Peronism, Hyperborean Wisdom,
Hyperborean Yoga.


Miguel Serrano: E/ Cordon Dorado Hitlerismo Esotérico, Nos el Libro de la
Resurreccion, Nietzsche y la Danza de Shiva, Hitler el Ultimo Avatara, La
Resurreccion del Héroe, Mant Por el Hombre que Vendrd, Memorias de El y Yo, Maya
La Realidad es una Ilusion.


Julius Evola: Rebellion Against the Modern World, Pagan Imperialism, The Race of the
Spirit, The Blood Myth, The Doctrine of Awakening, Men and Ruins, Metaphysics of
Sex, Riding the Tiger, The Bow and the Nail, The Way of the Cinnabar.

Otto Rahn: The Court of Lucifer.


Savitri Devi: Memories and Reflections of an Aryan, Gold in the Crucible.


Alfred Rosenberg: Der Mythus des 20. Jahrhunderts - The Myth of the 20th Century,
Editions Wotan.


Adolf Hitler: Mein Kampf - My Struggle, Wotan Editions. Introduction and Notes by


215


Agartha


The Virgin of |


216


THE NAVUTAN TREE


by PIEDRA IBERICA


SSA tS AZZz
RZ
oy


_——


>


Introduction


I am writing this text in order to be able to demonstrate as far as possible what relationship the symbols of the
Hebrew kabbalah have with the hyperborean mystery of liberation while trying to answer some questions
typical of spiritual people who do not find a clear reference point for the time in which they live. It is not a
question here of creating dogmatic rationalism about the possibilities of liberation of the virya (the complexity
of the ways can produce energetic phenomena inexplicable in the runic concert(1)), nor to try to demonstrate
which is the only possibility to complete the state of normality of the EHRE sphere and the consequent
attainment of the SELBST or psychic totality of our integrated self (the term was coined by the creator of depth
psychology, the Swiss Carl Gustav Jung, who, stuck to the academic limits of his own teaching, could not define
what was the depth of such a concept in the context of the essential cosmic war.


At the same time I allow myself the license to use different symbolic languages, among them I make special
emphasis on ASTROLOGIC , with the task of continuing the same interpretative line that has followed the
Jungian school in recent decades and in which even our comrade Felipe Moyano found the roots on which he
elaborated his innovative work in a language that followed the tradition of Western thought as a way to block
the sense that was taking such materialistic dialectic.


It should be noted that the ASTROLOGICAL discipline is a language of the Kalachackra and it is not a matter
of POSITIVISTICALLY affirming its designs as do the psychologists belonging to the NEW AGE movements
and their books tending to the genre of SELF-HELP, which is basically a subterfuge of approval of this Matrix
in which we live (being a postor of meaning of the cultural structure)... cee eeeeecseeeeeteeeeeeeeeeeee

to perceive the MAP OF THE CAVERN'S JAIL where we are imprisoned (following the well-known platonic
myth), to face the MOIRAS AND the DAIMON of FATE in the contest of the deployed forces, "to aim at the
star and not to stare at the finger", to burnish the scales of the loriga or to know the hypnotic score that spits the
breath of Brahma in our own realities from inside a PARTENON bristling with TYR edges because according
to the volume II of the fd of the sh:


"THE WATCHES
ATOMIC, BIOLOGICAL, AND PSYCHOPHYSIOLOGICAL PROCESSES OF THE PASU ARE
SYNCHRONIZED WITH THE


217


COSMIC CLOCKS THAT REGULATE THE MOVEMENTS OF ENTITIES ACCORDING TO
"UNIVERSAL PATTERNS OF REASON".


Or in other words: The more we detach ourselves from the forces deployed in the matter that surrounds these
planes of subjected incarnation and that make their order possible, the more autonomy at the ontic level we
achieve on our path to liberation.


However, there is no common esotericism among the viryas (nor a unique doctrine) since it would be falling
into the cultural error of RATIONALISM or structural limit of the gnoseological horizon Pasu...The symbol
establishes a limit to this same cognitive faculty (the NUMEN is not a ponderable category in the prison of the
spirit) between that which is partially glimpsed and its result: THE PARADOX (as a double formal opposition)
which has as an ideal goal the creation Of a oo... eeeecceeceseeeeereneeneeneenes noological ethics.

differentiated from each one of them (it is something deeper than the imprint of the lineage, but the true sense of
the SELBST) only produces synchronous phenomenon coincident with that hyperborean that reached the
greatest depth in the mystery, the charismatic POLAR center of gravity: These are the siddhas of Agartha KIEV
and THYR, who in the Kairos of the rune of Victory show the revelation of hyperborean yoga to the members
of OCTIRODAE( order of the Tyrodal knights of America and Spain) and its consequent dynamic-practical
utilization.


This text does not have the mission to show the history of the kabbalah, its different branches and
interpretations, the possible conflicts that arose between the members of the interpretative factions for the
possible definition of its limits or the same trajectory of its acceptance by the peoples that were assimilated to
the cutural pact (and died for the identification of their own blood idiosyncrasy).


The hyperborean knows by the action of his minné that there existed before this kabbalah an original or proto-
alante Kabbalah in which there was no inversion of archetypes, (Hinanyargarba kabbalah according to Miguel
serrano) which, used by the initiate, could produce pure phenomena of creation, alien to any karmic link or
dependent on the approval of the hierarchies of higher evolutionary level within the elaboration of the plan.


The original mutilated Kabbalah would remain in the hands of some hyperborean lineages responsible for the
Orphic mystical currents and the genesis of oblique myths such as the quest of the Argonauts, according to
other authors... It would also have its scope of expression in the pontifical rituals of Rome and the canons of
the classical arts, leading its geometry and embodied in the awakening of the runic consciousness of the
sleeping virya.


What is Kabbalah?


"The circuit of the fixed archetypes or emanations of the breath of the demiurge-brahma, ........ Jehovah.

by the Hebrew letters, 10 sephiroth, 32 paths of wisdom and 50 gates of intelligence, in their classical terms. It
is subdivided into three triads (the 9 primary numbers and the 10 of malkuth, manifestation-Earth) and 3 pillars
of severity (left passive), balance (central neutral) and mercy (right active)".

Its drawn representation alludes to the direct symbol of the cosmic tree and worlds

In it we can also perceive the SPIRAL or sacred symbol of the pasu when, especially when we unfold it by
tracing Jacob's ladder through the four planes or worlds of manifestation and unite the limits of the figure in a
single limiting form.


the Hebrew alphabet has 22 letters: 3 mother letters, 7 double letters and 12 single letters.

Each letter has numerical, primary symbolic, general symbolic and philosophical value. There are also the final
letters, which, because they are used at the end of a word, have a different numerical value than the one they
originally had.


Three Mother Letters: They are related to the Elements. Aleph:

Air; Mem: Water; Shim: Fire.

Seven Double Letters: Signifying Cosmic and Human Duality.

Beth, Gimel, Daleth, Kaph, Phe, Tau, Resch.

Twelve Simple Letters: Related to the Zodiac Constellations. He, Vau,
Zain, Chet, Teth, lod, Lamed, Nun, Samech, Ayin, Tzade, Qof. Final
Letters: They are used at the end of a word and have different values.
Kaph, Mem, Nun, Phe, Tzade.


The kabbalah can be subdivided into several types according to its use, since it is a geometrical-mathematical
figure.


218


linked to an alphabet allows the approach to its mystery from different logistical and perceptive angles:
-I. Dogmatic: Consists of the study of its texts from an academic and historical perspective.


-Practice: Its esoteric magical use through theurgical rituals. Talismans, use of stones and objects of
symbolic reference according to the principle of identification by analogy... Invocations and evocations of
the hierarchical hosts of matter... Druids of the cultural pact were experts in it and all of them.


-Literal: Divided into 3.1 Gemattria, it consists of analyzing the philosophical value of the numbers referring to
each letter and with them the underlying word formation; 3.2 Notaricon or value of the letters of the beginning
and end of the words and 3.3 Temurah: the result of the different combinatorial operations of formation with all
the letters that constitute a word.


-Unwritten: prophetic, revealed, expression of the priestly order.


The kabalah knows 4 worlds (for each of these worlds there is also a tree with its own shepirots) through which
the Macrocosmic Kundalini serpent descends, the greater will of the demiurgic DRAGON (through the veils
Ain, Ain Soph and Ain Soph Au, which are above all) that establishes its potential of equilibrium or perfect
entelechy of the three triads or heads that also include the sephirots in order of manifestation (from greater to
lesser density).


I.Assiah: the physical world (Malkuth).

Yetzirah: the astral (yesod) and mental (Hod and Netzach).

Briah: the atmic (geburah and chesed), the buddhic (thiparet) and the causal (review). 4.
Atziluth: the divine and the monadic.


(Note that the classical sevenfold constitution taught in the West by Theosophy and coincides with the same
realities in other traditions).


The sephiroth would be those points where the main Universal or psychoid archetypes reach their highest
density of expression. They are reflected in descending order by all the planes of the archetypal memory
perceptible by the human race and lead the sleeping pasu and virya towards the entelechy or final perfection of
creation in Malkuth (earth). They are also physical places of the material bodies in the different planes in which
the kalachackra acts at the same time that contain the essence of certain cosmic beings and hierarchies.For our
understanding I will use in its description the symbology of Western psychological astrology in its Jungian
sense (having as a reference the foundations of the hyperborean wisdom of Philip, since he also used the terms
of the creator of depth psychology as a milestone or limit of rational deepening in the cultural macrostructure
before describing the outline of the constituent noological hyperborean mysteries). Knowing the famous
Hermetic aphorism: "as below, so above", we can understand...


Description of the sephiroth, from the top to the bottom of the kabbalistic tree:


1.Kether: Uranus 2.Chokmah: Neptune 3.Binah: Saturn - Daath oculya sphere: Pluto 4.Chesed: Jupiter
Geburah: Mars 6.Thipheret: Sun 7.Netzach: Venus 8.Hod: Mercury 9.
10. Malkuth: Earth (astrological ascendant).


The 3 heads of the demiurgic dragon would correspond to the three triads into which the whole tree can be
divided, the first encompassing the aspect of WISDOM or of the universal archetypes: Kether, Chokmah and
Binah; the second the aspect of BEAUTY or of the potential integrity of the entelechies: with Chesed, Geburah
and Thipheret; the third the aspect of POWER or of the flowing of the breath of the demiurge: with Netzchad,
Hod and Yesod....leaving Malkuth or the earth as the zone of pure manifestation of the final entelechies in
play...

The kabalah tree should be analyzed as a set of pathways that link the different existential possibilities of all
incarnated humans. They describe any experiential process ...First of all, it must be pointed out that it is in the
humans contained in the title of this entry (sleeping pasues and viryas) where only the formation of the tree in
its "ideal" form embodied by the demiurge can occur (and the pasu cannot achieve a glimpse of the highest
sephiroth, not even by belonging to esoteric organizations that work on the archetypal memory of the snail
design), they cannot be postors of cultural sense in the unfolding of the steps of evolutionary psychic energy of
the serpent design) since the INCREATED RUNES go isolating and


219


submitting to his particular power the hyperborean initiates in search of the liberation of the spirit and the final
reversion of the ERHE sphere.


I will now describe the journey of the consciousness chained for this collective between the shephiroth and its
different routes or paths of wisdom, 32 in total (22 paths plus 10 sephiroth, all included) from the densest and
most unconscious point, the shephiroth Malkuth.


( note)Binah-saturn, the mother is understood as "wisdom", note between the lines that all those who pass this
shepirots are tested for some initiatory filiation of Chang Shamballa, as such the mold of embodiment of all
archetypes and the denied wife of the demiurge, the Kaly of our time, the iron age.


To understand the tree, we must think HOLOGRAPHICALLY, where the whole is contained in the part and in
turn all of them interact in each event of events.


KETHER or URANUS crown


Expression of the archetype kether uranus - it is the highest point of the tree, "the wise old man" (which is
changed from the saturnal patricarch to the "mad" scientist), where the influence of the first principle of
emanation coming from the demirugo is shown.It is not perceptible as to its physicality, and can only be probed
after reaching the higher initiatory states proper to the priests of Chang Shamballa, however we can know its
tone or effects on our existence: Ecumenism, originality as unpredictable elaboration of entelechies, objectivity,
spontaneity, eccentricity, certainties, all that is ingenious and surprising in any field of human knowledge.


His most negative archetypes are: the revolutionary, the inventor and the traitor.


Some scholars of the kabalah tree place Neptune (ruler of Pisces) in kether instead of Uranus, an error at present
since we have changed the era from Pisces to Aquarius (Uranus is its ruler). It is also the reason for the
transmission of hyperborean wisdom through the Internet on an international scale and the GLOBALIZING
SYNCRETIC tone of the NEW ERA (which agglutinates as a background the sinister purpose of the NWO
world government)?


When the astrological era changes, the white lodge prepares a codification of the light-plasma, kalachackra
construction by means of, and tries to make humans evolve according to the cosmic plan determined by
influencing the reduplication of the DNA fibers (here the SPIRAL symbol is repeated again, most probably
linked to the indeterminacy of the transferential Arn) and everything must conform to the supra-finality of the
Mant archetype...These evolutionary leaps of the past are designated by the events of synarchic initiation.

We leave behind the era of Pisces, with the symbol of the Fish, ruler Neptune, with its Judeo-Christianity and
substitution of the Aryan Kristo Wotan-Navutan for the one we all know, with its need to influence the molding
of the emotional body of humanity to enter the era of Aquarius, and now the traitor siddhas of Shamballa have
as their mission to do the same with the mental plane in this fractal of time (555 of the Kabalah, VVV in Roman
numerals)(1)... Here is where the violet ray comes into play, the transmutation ray, with the imperious need to
tighten the egresses that make possible the birth of the telepathic faculty - inner worlds - NOOSPHERE (2)
among the lost viryas and followers of the plan of the one (some call it the noospheric sphere)...


(1.Note) The reason for this statement is not explained in this volume.


2. That the reader reflects on the existence of realities such as the HAARP project or the methods of


220


big brother" surveillance in contemporary synchrony.


In general, the birth of the Aquarian era is presented around the end of the 60's, with the irruption of
psychedelia, large-scale TV, hippie culture, Ufology, revolutionary activism....All this would coincide with the
constellation of the Uranian archetype that also symbolizes the sudden, the unforeseen, the kundalini energy
(Uranus exalts in the genital sign of Scorpio) as fohatic electricity, the homosexual movements, the avant-
garde of the degenerate art and its aesthetics,the cinema-informatics, the electronic warfare-high technology,
the political chaos ("liberty, equality, fraternity" Masonic enthronement), the images of the unconscious that
possess the playful-sacral humanity like ao... eeeeceeseesseseeeteeseeeeeeees lightning bolt.

"deconstructionist" the paradox that the forgotten knowledge comes to us by one of the means of the system,
negative entropy: The Internet ........... networkBy these same characteristics the final war may start suddenly.
and the Kaliyuga end like a sigh, since even in World War II the term "blitzkrieg" is coined, as announcing the
interaction with the future time.


On the other hand, those sleeping viryas who do not take the pulse of their time will see their existential
expressions reduced to "meta-stories" and previous archetypes (Pisces era or the regressive dementia of other
older ones, we can understand this phenomenon as the sacralization of the movement of the swastika in its
previous closest movement and also its centrifugal force that prevents those who have not reoriented their
gaze on the Minné from accessing its mystical center).

of the unicorn barbel fish in the viryas who do not complete their orientation (Symbol of the house of Tharsis,
virile tyr-piscis in this case degraded).


The Uranus symbol bears a strong resemblance to a television
antenna. It is a SPASMODIC wave pattern.


Alpha individuals within the betrayal or opposite Trinity.


I quote three of the main terms of Theosophy(1) in describing the most advanced servants of the One in the
unfolding of His cosmic plan. They would be the models to be followed by all the lost viryas or pasues in the
lower stages of the structure. They can be the traitor siddhas directly or already high adepts "immortalized" for
the soul. With them are directly related the grades above 33 of the various organizations of the terrestrial
honeycomb . Applying the trident of the logic of the virya would remain:


1.Manu: Life aspect. Individuals marked with a racial "supra-archetype", they are born reproducers whose
mission is to confuse the pure lineages in their acts of multiplication on earth. Cultural heroes or fathers of the
regions, politicsLudicity . First Ray. FATHER


2.Christ or Bodhisattva: Aspect of consciousness. Individuals who represent religious and metempsychic
mysteries within the various devotional derivations of the cults. They show the most advanced psychic faculties
of their time to fulfill the evolutionary plan which makes them embody the appropriate fragment as a mission
revealed to the people. It encompasses the active determining sense of the prophecies of the instructors of the
people . Sacredness. Second Ray. SON.


3. Mahachoan: Aspect intelligence. Great Master (above the minor choan masters). Turned to the farthest
entelechy, it is related to the "advances -revolutions" of the countries. All of them can show real combat (how
ironic, when everything "is peace, love and fraternity" in their writings) if the occasion requires it. Third Ray.
"HOLY-SPIRIT" (in Judeo-Christian meaning as inspiration and Faith).

We have then the Rays of aspect: the first Ray of Will-Power: Manu. The second Ray of


221


Love - Wisdom: The Christ . The third Ray of Active Intelligence: the Mahachoan.


And in the sub-departments dependent on the Mahachoan, there are the Rays of attribute: the fourth Ray of
Harmony through Conflict, which governs the arts and letters (harmony-beauty), the fifth Ray of Concrete
Knowledge, which governs the sciences, the sixth Ray of Devotional Idealism, which governs religions, the
seventh Ray of Magic and Ceremonial, which governs communications, commerce, finance and multinational
organizations.

These last four Rays, or attributes of the mind, are synthesized in the Mahachoan and constitute the totality of
the fifth principle or Manas (MIND) and are presided over by Choanes.


Attention: 5 is V in Roman letters, the right angle! .... Age of Aquarius, Uranus ruler, Mind... THE GREAT
HERESY.


1 I quote here and in other occasions words coming from Theosophy because for decades it has been and is
considered in cultural-literary environments with a taste for the esoteric as the maximum external reference of
the wisdom revealed by the siddhas traitors to humanity. It is known by biographers that many of the
significant characters in political, economic, scientific or artistic fields of the last century liked to study and
approve this knowledge in a non-publicly recognized way. The magical novel also mentions some characters as
is the case of G.R. (traitor siddha) often quoted in theosophical texts.


Hokhmah or wisdom of Neptune


Here we would find the principle of the dissolution of the limits in the different planes of existence (and the
subtle demiurgic bodies of the human), with the force that creates the major egregores, it is the psychism
carried by karma, the prostration before the superior forces of the enchainment that demand sacrifice, ecstatic
possession and dominion as guides...It is the secret and the desire of knowledge beyond gender, it hides part of
the promethean impulse to steal the forbidden fire of the gods... Seduction and longing...The use of intoxication
by entheogenic drugs as a substitute for one's own will on the initiatory path...


The most negative archetypes include: the addict-adept and the Martyr, the medium without mastery of his
awakened psi faculties.


AMEBOID wave pattern.


Binah or understanding of Saturn


All those principles represented by the stable laws, the outdated estates, the limitations and traditions, the
discipline, . Deprivations, asceticism, poverty, illness, hardships... It is the framework of those created as forms
(information matrices), where the magna mater (as a symbol reverted in these planes) illuminates her creations
and they take the diabolic disposition of Kaly's seeds.

The anarchist, the curmudgeon and the sick king of the Arthurian tradition. The archetype of pain and the spiral
of the Pasu enchainment applied here as superior laws of Karma to fulfill (not as the blind inertia of Malkuth),
ethics and priestly morals taught and kept by the lamas, brahmins, rabbis and golem lords of the mysteries that
follow the doctrines of SHAMBALLA.


The great mother, the three gunas, coiled kundalini

CONTRACTILE CENTRIPETAL wave pattern traversing radii that become increasingly stiffer in a spiral
inverse fan.

Mystery of Death

The sleeping virya suffers three deaths if he does not manage to free himself:

1. Death of the physical body


2. Death of the astral-etheric: wandering through the KAMALOKA
3. Death of the mental body: it "reveries" in the oneiric DEVACHAN.


222


And a possible total destruction in the ATVICHL. All these mentioned regions have hyperdimensional location
in physical layers eccentric to the core of the terrestrial sphere and are influenced by the scientific and
technological activities of the prevailing humanity.

There is involvement of extraterrestrial machinery and defined internal geographies where the monads (tied to
the astral cords of silver and gold) can conduct themselves in the process of new birth.


The virya does not have to have real consciousness of any of these phases, nor does it have to be presented in
the way the classical texts of the religions expose it... It is only a description of the Bardo processes in the most
standardized way possible on an average subject (sleeping virya) in the established plan.

From Malkuth to Kether, each DAATH stage (plutonian-knowledge) is concentrated back into Yesod or
foundation (for | new level).


Christian tradition would identify:
1. Atziluth-Heaven (of the hierarchies) 2. Briah-Paradise 3-Yetzirah-Purgatory 4.
Levels that can also be perceived on a smaller scale in any entelechial body in process (not only as regions of


Maya) depending on the amount of accumulated Karma and its intensity (the greater the karma the lesser the
possibility of ontic autonomy).


Kronos devours his children


(in the picture Rubens' painting with the name of the header of the entrance, famous episode of
the Theogony, in which Goya would be inspired for his famous paintings of identical subject)


Much has been said on the web about the expression "subruna crisis" (the negative states of consciousness of
the saturnal nigredo that overwhelm us between each runic-estatic stage or transmutative summit phase) etc.,
although we have not found a text that delves into its true Gnostic meaning and that appeals with the left
hemisphere to the understanding of the subject within a framework that is as scientific as possible.For this entry
I will try to show the "bricks" of the labyrinth that separate the virya from his selbst, the anchors that constitute
the embouchures of the Tetrarch and which are the psychological stumbling blocks that stop the virya's
perception in recurrent autogenous dramas. For Advaita philosophy these would correspond to the so-called
SAMSKARAS, impressions or grooves that remain in the substance of our mental plane and by the law of
eternal Karmic return force us to repeat certain patterns of behavior that stop our process of liberation and
spiritual enlightenment. These are called in our culture THE PSYCHOLOGICAL DEFENSE MECHANISMS.
The Virya must be very clear that academically established depth psychology does not


223


recognizes the higher states of consciousness and all its purpose is to indoctrinate model citizens, perfect cogs
of this decadent and alienated society, so using it is only a crutch for the better understanding of our time ...
These would be:


1. Compensation: Exaggerating a personality trait to avoid the state of insecurity produced by not feeling
welcome competition in others. Enormous waste of time and energy...Narcissism, vigorexia, unfinished
expression of family shadow and childhood traumas. Archetype of the profession. Neurotic perfectionism.


2. Identification: the Egregor of the group or of any influential personage totally subjugates the will of the
subject producing a dissolution of the will in a collective structure. Fashions. Playful typology.


3. Repression: This is contrary to the previous one, there is an individualized blockage of the expression of
the forces of the psyche that produces abnormal states of expression. Problem of the sexual force - libido
and Kundalini... Sexual paraphilias and behavioral incongruities. It attacks especially the sacral types.
4.Projection: Attribute to others what we do not want in ourselves. Envy, criticism and defamation. Can
lead to reductionist Manichean and "binary" mentality.


5. Introjection: The opposite of the above..Self- phagocytization fixing the traits of another person to
assimilate them denying our own individuality...I[dol problematic.


6. Regression: The psyche of the virya remains imprisoned in behavioral structures of the past... A Virya can
drag Karmic structures from other incarnations or add them in his noological journeys of incursion in his
ontic registers badly archemonized. Manu of Eras and shadow of empires. The drama of the Soul both
collective and personal in its essence.


7.Reactive Formation: It is a special form of denial in which the individual expresses with special intensity the
opposite of what he/she thinks or feels. Hypocrisy, victimhood.


8. Displacement: the objectified will on certain emotions and behavioral motives is removed from its
original motives and exchanged for others where there is less risk of dramatic existential involvement:
frivolous patterns of existence role.


9. Dissociation: The self becomes split in response to strong energetic tensions or dramas. It is not always
accidental if one seeks parallel spheres of meaning, autistic fantasy, paradisiacal escapism. The unconscious
can burst uncontrollably from the shadow sphere, which would produce psychosis (visions, panic, entry into
other real alternative planes of the Maya, etc). Use of drugs in any of its meanings. Injuries and brain
degeneration. The virya can be at the mercy of the attack of unknown powers. It would also include the subject
of reflex mediumnism, possession and trances.


10. Isolation: Overestimation of one's own qualities, possession by the numinous symbols of the higher
chakras. Messianism. Can lead to severe dissociation.


11. Denial: The total blocking of what is not admissible for the conscious subject. It usually derives in
Intellectualization, Rationalization (some authors classify them as separate mechanisms), Scientistic
mentality.

Exacerbation of cultural metarethals. The problem of the sleeping virya.


12. Uncontrolled aggression: can be passive if the Virya directs the expression of his warlike ardor towards
himself, causing psychosomatic damage. Sour vital tone. Or Active, with the wrathful bully complex.


13. Sublimation: Libido is derived in an asceticism involving higher creative goals. It is positive as long as
one does not fall into neurotic maniatism, eccentricities or aesthetic complexes of the higher chakras or
inoperative hypersensitivity.


These mechanisms would correspond to the detailed explanation of the SOLIPSISM of which I will speak in


another section, ontic problem in the ways of spiritual liberation proper of the external trace of the rune ODAL
(SUN IMITATING THE DEMIURGO, EXALTED EGO).


Kairos vs Kronos


224


Two excerpts from the wilkipedia entry:


"Kayros, Kairos or Kayros ("the right moment") is, in Greek mythology the son of Chronos, in Greek and
Roman philosophy the experience of the opportune moment. The Pythagoreans called it Opportunity. Kayros is
time in potency, timeless or eternal time, while time is the duration of a movement, a creation. In another
meaning, Kayros is also the opportune laughter that produces good.


In the temporal structure of modern civilization, only one word is usually used to signify "time". The Greeks
had two: (1)Chronos and (2)Kayros. Chronos is clock time, the time that is measured. Kayros, the right time, is
not the quantitative time but the qualitative time of the occasion, the experience of the right moment. We all
experience in our lives the feeling that the right time has come to do something, that we are ripe, that we can
make a certain decision. A similar concept in the thinking of the Maya was the Zubuya."


And a portion of the fd volume I:


"For the actual infinite cannot be reached because it always is: it is real at all times because it is perfect outside
Time; it is always-present, from its eternity, in the pure Self of the virya, on the Symbol of the Origin, in the
purity of the blood. He must be reached, but this "reaching" is neither temporal nor spatial, but STRATEGIC or,
if you will, Gnostic: This is what the Hyperborean Wisdom refers to when it speaks of "reaching the Vril",
"reaching the infinite", "reaching the awakened Self", etc.; not to a spatio-temporal transit but to a STRATEGIC
LEAP TOWARDS THE SYMBOL OF ORIGIN, an act that is called "BLOOD PURIFICATION" and is the
main objective of the Hyperborean initiation. In the strategic "arriving" it is not KRONOS, time, but KAIROS,
the opportunity to attack the enemy and win eternity: because it is both moment and eternity, the moment in
which the warrior dies and wins the eternity of Valhalla, therefore it can only consist of a fulcrum from which
space and time are traversed TOWARDS eternity: ONLY A LOST SELF ACTING IN THE RIGHT KAIROS
CAN "ARRIVE" TO THE PRESENT INFINITY, TO THE SELF.

INFINITY."


(1) As Kronos we would understand the flowing of the breath of the demiurge that causes the alienation

of the self in the corresponding monarchs.

(2) Kayros would not be understood without the possible intervention of our real Self in the reversible
spirit sphere EHREa partial death and a greater approach to the truth of the Selbst. It is when it is propitious to
reach

an initiation, although at any point in Kronos it is also possible (with much more effort).


Every Kairos is recognized by the group of viryas ina SYNCHRONIC way as an expression of the CARIMAS
that constitutes a mystique, either by noological experiences lived in common (for the awakened ones) or by the
power of the symbols enlivened in the psychosphere (for the rest).. in the frame of the ETERNAL RETURN we
incorporate to our perceptive phenomenal periplus the solution that RESIGNS a past collective Karma of action
carrying in itself for its unveiling the positive and gracious RUNIC of theo... cece ceeeeeeeeeereeeceteeeeeeeerenee ancestors'
action.

essence of any global gnosis or psychosocial strategy, the paradox of ADVANCING BACKWARDS which
entails a greater and deeper mystery of the pontonic language in which no more culture is created but rather what
needs to be remembered is updated.


The DAATH Sphere: THE KNOWLEDGE of Pluto


Also called the hidden sephiroth.

The transformations, the changes, the power, the intensity, the generational values, the borderline characters,
the hidden wealth...

It has explosive, mutant and self-generating energy patterns.

The priestly initiation SHAMBALLICA (ANTIGUA DEMIURGUICA) vs. the

hyperborean The hyperborean tantra and the gates of Venus and Agartha...


Hypothesis of the lattices of the white lodge


Note: The following text shows conjecturally what the priestly initiations of chang-shamballa may represent
and its reading may be left to the reader who seeks "more earthly" answers. For


225


For further information on the following article, we recommend reading also "THE MYTHOLOGICAL SPHERE
OF THE VIRYA" (Gustavo Brondino), which also considers the demiurgic initiation performed before the purely
Shamballic one and whose description runs along the following lines

In Felipe Moyano's books there is a lot of talk about the white lodge, operational network of the traitor siddhas
and whose chief known by every esotericist is Sanat Kumara (Satan-Kumara-Saturn-Jehovah)....On the other
hand, none of them show what their hierarchy is nor their supposed evolutionary plans in real or future time for
the possible receivers of their teachings... I believe that it is of vital importance for everyone involved in their
spiritual liberation to know who these individuals are by breaking down the internal structure of their supra
organization..... The most palpable symbol of their presence can be analyzed in the dollar bills, with a pyramid
with its top separated (those who dominate us from the esoteric are ET it seems to say) and an eye of Abraxas
YOD as a contemplative star of multifocal perception, sample of the final archetype of chaining and submission
to the one.


Apparently the history of the lodge on Earth begins with the descent of the 8 lords of the flame in the area of
the Gobi desert (THAR gate) after a series of stellar conflicts involving a large number of planets and
civilizations (discern the reader synchronically as more and more information appears about the theoretical
history of our cosmic origins, authentic Aquarian knowledge in the making).... The purpose of this advance
party on earth was to make possible the creation of a base et that would serve as a directive command for the
establishment of the evolutionary plans of the cosmic hierarchies, to take the earth as an enormous garden of
Eden (it is a planet Ur, of blue aura, ideal for genetic experimentation - preservation of essences) and to create
in it an enormous sanctuary of animal, vegetable, mineral species plus human races with which to repopulate
other universes, galaxies and planets. It is evident that no owner of a zoo likes that his creatures try to escape or
rebel... For the moment I will not deal here with the mystery of the arrival of the Aryan seed or betrayals, only
to say that the kumaras (galactic spirits) of which it is not clear if only one of them was Logos or not, were
established with their own hierarchical ranks in which the Kumara Sanat was the leader.A Logos of a planet is
an intelligence that has total control over it and in its initiatic transit to dimensions or bridge universes, submits
to it the own corporal-structural dynamics of the commands of its form and voice.


Each time a Logos takes higher initiation, a new root race is born on a planet, perhaps as a kind of subtle
partogenesis, to say that these entities are not absolute in power and scope and that above them there are others.
The motive of their action is to crystallize the forms, in order to prolong their own existence in an eternal
cyclical becoming of self-sustaining forms: he grants life, but the offering of death is what makes possible their
private existence in the transit of eternity. Paradoxes of pain...


Man or at least he who has divine lineage (viryas) possesses a combination of very powerful and latent DNA
that enables him to overcome the power of these same creative entities. This is what allows him to free himself
through the power of the sword and at the same time makes him indispensable in the evolutionary plans. This
same characteristic makes another mystery possible: that of the filiation to the initiatory priestly chain of
Sambhalla in the basic scheme 7 plus | rays (supra-archetypal light rays that personally configure us the
reversed aural egg (ehre), together with the rest of matter and its transformation phase periods)-7 trajectories of
work-7 asrhams (places of learning)-7 races (to be mixed) ...Basically this process begins like this:


-First initiation, BIRTH: The subject suffers an increase and modification of the volume of prana that circulates
through his auric egg, leaving it broken and at the mercy of the kalachakric signs. Psychic awakening and
discomfort. Global call. Sacrum. Cesium crystals catalyzing the Aquarian violet ray. Sexual repression.


-Second initiation: BAUSTISM: The astral body is energized with lightning vibrational influences and falls into
strategic coding. Global call. Interactions and permissions in the astral plane. Cosmic names. Solar plexus and
devotion. Emotional repression.


-Third initiation: TRANSFIGURATION. The physical, astral and mental body are under control for the plan...
It tests the fidelity of the candidate and is individual, his will... Total loss of the sign of origin...
Communicative telepathy... Mental and mental plane... Establishment of the antakarana and egregorical
cohesion with the components of asrhrams and masters... Establishment of the antakarana and egregoric
cohesion with the components of the asrhrams and masters...


-Fourth initiation: CRUXIFIXION or great renunciation. The subject is martyred to the limit of the final test of
his karma. Total renunciation of individuality, often physical death. Total integration with the hierarchy,
Buddhic plane, cardiac center. Passive protagonism. Adept.


226


-Fifth initiation: REVELATION. Subjugated to the fire of the living presence of his monad in the eye of
abraxas, mastery arrives. Sacrum, atmic plane, "subjectivized" mayavirupic body, knowledge of the cosmic
plan in the present time with active protagonism.


-Sixth initiation: DECISION: The subject may choose to: a. Service to Earth. Service to the Earth. b. Magnetic
work (karma of the 5th ray). c. Training for planetary logos. d. Path to Sirius (Pleiades). e. Continuation of the
path of the rays. f. Path of the terrestrial logos itself (possible fusion with elementals or devas). g. Filiation with
more evolved beings or devas. Path of the terrestrial logos itself (possible fusion with the elementals or devas).
g. Filiation with more evolved beings or Lipikas (perhaps consciousnesses of very high densities beyond the
6d). There is ascension Merkaba.atmic plane.


-Seventh initiation: RESURRECTION. Hierophant. Executor power in all the rays on Earth. -Eighth initiation:
TRANSITION.


- Ninth initiation: THE NEGATION. That would include the total aspect of the mystery of the trinitarian
transubstantiation with the Logos, the exchange and use of bodies as shell suits and the possible sowing of
that one or that one with the logos in another system or after the cosmic night (does the demiurge self-clone
to save himself?) to be swallowed by the "holy crop".


The structure would be composed of 3 internal and 3 external kumaras, the 4 degrees of minor initiates, the
degrees of the disciples and those of the probationary path. Below the fifth initiation, the components are
sometimes referred to as the "blue lodge".

control the Akashic archives and planetary councils.


Other master figures of masters (it is not clear if they are the kumaras, some are) are the BODISATTWA,

the MANU and the MAHACHOAN (see previous entry) Among these are the protagonists of racial
genetics,

religion, science, politics and beliefs of the movements and revolutions of the peoples in the sense of the "macro-
cultural context" of the evolutionary entelechy of humanity.


Finally, it should be noted that one does not fit into this initiatory system as he/she wishes, the system chooses
him/her and traps him/her in a confusing unconscious synchrony according to the quality of his/her ray,
underline and degree of vibration: thus we have the personality and the ego prefigured in order of quality as raw
material of this subtle kaos .....

Thus is outlined in broad strokes, one of the most twisted aspects of the spiritual enchainment. And

about the sixth or elective initiation:


a. Earth Service:the initiate becomes a "master" of wisdom and has access to the cosmic astral plane.there are 7
ray groups and a dynamic of sensitization to the forms that show themselves beyond the Earth's aura.they are
held in their freedom of action by Sanat to the Earth aloneFrom .............. these subjects.

(St. Germain, etc.) come from many of the new age texts with bombastic names and confusing

syncretism, teachings — of updating of supra-narratives and various entelechies.


b. Magnetic work (karma of the 5th ray): Also in cosmic astral. The raw energy or Fohat and its 7 subdivisions
are handled. Ideas, psychoid archetypes, adenetic and luminic codes, etc. are created and manipulated. Ancient
arcane technology, crystals, UFO forms, places of power, alteration of lithic constructions, etc. are involved.
There is communication with cosmic mental plane.


c. Training for planetary logos: very few opt for this path.in each planetary scheme there are 7 logos per planet

and 49 sublogoic subdivisions.it would correspond to the development of esoteric psychology potential. It

would correspond to the development of the potential of esoteric psychology.disembodied initiates undergo

telepathic instruction by the active kumaras and the council of shamballa.the evolution culminates in the cosmic

mental, after a previous passage through venus (?): will it be the trace of the traitor siddhas, or disinformation.
perhaps here we have the hidden agenda of the system of

propaganda and mass control.


d. Path to Sirius (Pleiades): Possible transmigration of souls to the Pleiades system for colonial relocation of
planets and bases. It is assumed that the initiate upon incarnating there or being teleported there will have a


key position of authority.


e. Ascending along one's own ray line, the subject first works in the shamballa chamber vibrating his ray, then
moves on to inhabit the planet of his ray, then learns to work on his own ray.


227


with solar energy to end up in another cosmic system linked to its «1.0... energy.
to enter the inorganic devic evolution (or rather involution).


f. Path of the terrestrial logos itself (fusion with the elementals or devas), the initiate develops special
powers of very powerful inner vision. It is an expression of the sixth chackra of the demiurge for his
explorations in the cosmic buddhic plane (espionage?)...It works with devas and they must replace
unknown hierarchies that correspond to the turn of the divine thrones, so that these return to their place of
origin and break or continue their enchainment in another place.


g. Filiation with more evolved beings or Lipikas (perhaps consciousnesses of very high densities beyond the 6d)
The initiate fulfills bureaucratic tasks of collaboration with entities superior to sanat.The mystery of incarnation
of special "cosmic masters", possibly already in a framework of collaboration and entry

(The earth would become part of a cosmic government around 2012).


PS: This cosmic government converges with the implementation of the new world order NWO, the star wars
and the technology of time travel and the contemplation of possible horizons of paradoxical future
(modification of history to present time) with hyperdimensional technology. From the fractal 2012-13 there
may be an interactive irruption of humanities (veiled or not) coming from different times and with different
energetic-initiatic configurations elaborated since certain alignments with the center of the galaxy with a black
hole are fulfilled.


Enemies of liberation:

-Initiated members in varying degrees or not of the various branches of the synarchy of military groups, occult
orders, religious groupings, government services with experimentation projects or paramilitary bodies associated
with subtle frequency control.

-Isolated or sectarian esotericists with a redemptionist tendency.

-Entities of the different planes of Maya, including the disembodied, exogenous parasitic fauna and
fragmentations of the dynamics of interpersonal energetic interaction.

-Alien factions with interests contrary to the destiny of the ported blood .

-The same traitorous siddhas and ascended masters together with their hierarchical associates.


The mystery of the cosmic existence contemplates the existence of EXTATERRESTRAL,
EXTRADIMENSIONAL, INTERDIMENSIONAL and INTRATERRENAL beings, from the point of view of
the physical plane where our body is located, both from the Earth and from any point that can be visited with the
possibility of execution of all the possible space-time combinations that do not always have to be understood
from the dualistic-binary-dialectic discourse but under the premises of an emergent QUANTUM mind.


Hesed or Jupiter's mercy


Beliefs and ideals, virtues and values, higher education of culture in its suprafinality, opulent wealth, growth
and exaggeration, convictions, ethics and morals (subjected here to the law of the one) in terms of Faith,
meaning, optimism and happiness misplaced from the ideal bourgeois world.


The priest, the materialistic triumphant, the encyclopedist philosopher, the misguided encyclopedist
philosopher of the spirit, a figure much praised in the European culture, believing to falsely recover his polar
north after the darkness of the Middle Ages.

DIVISIVE wave pattern, but for constant expansion.

Lightning ashram


"Asrham" (from Sanskrit): place of learning...


This is what the synarchic initiates (priests) found by obeying the traitor siddhas and choan adepts on this plane


in order to implement the teaching of the plan of the one for a delimited time. ........ eee eeeeeeeee They can
They present multiple forms, apparently unconnected but they respond faithfully toa MANDALA OF
THE KALACHACRA and to certain constituent aspects called RAY SBasically this is how they


are presented:


-Pseudo-gnostic institutes or traditional or reconverted cult sects... They may have institutional weight with


228


economic power.


-Alternative science, medicine or psychology academies. Referent publications tending to global diffusion...
-Circles of ufological contactees with "unique" revealed doctrine: cosmic history of humanity. -Schools of yogas
or orientalist sciences.


-New Age writer-composers and their fanatical followers en masse.


-In rural or remote environments ("poorly educated"), preaching of spontaneous "enlightened ones" with gifts
of healing and sometimes linked to the renewal of an image of the saints, Marian or pilgrimage.


The activities of all these subjects and their mentoring entities may or may not have a presence on the internet
and in egregores that capture the attention of the virya (in different states of consciousness belonging to the
signed psychosocial region).


WISDOM VS WORSHIP or on the use of images


They are myths, stories of gods and heroes with interpretations tending on a variable scale of accuracy or
subjectivity (accepted or not by the average consciousness) according to the incidence of the
KALACHACKRA and the mandalic programming of the rays on a society.


The cults (not to mention the animisms) are sacralized reproductions of the luciferic magical acts of those viryas
that travel the path of return or the forms of rendering TRIBUTE AND MEMORY to the divine deeds: very
important this point, since all worship is nota SLAVISHING POSTRACTION, TRIBUTORY SACRIFICE nor
a form of rendering obeisance as an act of sterile reverence, there are times that the karmic Runification of the
Minné INSPIRES a significant revelation and is established under the premise that the worship is understood as
an act of strategy and its UNDERLYING WISDOM: describe an archetype yes, but allow TRANSMUTATION
because they allow to UNDERSTAND THE SERPENT WITH THE SIGN OF THE ORIGIN that no longer
showed itself in a spontaneous-conscious way.


In the hyperborean peoples under the purest fences and in the times in which the balance of the essential cosmic
battle was tipped towards the side of the blood pact, they could settle down without restrictions with the
transcendent sense of the eternal liberating symbols and reach the common LEGISLATION for an entire
people: thus were born the initiatory rites and the SCHOOLS OF MYSTERIES. The priest and the warrior even
managed to unify in certain exceptional personalities as was the emperor CESAR AUGUSTO (resigned
demiurge) pontifex maximus or even the warriors were taught by the priestly caste as was the case of the
PRETORIAN guard and their initiations. The fight of the essential war takes place in all the strata of a society
being one of the most active that of the religious symbols, the distortions-appropriations to which the related
facts are taken and their later coercive interpretations attend to a precise result in a superstructure, although it
would also enter in it, without previous manipulation, the action of will added by its inhabitants: ENTHROPIC
action of the QLIPHOTH or indeterminacy of the projected unconscious of those who turn away from the
rewards of demiurgic higher perfective programming and do not contemplate any possibility of tracing their
blood back to the origin; Let us not forget that since recently in this Kaliyuga of Aquarius, our official science
begins to be interested in the theory of Kaos.


Let us read almost at the end of the fourth day of the novel the metaphysical reason of certain warrior
LINES that had to take the priestly posture, the cult was perfected in this way it was adjusted to its archetypal
quality-essence and from there in an act of purification of the astral blood one could reach the spiritual
uncreated (which is not the warrior ideal, but neither could it be achieved with the WALL infiltrated by the
TEMPLE given the fatigue and the debilitating self-forgetfulness of the centuries-long war):


"I repeat it: the folly of gathering in one single Styria the Cult and the Wisdom caused a disaster in the peoples
of the Blood Pact: the interruption of the initiatory chain. So it came to pass that at a certain point, when the
Gods of the Cult prevailed, the Voice of the Pure Blood was extinguished and the Initiates lost the possibility of
listening to the Liberating Gods: the will to return to the Origin had long since weakened and now they lacked
guidance. Without the Voice, and without the orientation towards the Origin, there was no more Wisdom to
transmit, the Sign of the Origin on the Stone of Venus would no longer be seen. The Initiates suddenly realized
that something had been severed between them and the Liberating Gods. And they understood, very late, that
the future of the mission and of the Pact of


229


Blood would depend as never before on the struggle between Cult and Wisdom, but a struggle that from then
on would no longer take place outside but inside, in the field of blood. What did the Initiates do to counteract
this irreversible reality, the darkness that was descending upon the Spirit? Almost all of them acted in the same
way. Starting from the principle that all that exists in this world is only a crude imitation of the things of the
True World, and faced with the impossibility of locating the Origin and the Path to the True World, they chose
to use the last remnants of Wisdom to embody in the Purest Blood Styres a "family mission" consisting of the
unconscious comprehension, with the Sign of the Origin, of an Archetype. It should be noted how modest this
objective is: the Ancient Initiates, the Wise Warriors, were capable of "understanding the serpent, with the Sign
of the Origin"; and the serpent is a Symbol that contains All the archetypes created by the God of the Universe,
a Symbol that was consciously understood with the uncreated Sign of the Origin. Now the Initiates proposed,
and there were no other options left, that a family should work "blindly" upon a created Archetype, trying that
the Symbol of Origin present in the blood would some day casually comprehend it and reveal the Truth of the
Uncreated Form."


Hyperborean Gnosis of the Sacraments


From the Latin "Sacramentum", "Sacra": sacred and "Mentum": means, instrument, way... "THE SACRED
WAY" ...Those rites and acts that seal the commitment with the laws created by the Gods....We could consider
them as the exoteric form for the masses of the YOGAS (act that provokes the union with the divine, in our
case with the uncreated spirit)... Those established by the Christian rite that acts in a syncretic way that are
observed in the majority of the past cults and even existing on earth.It is observed in them a firm attempt to
provoke the epiphany (revelation of the numen mediated by the priestly plan, even in the Sacrament of the
Order that establishes the shepherds for the Church: Bishops, priests and deacons) in the faithful something in
direct opposition to the INITIATIC RITES, many times mystical, that were proper of the warrior societies.
Thus we have:


1.BAPTISM: the contact of the water creates the new Christian member of the Church and son of the
demiurge... For the virya it symbolizes to submerge in the WATER of his unconscious, in the traces of the


labyrinth, to go rescuing from him MINNE by means of his integrity in ontic-perceptive individuation
(Selbst).


2. CONFIRMATION: the Christian remains at the mercy of the HOLY SPIRIT, extradimensional control, gains
gifts for entelechial perfection and the apostolate of the message...The virya however achieves SIDDHIS and
reinforces his GRACEOUS LUCIFERIC will through the PARACHLIT...A real noological contact with the
superiors of the golden chain also takes place.


3. CONFESSION OR PENITENCE: the priestly hierarchy has the power to forgive sins committed after

Baptism, a way to generate an egregious COMPLEX OF GUILT of enormous dimensions and also a way to
subliminally control the members of a community from the confessional (something that had much weight in
the past especially when the IMPERIAL AND ECCLESIATIC power were in full union or in dispute).

The virya only knows his HONOR (with himself and his fellow men) and an apollonian-martial ethic of behavior,
there are no mediating judges who submit to a discipline of MORAL submission, via the left hand.


4. EUCHARIST OR COMMUNION: The body and blood of Christ under the metaphor of the
Transubstantiation in the bread and wine is food for the Christian, reinforcing his link to the egregory of
ecclesial belonging. The chalice appears.


The virya must only "eat" his own flesh, transform it into RED VAJRA, the great attainment, knight of the
GRAAL. Note also the material parallelism with the tantric way of liberation.


5. The virya faces death with total serenity and self-control (in case he fails in his attempt to leave creation).
He knows that he will face the harsh reality of the DEATH ARCHETYPE and can even reorient himself by
following his opposition-combat in the subtle dimensions of Maya.


6.SACERDOTAL ORDER: Some Christians become ministers of the demiurge and consecrate their lives to
it...For some viryas it represents here the possibility of strategic PONTIFICE and its missions, it is also the
meaning of any HYPERBORN grouping (as they were, are and will be).


230


does not mean that they should be formed in analogy to a "church" or ritual cult with devotional and servitude
implications.


7.MARRIAGE: the monogamous union is "sanctified" in pursuit of the paternal-familial responsibility. The
realization in the matter and the path of men is secured,...Self-fulfilling paradise, the Adam and Eve pasu and
the family archetype. The virya sees in this the mystery of A-MORT.


Geburah or severity of mars.


Every principle of impulse, discovery, exploration, domination, combat, competitiveness, violence, sexual
libido, assertiveness and aggressiveness... is pure masculine.

The bully and the destroyer.

The spiritual path of the warrior or oriental BUSHIDO in which VIOLENCE is only used against those who
oppose the path of spiritual liberation.


Opiddum and Castrum


In the Latin sense, summarized and without entering in the meaning for other previous peoples: Castrum:
"Fortification in an elevated place"...Word from which later would derive CASTELLUM and CASTLE...The
latter being the maximum architectural excellence of the Hyperborean lineages in the European Middle Ages
and totally contrary in its function to the CATHEDRALS of the cultural pact. Oppidum:

"Construction that takes advantage of natural topographical singularities for proper defense".

It is also essential for the correct development of the virya to understand the importance of the liberated places
and their analogy with the concepts explained in the previous paragraphs.


On the misappropriation of the warrior concept


We are facing a great TRAP: the fact of deriving, confusing, or modifying both deliberately and unconsciously
the meaning of the word "warrior" (in the ancient Indo-Aryan meaning of the kshatriya caste) is one of the
main actions used by the synarchy in the act of cultural manipulation...

The lost virya or pasu who follows the plan of the One marked for the time of his incarnation soon sees that he
is gifted with this adjective, as soon as he walks the path of "chela" or discipleship in its simplicity. Such an
individual (alienated rebel, not warrior) feels himself and is praised as such by the fact of not acting like the
rest of the people around him immersed in the economic-materialistic paradigm.

In this way it is possible to take advantage of the consequent negative states of mind that are produced until
reaching the initiations or pre-initiations for a derivation of meaning that encourages and in passing fulfills its
mission of destruction and functional relocation of the people...


At another extreme we can also appreciate the total psychologization of Mythology and of the initiatory rites of
our past, even to the point of understanding the conflicts, actions and stages of these as ACHIEVEMENTS ina
profane postmodern life tending to achieve the final bourgeois entelechy of positivist capitalism. Whatever the
way, what is always observed is an obsessive incidence in the PACIFISM and in the ignorant brutality of the
past times that must be FORGOTTEN forever.


231


Spanish Conquest


This brief entry is not to detail the details of the conquistadors' voyage on South American soil but to show
some rather hot aspects of why the Spanish empire moved to such remote latitudes, beyond the ocean, in the
sense of the hyperborean gnosis, not in the cultural history approved by all the relevant social institutions...


In this end of Kaliyuga, the political concept of INDIGENISM is born, which directly confronts the
Hyperborean reality of HISPANITY: referred not as a total strategy of the siddhas of the blood pact but as a set
of SITUATIONAL PARADOXES which imply, as in any human historical movement on a large scale, the
possibilities of liberation or enchainment of the protagonist human mass(1).

Let us understand INDIGENISM as a concept that refers to a bucolic and pristine-happy past of the racial
communities involved, one more version of the myth of the happy WILD and the earthly paradise of the pasu
that is violently destroyed and that needs to be vindicated by current politicians in search of a consensus or
moral and historical ecumenism (one of the branches of the superstructure of the invisible DEMOCRACY)
where any ethnic group, however diffuse or inexistent the trace of its history may be, is elevated from its own
gnoseological category to the pedestal of a reality that is recreated in the own unfounded emergence of the
present: the history and culture of the demiurge are weapons in continuous metamorphosis in this case at the
service of oligarchic interests and a savage capitalism.


The Spanish conquistadors carried the cross of the synarchy (Columbus brought a well-defined Evil mission, see
"the mystery of Belicena Vilca", a story well known to all readers), but paradoxically they brought the rune and
the archamone in their blood as well as in their inculcated customs(2) and found themselves there with two
completely different realities:


a. Communities of pasues dispersed in tribes to which the MESTIZAJE made them incorporate the
SYMBOL OF ORIGIN itself. The conquerors were direct descendants of the Iberian, Tartessian, Roman,
Greek and Gothic-Vigothic peoples, all Hyperboreans.(3)


b. Lineages of viryas already mestizos of those white peoples who arrived to these territories before Columbus,
mainly the Viking (3) who added their blood to that of these local monarchs... In them the distant memory of
those ancestral white instructors who taught their peoples arcane knowledge of practical wisdom and showed
the art of war against the yoke of the yellow peoples (here if the siddha mandate exists) in times when
hyperborean initiations were still being taught overseas.


232


The great thickness and splendor of these empires already passed (as well as disappeared in extraordinary
expeditions to the inner land or mysterious cities such as "EL DORADO", "PAITITITI", ETC, many of its
components) and only a remnant remained in a state of chaotic social decomposition, often in total submission
to the ethnic members of the point a (who took as authentic liberators to the Spanish).


It was common to all the apocalyptic habits of the HOLOCAUST ANTHROPOPHAGES and the ritual
sacrifice to the gods of the underworld or black lightning of the kalachacra, cause of civil wars and constant
skirmishes among them...Also in others, the repetitive INFANTICIDE, the degradation of women to
animalistic level, ritualized priestly sexual perversion and alcoholism-drug addiction together with a technical
and urban backwardness almost typical of cavemen times.


(1) Let us remember that the descendants of the white Atlanteans move in a triple sense: either they are
stationed in one region or in opposite directions with respect to the geochrony of the symbol of the origin that
points towards the region of greater charismatic expression.

(2) I am not recounting here the history of the house of Tharsis and its mission since 1534 with the

arrival of Lito and the wise sword.

(3) These white instructors are behind the mystery of 5 great empires in America: Manitou (North

America), Maya and Aztec (Central America),

Chibcha (North and Northeastern South America), Inka (Andean region), and Mongula (Amazonia).


Thiperet or beauty of the SUN


Here we find the balance of development, magnanimity, self-confidence, mandate, temperance, emanated
authority. the sense of the incarnational dharma and the vocation to work as

The virya is "beautiful" when it fits perfectly in the programming of the one, being the WORK factor the main
social exponent, discovers its "virtue", its ethical-social duty, and dies without being able to understand the
internal time of its own reversibility.

CIRCUNFERENTIAL EXPANDING wave pattern (from a center point), in the opposite direction to the normal
sphere ehre to and in the dimensional realms of Maya (MYSTERY OF THE DOUBLE SPECTRUM).


The natal sun sign of the zodiac of each person, his particular essence... The tyrant, the hero of the cultural
pact. Minne of Odal.


All viryas in our past (or present) to a greater or lesser degree, while traversing the outer trace of the limiting
rune of the labyrinth, the ODAL, have fallen into the saturnal trap of the nigredo at the time of communication,
a psychological problem called SOLIPSISM, from the Latin "ego solus ipse" (roughly translatable as "I alone
exist") is the metaphysical belief that the only thing one can be sure of is the existence of one's own mind, and
the reality that apparently surrounds one is unknowable and may be no more than part of the mental states of
one's own self. Thus, all objects, persons, etc., that one experiences would be merely emanations of one's mind
and, therefore, the only thing one could be certain of is the existence of oneself. (Source:

http://es. wikipedia. org/wiki/Solipsismo).


Installed in such a complex, there is no possibility whatsoever of establishing a common nexus with our
comrades, both those here and those on the other side, since every relationship becomes a pure eclipsed
expression of the Ego or natal astrological Sun, which is essence or monad reverted for the "imitatio Dei" of the
demiurge... Destructive criticism, suspicion, misappropriation, pettiness, anger and other disturbing states of the
soul possess us, blinding us in our own projection of the non-integrated psychological complexes.


If the will of the virya crosses the interior of the rune, the perception of the Noological will appear and with it the
awakened faculties, runic achievements -siddhis and the eternal joy of the SPIRIT oriented from the blood,
PARAKLITO of the SOPHIA, albedo remnant in perpetual transit towards the origin, sanguine HONOR and
commitment with all that authentic comrade chained like him who suffers.


Thus the virya will reach a distant future in his process of liberation in what will be yet another paradox...
Although here remains a new mystery...


233


Weltanschauung (worldview) and Ubermensch (superman), THE MYSTICS THAT GIVES THE
GOLDEN RUNE, THE ESBOX OF AN IMPERIAL NOOLOGICAL ETHICS.


From German (Welt, "world", and anschauen, "to observe"): "Conception of the world" or COSMOVISION.
Term coined by the philosopher Wilhelm Dilthey in his work Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften in 1914.
The hyperborean cosmovisions would be a "supraidea" of the structure of the world, not a branch or meaning of
any system theory, but a deeper truth that is intuited from the blood and that has as its essence of vertebration
the METAPHYSICAL order of the spirit, the true cosmic laws not reversed. The khsatriya warrior appreciates
HIS world (we understand as this the planes of the spiritual enchainment) as the Valdplas or focal point from
where to SPIRITUALIZE existence in an eternal alchemical and graalic work for all matter, from the smallest
particle, which is reaching its true possibility of redemption.... These would be its facets:


1. SCIENCE: Or How to know reality... To catalogue all entities and their abstract force relations. Its task is to
understand the cosmic concert with the maximum simplicity and with the measuring standard of analogy in a
UNIVERSAL way... It measures the degree of objective intelligence of a people. It should not be rigidly
fanaticized by dogmas, atomized or silenced by minorities that increasingly try to distance their language from
the common understanding.


2. TECHNIQUE: Or how to transform reality...It is the practical application of science. It preserves the energy of


the biological formations that create it, mutating its level, granting comfort...Its use must create the minimum
disturbances of plane, without altering the continent of the content when it does not speak explicitly of
destruction since the rune spirit has as a requirement of manifestation the SIMETRY, its beauty. Example:
Implosion engine vs. explosion engine, non-polluting free energies... It should not serve to subjugate the
population as it is the case of the current psychotronics or to create mercantile usury interests with strategies of
gradual implantation or replacements. Neither should it substitute the faculties of the human brain, it would
create psychophysical invalidity in the long run, encourage even more THE BLACK ALCHEMY of the
demiurge or traffic with health.


3. TRADITION: Or how to interpret reality... The minné makes it possible to recover the memory of

race, the collective unconscious keeps the initiatory symbols and archetypes, the rites or social

festivities that made it possible to combine cyclical time with its eternal meaning.

To honor the memory of the ancestors is to meet with what we have been either by purifying Karma or by

our real incarnational records... The principle of the encirclement of both soil (homeland) and soma (race

and ethnicity) is one of its facets.

Respect for the elders, their ORAL transmission and the EXPERIENCE value already refined in gnostic
wisdom. Nowadays it is imperative to erase any trace of tradition since it is the greatest revulsive for the
Positivist and entelechiated GLOBALIZATION.


4. POLITICS: or how to administer reality...The leaders should be those who show the highest degree of
CHARISMATIC orientation towards the spirit. The prototypical monarch fulfilled this requirement as proof of
his pure blood, later One of the causes for the existence of castes designated to politics was that by the fact of
the custom to wealth from the cradle they would not use their position to access it (case is apart from the
hyperborean archetype of lineage seat of the rune of origin)...Other hyperborean leaders at a certain age of
maturity, had shown their worth in different crucial strata so that their election was univocal.

Nowadays, foreign policy serves to cover plutocratic and ideological interests of hidden elites, it is just one
more profession alien in its deontology to its true importance and increasingly fragmented in multiple
administrations-incumbencies, the clear example of parasitism of the concept STATE.


5. ETHICS: Or how to govern reality... If morality is the comprehensive form of good, ethics would be its
articulation in society, both concepts are direct expression of unadulterated cosmic laws. Here we do not speak
of impositions of codes of conduct subjugated to tyranny and fear imposed by a cruel creator god.

Nor how the path of the left hand must face the stages of its liberation confronted with the priestly
SACRAMENTS. The RHETORIC was its main vehicle, the constituent essence of the language endowed with
meaning to the EVERYDAY, with the highest values of HONOR AND

JUSTICE: A NOOLOGICAL ETHICS

There is a martial order and a spiritual hierarchical golden chain in time of peace as well as in time of war.
EDUCATION of the young was one of its best expressions. SUICIDE AND EUGENESIA were accepted as a
standard of personal DIGNITY AND communal good, the value of "life" was weighted in its just value.


234


measure which is that of the ETERNAL RETURN. Roman Fides, oaths, blood pacts. In our times everything is
"valid" and relative with the premise of FREEDOM and PICARESQUE, which radically promotes the ludic-
commercial typology and all kinds of psychosexual aberrations (libido is eroticized, "orgasmolatric",
pansexualistic).


6. ART: or how to transfigure reality... Major and minor arts. It must capture the beauty in the language of
tradition (symmetrical proportions of the eternal) in order to reach the liberation of the spirit. The matter was
thus marked with a rune of resonant and permanent effects...The Trance and the inspirational ecstasy are
controlled by the Apollonian WILL of form...Its first manifestations show a desire or magical formation of
control especially in the pasu subjugated by the mysterious Nature, being later degradation of what is related in
the myths (chronicles of the gods) and of the transcendental initiatory rites: THE CONCEPT OF THE
TRAGEDY nitszcheana, the anguish of the enchainment and its longing pilgrimage igneous emotions are
refined in evocative feelings of the ice finding its correct channel of elevated expression.

In this time of postmodernism, art is only valued as an expression of that which has never been seen (an
anecdotal entelechial overcoming), the abstract incomprehensible ("intellectualized schizoart") or the
perceptive extremes that violate the senses ("epatar").


7.MAGIC: or how to orient reality towards the origin... Esotericism with a functional elite at the service of its
people and real opportunities of transcendence for all, not as a secret caste that subjugates. The community
advances multidimensionally conscious of its potential and its possibilities, being born in it THE SENSE OF
THE ETERNAL authentic spark that completes the life imbued with the deepest and richest sense.
PHILOSOPHY or love of wisdom is not bookish or speculative theorizing but active-practical gnosis.


8. WAR: Or how to destroy reality...Every people has the cosmic right to self-determination and to stand up to
any faction or force that wants to impose its designs of FREEDOM, purity and expression...The martial arts
show that through the use of force there is a way of realization and

Integration...Combat is a real cerebral and tactical discipline, not only physical: it would be gratuitous
VIOLENCE.

At present PEACE is absolute metarelate, perfect excuse of control for the masses to be offered in energetic
sacrifice of the trophic pyramid.


These 8 points form an interchangeable solid reality (THE CONFRONTATION OF THE RAYS OF THE
KALACHACKRA IN OPPOSITION), that is to say that they cannot exist separately and can be explained each
one from them. When this separation happens, that civilization walks towards its APOCALYPSE by dissolving
degeneration...... When this cosmovision awakens in a hyperborean community, its members are called
UBERMENSCH (see NIETSZCHE again), "supermen or absolute men" who go up their modified genetics and
come to toast with their inspiring father gods beyond the stars.


ASCETICS of the Rune: On the concept of "asymmetry" and its implication with an individual noological
ethics.


This concept is one of the most difficult for viryas to assimilate in its true depth, because it has always been the
basis of the PRECEPTS and LAWS of the morals of the Priestly caste, which at this stage of the kaliyuga is
antithetical to the warrior kshatriya, to which the virya belongs. In order to understand its meaning I will resort
to the planetary astrological symbol, to our discursive trident guibur and to the distinction offered by the
knowledge that there are 2 factions of liberator and traitor gods, some struggling to untie us from the chains of
Maya and others to sink us more and more in the densest matter...


1.Sin for the cultural pact: "All that act that moves away from the concreteness of the formal aspects of the one
and of being able to oppose its legislated VOX" (both in books for the people, as well as texts of pure formal
operative magic)...The priest here is a bidder of Manu sense and offers the deception or hypocrisy of not
showing all the knowledge to the masses....In certain epochs there is the flourishing of extremely strong laws
that repress to the point of illness the psycho-sphere of humanity, which subsequently makes possible the
occurrence of REVOLUTIONS or radical social changes in the spheres of counter-expression of these
underground forces.

Right hand path... SACRALITY.


235


2.Sin(1) for the blood pact: "Any act that takes us away from spiritual liberation, from the realization of our
runic geometry". It is here where the deepest PARADOX occurs and where we must probe its nuances ... Since
we are embryos and being overturned in these infernal planes we are subjected to the IMPRONTA of some
spiral forces that like onion layers are molding the 7 main rays of the kalachackra on our ontic monad (which
enables the chaining and reversion along with other postmortem or bardo mysteries) .... These forces are the ones
that the authentic virya manipulates for his purpose of producing the less conditioned-dense material states (that
make possible the spiritualization or liberation of the self) and that translated into the language of consciousness
would produce in us the beginning of the INDIVIDUATION PROCESS....They are the ARCONTES in some
Gnostic currents of the past (sometimes they were seen as tyrant kings of the expression of the natural order)
and we can study them as WEAKNESSES tending to the curvilinear in the external linear faces of the
PLATONIC BODIES that make possible each phase of molding of the ROUND CRYSTAL.

NOOLOGICAL personal resignative, which is in turn STONE ("BEING STONE MAN") and condensed center
of gravity... These would be:


1.Moon-Yesod: Laziness
2.Mercury-hod: Envy
3.Venus-netzchah: Lust
4.Sun-thiperet: Pride
5.Mars-geburah: Wrath
6. Jupiter( chesed):Gula

7. Saturn (binah): Greed


RESIGNATIONS:


1.Moon: laziness would be resigned by the diligence of the activity, a superhuman energy coming from the vril
2.Mercury: envy would transmute into generosity with comrades, giving a fair dimension to the

importance of money, a concept stripped of its current primordial gravity...

3. Lust: lust would transmute into chastity in a correct tantric use of the seed in the polarity of ecstasy-

ecstasy.

4. Sun: the solipsistic pride would be resigned by a humility and honorific

simplicity (loss of personal importance, a term which

readers of Castaneda) that focuses on self-love, not on the

destructive ego, and that entails a lack of honor and

final disloyalty...

5.Mars: the bully's anger-complex would transmute into Berserker rage when the occasion was a strong
obstacle to spiritual self-determination.

6. Jupiter: gluttony would transmute into temperance, we would take the right food (whatever its nature) for the
best elaboration of our physical or mental martial purposes.

7. Saturn: Greed understood here as an act of sapience (last mask of the demiurge, higher sephiroth) would
transmute into the sober restraint that produces the certain knowledge flowing between

all states of consciousness of the recovered selbst. At this point we also consider how to handle the power that
comes from our ancestral lineage.


(the concept of sacred sin in the cultural, usually allows certain licenses usually related to the INSTITUTION
of the sacraments, ie it is allowed to release the lust in marriage, the pride in the priestly order, etc, etc. hence
they are not the same for practical purposes, note where I speak of the sacraments in this text and the
magnitude of the inconguence).

Up to here we would understand the esotericism of the Sacred pole of

the archons, but it happens that the hyperborean spirits are chained with

the purpose of producing culture... The viryas thus carry in a connatural

way a great CURIOSITY (the germ of rebellion and confrontation)

which enables them to pass through Elix and Labrelix, which is the

origin of rebellion and confrontation.

which leads them, before reaching the luciferic pole, to have to

know the Ludic of the archons, that is to say that, having an

effect on the

EXCESS WAY and pondering on all those errors-lack of symmetry can the

virya to reach the self-knowledge of the polarities of energetic expression, as long as the memory exists in
him.


236


of the origin and sees in this terrible affront a NIGREDO of atrocious suffering, the DIGNITY or HONOR
sullied and wishes fervently to free himself beyond being one more Involutionary DEGENERATE (if he stayed
in the cultural sacral pole fulfilling it he would be a GENERATIVE EVOLVED)...Freed then the virya of the
left hand of such BUCLES of induced behavior can thus approach the pole of the left hand of such BUCLES of
induced behavior can thus approach the pole of the right hand of the right hand of the left hand of the left hand
of such BUCLES of induced behavior...

LUCIFERICO pure to the noological ethics stripped of psychology and that only attends to the signs of its selbt
with honor...


(1) The left hand virya has all the freedom to change the word "sin", which immediately leads to matrices of
priestly information to others of a geometrical, runic or symbolic nature... ARCONTE OR ASYMMETRY may
be one of them.


Let the virya critical reader of these lines also remember that the extraterrestrial hyperborean reality is that of
civilizations with a great organizational precision under the DISCIPLICINE OF MARTIAL CAMARADERY
(honor and loyalty), the hyperborean siddhas and their societies are not composed of bands of outlaws or
ruffians of anarchic- nihilistic tendencies.

pd: alchemy as a process of individuation for the inner labyrinth and Graal for the outer.


SOLAR EMPEROR:AUGUSTUS


Augustus, initiate of Apollo in Apollonia, builds in Gallaecia (present Galicia) a city called LUCUS AUGUSTI
, 12 B.C (present LUGO) in a sacred forest (let's appreciate the functional reminiscence with the apple tree
forest of Tharsis) "sacred forest of Augustus" ...For him, this new city to be founded materializes the
achievement of the Pax Romana in the Empire (the urban analogy of the ARA PASCIS). His aim was to show
in the city the perfection of the proportions of VITRUBIO, after the victorious achievement of the Cantabrian
wars...


Augustus after being named maximum pontiff, agglutinates in himself the personification of the solar god Lug,
and thus has ascendancy over the Celtiberian tribes of the cultural pact both in Hispania and in Gaul. Lug was
the lord of the Milky Way (let us understand it as a concept of Boreas, resigned to the Hyperborean by a pontiff
of the power of Octavian Augustus in a framework of the best psychosocial strategies).

The city would encompass the point of arrival of a pilgrimage to FINIS TERRAE (heiress of the mysteries of
the megalithic routes), a very important concept for the Roman world of the time since it designated the end of
the known earth and where the world of the dead began...There they would build an ARA Solis (setting sun), to
designate where the sun rests daily... This would give rise to the CALLIS IANUS -WAY OF JANO
hyperborean predecessor of the current WAY OF SANTIAGO OF COMPOSTELA of the shortened cultural
pact - deviated and established by the Franks (which later would give way to the constructions of the Cistercian
and Cluny).It began on March 25 under the auspices of our VENUS (the same figure of the Viera shell carried
by the pilgrim) and in the cape of Creus of Tarraco temple of the VENUS PYRINEA (our lady of the cold fire),
the most eastern point of the peninsula and therefore close to Rome...A line seemed to unite Ephesus and its
lunar cults of the mother goddesses at the eastern end with the eternal city (THE OMPHALOS) and the newly
founded city of LUCUS AUGUSTA ( finis terrae occidental) solar astrological sign, Augustus-Augustus (
summer in the northern hemisphere) and LEOEL _ that completed the route received the perpetual immunity of
Rome, this is what

We suspect that it would only be at the EXOTERIC level (pilgrims were foreigners who were not strictly
Roman). Joining the


237


Sun with Moon is to complete the mystery of union.

SUCH AN INSTANCE PROVOKED BY AUGUSTUS HAS KARMIC REMINISCENCES THAT ARE
DIRECTLY CONNECTED TO CONTEMPORARY TIMES AND GLOBAL DIFFUSION.

OF THE HYPERBorean WISDOM (it is where the imperial and spiritual power are added, Throne and


altar). [US DIVINUM


"law revealed by the gods that regulates the relations between the gods and men."

The "PAX DE ORUM" (peace of Venus) would show this perfect concordance, sealed with the rubric of the
AMICITIA or friendship between both parts, the structural concordance of the perfect order between the
contact of the hyperborean siddhas and the loyal people in the blood pact... Such a concept would have a total
vertebration in all the strata of social execution of the collective in pursuit of a final transmutation of the people.
SOLAR MYTH AND ITS INVERSION: HERCULES IN IBERIA.


The Tower of Hercules and its myth


Located in the province of A Corufia (Galicia, Galicia, characteristic symbol of the city), and recently named
(June 27 of this 2009) World Heritage Site has as main singularity to be the only Roman lighthouse still usable
and be the oldest in the world ... It has 68 meters high was built by the Romans as a navigation lighthouse in the
first century A.D., The construction was between the reigns of Nero and Vespasian, according to the findings of
fragments of terra sigillata and thin-walled vases datable between 40 and 80 of our era ... . The inscription at the
foot of the tower and the documentary references to the city of Brigantium (La Corufia) reveal the existence of a
lighthouse from the time of Trajan. At its base was found a votive stone with the Latin inscription MARTI
AVG.SACR C.SEVIVS LVPVS ARCHTECTVS EEMINIENSIS LVSITANVS.EX.VO, which has allowed us
to identify the architect as Gaius Sevius Lupo, originally from Aeminium, today Coimbra, in Portugal.


The oldest mention of the Tower is found in the Historias adversvm Paganos by Paulo Orosio, written around
415-417 AD, which reads: "Secvndvs angvlvs circivm intendit, ubi Brigantia Gallaeciae civitas sita altissimvm
farvm et inter pavca memorandi operis ad specvlam Britanniae erigit". Likewise, historians identified the tower
as the place where Breogan's Tower could have been located, a mythological tower that appears among others in
the Irish mythological cycle (more specifically in the Leabhar Ghabhala Erenn), and from which Ith, son of
Breogan, would have sighted the coasts of Ireland. This suspicion is heightened by the toponym Brigantium,
which is highly likely to derive from Breogan, and is supported by the tradition of the Romans in identifying
their own gods or heroes, in this case Hercules, with the natives.


The tower possibly lost its maritime use during the Middle Ages when it became a fortification. It was in the
17th century (1682) when the Duke of Uceda commissioned the architectural restoration to the architect Amaro
Antune, who built a wooden staircase that crossed the vaults to the top, where two small towers are located to
support the lanterns. During the reign of Charles III, the complete reconstruction was carried out. The
neoclassical work was completed in 1791 under the direction of Eustaquio Giannini.

The tower was, before the renovation began, a prismatic body with a square base; on the outside it had a stone
wall with two doors in the lower part and asymmetrical windows that went all the way up to the upper floor.


238


a helical mordant that reached the top. In its interior it conserved the old Roman structure, but with
wooden stairs that belonged to the restoration of the building, harmonizing it in its decoration with
upper frames of doors and windows.


Mythology says that "there was a giant named Geryon, king of Brigantium, who forced his subjects to give him
half of their property, including their children. One day the subjects decided to ask Hercules for help, who
challenged Geryon to a great fight. Hercules defeated Geryon, buried him and erected a mound which he
crowned with a great torch. Near this mound he founded a city and, as the first person to arrive was a woman
named Crufia, Hercules named the city after her."[citation needed].


The current facade of the tower is the result of the neoclassical remodeling carried out in the eighteenth
century. In 2007, it was chosen as a candidate to be added to the list of World Heritage Sites. On September 9,
2008, it was twinned with the Statue of Liberty in New York and on the 25th of the same month with the
Morro Lighthouse in Havana, the oldest in America and one of Cuba's emblems.


Source:http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Torre_de H%C3%A9rcules


We can appreciate that in the antiquity appeared 3 types of Hercules according to the
region... I.Solar Hercules, Egyptian Hercules: as a hero-god in struggle-cosmogonic drama.


2.Hercules Melkarth - Phoenician-Punic Melikertes : patron of travelers and merchants.LUDIC, seeker of
wealth-pleasures-fame. Hero of the cultural pact. The most recognized version today.


3 Greek Heracles: The hyperborean par excellence, the first, Luciferic liberating WARRIOR who gathers in
himself all the virile pattern of APOLLO-BELENUS and who gave rise to the legend among the Dorians and
Ionians of the descent of this one together with the Heraclids as revenge before the Semitic peoples (mainly
Egyptians and Persians) because of the enchainment of the Aryan spirit in the Mediterranean-Eastern zone.
Iberian-Atlantean and Pelasgian origin, similarity to Perseus. His original name is unknown.


A legend-myth with so much power could not pass untouched by subsequent CULTURAL DEFORMATIONS, as
we read in the magical novel (about the alliance between the Iberians of Tharsis and the Lydians against the huge
and threatening Phoenician army settled in Balares).


"This was, Dr. Siegnagel, the real reason for the continuous state of war in which the Lords of Tharsis must
henceforth have lived, which meant the definitive loss of the illusory sovereignty enjoyed until then, and not the
"greed" that foreign peoples and conquerors might have nourished for their riches. On the contrary, there was
not a King, Lord, or simple war adventurer in the whole orbit whom the Golen had not tempted with the
conquest of Tharsis, with the fabulous booty in gold and silver to be won by the one who attempted the feat.
And it was their intrigues that caused the constant siege of bandits and pirates. As long as they could, the Lords
of Tharsis resisted the pressure by their own means, that is, with the help of the warriors of my people. But
when this was no longer possible, especially when they learned that the Phoenicians of Tyre were concentrating
a powerful mercenary army in the Balearic Islands to invade and colonize Tharsis, they had no choice but to
accept the help, naturally interested, of a foreign people. In this case they requested help from Lydia, a
Pelasgian nation of the Aegean Sea, made up of exemplary navigators whose overseas ships docked in Onuba
two or three times a year to trade with the people of Tharsis: they had the defect that they were also merchants,
and producers of expendable goods, and were accustomed to practices and habits much more "culturally
advanced" than the "primitive" Iberians; but, in compensation, they exhibited the important quality that they
were of our same Race and demonstrated an undoubted ability for war. By "Pelasgians" History has known a
group of peoples settled in different regions of the Mediterranean and Tyrrhenian coasts, of the Aegean
peninsula, and of Asia Minor. So, to find a common origin in all of them, we must go back to the beginning of
History, to the times after the Atlantean catastrophe, when the white Atlanteans instituted the Blood Pact with
the natives of the Iberian Peninsula. In truth, at that time there was only one native people, who were separated
according to the Atlantean exogamous laws into three great groups: the Iberians, the Basques, and those who
would later become the Pelasgians. In turn, each of these great groups was subdivided internally into three in all
the tribal social organizations of the villages, towns and kingdoms. That unique people would be known after
the departure of the white Atlanteans as Virtriones or Vrtriones, i.e., herdsmen; but the name soon became
Vitriones, Vetriones, and, through the influence of other peoples, especially the Phoenicians, Veriones or
Geriones. The "Giant Geriones", with one pair of legs, that is to say, with only one racial base, but triple from
the waist up, that is to say, with three bodies and three


239


The original people is represented with the triple exogamic division imposed by the white Atlanteans; with the
passing of the centuries, the three great groups of the native people were identified by their particular names and
the original unity was forgotten: the rivalries and intrigues stimulated from the Cultural Pact contributed to this,
each group ending up convinced of its racial and cultural individuality. I have already mentioned the Iberians,
since I am descended from them, and I will continue to quote them in this story; of the Basques I will say
nothing except that early on they betrayed the Blood Pact and allied themselves with the Cultural Pact, a
mistake they would pay for with much suffering and great strategic confusion, since they were a people of Very
Pure Blood; and as for the Pelasgians, the case is quite simple. When the white Atlanteans departed, they were
accompanied en masse by the Pelasgians, who had been charged with the task of transporting them by sea to
Asia Minor. There they said goodbye to the white Atlanteans and decided to remain in the area, eventually
giving rise to the formation of a large confederation of peoples. Successive invasions forced them on many
occasions to abandon their settlements, but, as they had become excellent navigators, they knew how to get out
of all the troubles well: however, those displacements would bring them back to the Iberian Peninsula; at the
time of the alliance with the Lydians, VIII century B.C., other Pelasgian groups already occupied Italy and Gaul
under the name of Etruscans, Tyrrhenians, Truscans, Taruscans, Ruscans, Rasenes, etc. The Lydian group that
the Lords of Tharsis summoned, still remained in Asia Minor, although enduring at that time a terrible scarcity
of food; they recognized by the traditions the close kinship that united them to the Iberians, but claimed to
descend from "King Manes", legendary ancestor who would be none other than "Manu" the perfect Archetype
of the animal man, imposed in their Cults by the Priests of the Cultural Pact."


Y:

"I suppose that you are waiting for an answer to the pending question: What would be the next reaction of the
Golen to the Tartessian power, which was developing beyond their control and which was frustrating all their
plans?" This is the answer, very simple, although it will have to be clarified: the Golen directed against
Tartessos the Myth of Perseus.


With all rigor, it can be affirmed that that of Perseus, as well as other legends that have belatedly been grouped
under the general denomination of "Greek Myths", is in reality a very ancient Pelasgian Myth. The same thing
has happened with some of the "Greek" stories of Herakles: for example, with that in which the hero fights with
the Giant Geryon to steal his red oxen and which hides, under a symbol dear to the Pelasgians, an ancient
incursion of the primitive Argives against the "triple people" of the Iberians, or Virtriones, in order to conquer
the secret of the cattle that they did not know or had lost; and the proof is that those Argives, "enemies of the
Geryons", were considered relatives of these, since Herakles himself was the great-grandson of Perseus. But
Perseus was the great-grandfather of Heracles only in the Argosian Myth; in truth, the theme is taken from a
much older Pelasgian Myth, of Atlantean Iberian origin, which refers to the adventure undertaken by a typical
Hyperborean Spirit to attain immortality and Wisdom. In the primordial theme the Spirit Perseus was not
Argosian but a native of the Atlantean Iberians, that is to say, of a much more western people; that is why his
exploit is not carried out on behalf of a mere mortal king like Polydectes.

but of the Goddess of Wisdom, Frya, the wife of Navutan: all the Names, and the functions of the Gods, were
then changed, and transposed, by the peoples of the Cultural Pact, the story of Perseus remaining in the known
form."


At this point of the extensive entry when we can accept that the Tower was built by order of Augustus
something before that all the sources seem to state and as a polar-extreme replica of the MILLARIUM

AERUM of the Roman forum or golden milestone, kilometer point 0 in the count of the distances (it would be
located next to the Roman forum). It would be similar to the TOWER OF AUGUSTUS of CAMPATORRES
and another one more lost in CAPE TOURINAN...These 3 could be the so famous ARAS SEXTIANAS
agustianas ..Runa Ar as cold fire maintained..Altar and refuge, Lighthouse and quasi Menhir.

As a conclusion to add that the figure of Augustus AGLUTINUS to all Hercules himself (he was even
represented in resemblance to him, canon doriforo) and the death of Geryon is identified with the
ROMANIZATION under the maximum pontiff of the entire Iberian peninsula, a way to recover the myth before
the triumphant sinarchy.


We can also appreciate how they are currently trying to twin the Tower with other very important icons of the
Iron Age (Statue of Liberty, Morro lighthouse), in an act of cultural degradation...


Netzchah or eternity of VENUS


240


The principles of love, attraction, aesthetic, artistic, prosperity and fertility, sociability and skills, temptations,
eroticism, charm, weaknesses... The principles of beauty and feeling .It is purely feminine.....Eros vs
hypnos....The prostitute without hyperborean frame.

Its energy pattern isa ROTATIONAL VORTEX. Venus as a planet rotates in the opposite direction to the rest,
recalling in this curious movement the mystery of AMORT.


The Woman


The identity of the FEMININE is trapped in a collective unconscious of the end of the iron age that asks from the
"new age" to affirm the effects of softer values on the outside: peace, tenderness, maternity.

While the Aryan spirit world claims a "virility" that from the cultural perspective that we have been inculcated
may seem to be even spiteful misogyny... The hyperborean wisdom itself shows us the mystery that at this time
there are few warriors incarnated in proportion to the male viryas ... However, the texts published so far plus

our own gnosis and personal experience can make us break down the archetypes of femininity for the best
transduction of the symbol in the memory of blood ...


When a woman does not receive much artificial light, she synchronizes her menstrual cycles with the moon in 28
days.

( 7x4=28, 1 month)( 28x13=364 days. | year)... Thus the four phases of this, are the four ages of the

Manvantara and the psychophysical cycles marked in its dynamics of change. Types of women in our way:


I. Woman Eve: She is the one who only lives to fulfill the entelechies of the demiurge.... In astrology she has two
basic archetypal realities: The Moon and Venus.... This is what can happen if any woman affirms them and
fulfills the actualization of her entelechial matrices (to turn to the realization in the matter and not in the spirit):


1.1Eve Moon: If the woman develops this possibility, her life revolves around the conjugal bond and the action
of having children, seeking a "good marriage" with material prosperity. To be a Mother, Adam and Eve
Metarelate. Sacred Aspect. For many women it is very difficult to avoid this instinct... As the mother of their
own creations, here would also have a place for those women who, upon becoming androgynous, invert this
instinct and their life revolves around success in the business or artistic sector. To have children of the flesh
with Eve, is to go against the mystery of A-mort, which obliges the viryas to be children of the widower (of
himself in the spirit, with the sublimated intervention of her)... Thus the family archetype densifies over us with
its role-playing, economic waste, emotional blackmail, loss of vital time, burdens and responsibilities.... Having
children also weakens considerably the ethereal field (and as a consequence in the physical) and in the case of
women it even leads to piercing (whoever has astral vision will see this to a greater or lesser degree in the first
layers)... We also resonate energetically with our offspring, especially when they are very small and helpless...
Having descendants in matter, on the other hand, is good when there is a possibility of collective-racial
transmutation.


Venusian Eve: would polarize the daughter and sister aspect. Women who occupy an "indispensable" position in
the life of their family or group of friends. Strongly possessed by collective egregors or by the family archetype
of origin, even in the professional aspect as tradition. "To be the best friend" ...Great percentage of playful
attitude and pose of "sentimental frivolity" that locks them in a multitude of amatory relations because of a not
correctly sublimated animus in eternal search of emotional stability. Hedonism, cultural eclecticism, escapist
desires and free time spent in unanswered tourism. Explorative homosexuality and role
confirmation...Separation dramas, divorces, postmodern orgasmolatrous sexual dissatisfaction problem.


2. Woman Kaly: The warrior woman, NOT BEING REVERSE (or at least not in the same way) in spirit, carries
a priori the archetypal catalytic "absorbing" potential of the iron age and reflects an attitude of essential hostility
with a very pronounced chthonic-demonic potential, a pure hostile force. It is something that must be refined in
its initiatic hyperborean ascent, to differentiate itself beyond a simple WITCH... Aggressive and devouring-
destructive-blackmailing sexuality in the complex of energetic vampirism . Prostitutes or not, they would be
suitable women for the wet way of hyperborean tantra... "Confused mass" alchemical, turbulent waters... The
warrior man, being reverted in this era, is not so primary, but only a "balanced" muppet to elaborate cultural
manifestations... It can also occur in Pasu women without the possibility of escape... It is worrying the null
capacity that modern man has to perceive Kaly.


241


the last official external trace (since modernism) was the morbid "FEMME FATALE" that torment of
degenerate Aryan artists who saw their pathetic pretensions of success and accommodating fame inspired by a
figure that caused them a heartbreaking torment in this case caused by the dramas of Kundalini active in the
lowest centersSuffering............cceseeeeseeeeeseeeeees , for forgetting Her, Karma of the cultural, so much of sense.

for the wo... demiurgeThis femme fatale, already liberated and cosmopolitan since the Greek hetaira, also
foreshadowed the

irruption of the woman in the arts: a prototype of hysteriform sick woman (see Pathos concept) who debates
between the playful exploratory and the sacred vindictive substitute of dogmas. Harassing narcissism that
usually also shows the highest degree of exploitation in its false ............... weakness Thus Died the Light of
Apollo in

the arts and the female Priesthood unveiling the meaning of sexuality-ancestry, the dragon of sodom fulfills the
installation

of the Androgynous as a model of the ideal future for humanity, being in turn also the debacle of the Family as
an institution and by extension of the ............ Lineage.


3. Kaly woman mirroring Lilith: Not all Kaly women can be Lilith oe women Would these be a
prototype of a Kaly woman?
racial beauty-perfection that plagues our memory or the Minné of the personal SHE ( great unknown)..... The
The embodiment of the Numinous beauty of Wotan's wife, the reflection of her memory (it could be a hologram
installed with extraterrestrial cybernetic technology, green ray) has the purpose of creating a state of falling in
love in the lost viryas with the active chackras above Anahatha, the impossibility of real consummation in the
flesh of that affection and the formal relationship because it merits devotional-respectful sense, provokes the
spark of the Alchemical Nigredo for the male, which finally leads to the birth of the son of the Widower (term
of M.Serrano) or Child of the cold stone. Occitan TROVAR CLUS and possible unresolved Karma floating by
the Cathar pontiffs creating later unmeasured suffering in this eternal return. Medieval knights and sublimating
Madonna-Virgins . Nietzsche lived it in his flesh with Salome, and he knew it. But these are no longer there
either. There is almost only the hedonistic bourgeois who wants to collect relationships if his wallet is abundant
enough to access the total and capricious projections of his false sublimation of the soul. The processes of the
dry way, the azoth and the later mercury of the philosophers... A-mort-fall... oo... ecececceeseeseeeeceseeeeeeaeees MOON
BLACK ASTROLOGICAL also...


4. Woman Pontiff-dama-vraya-Kalibur : The Walkyria resolved. In the tradition after the fall of Atlantis were
those women who carried the stones of Venus, guiding the peoples for their strategic reorientation.


Here we have an adaptation to the SOPHIA or virgin of stoneWoman is already a transinfinite bridge with


well controlled siddhis powers must also already know about your LUCIFER OR VULCAN tulku, your
partner.
original, in which he delegates the focus Of his 0.0... eeeeeeeeeseeeeeee sublimated libido.


SELBST conscientialized with dominion or perhaps to be able to direct its power as a "Berserker" explosion for
liberation purposes..SOL NEGRO ( misterium connuctionis). As a magnetic ovum she articulates the dynamics
of the swastika from her womb that renews the encoded light, in the metaphor of attraction of the sperm viryas
and Noyos for the STRATEGY OF LIBERATION.they are a type of women of a forgotten past, fascinating
both for their candorous nutritional beauty , as for their volitional power, intelligence or hard character.From
this numinosity must be born the tension that makes the RECOVERED couple of liberated people continue to
transmute through the infinite space: colonies, planets, dimensions, etc. in an exercise of eternal polarity
ENERVANT If oo... eeeeseereereereeees creative SOLITUDE is not chosen in something that is already PURE
LOVE (AMORT, is love as not death) in

all its nuances, but only the promise of it from the "ruins" of splendor that we inhabit.

If in the previous paragraphs I presented the feminine paradigm in relation to our dismal era, such as Evas in
its Venusian and Lunar aspects; Kaly; Kali-lilith; and the Kalibur Vraya,in this one I will show how the
PSIG 2.52 ease nese SO ak Ae ree paradigm is presented in relation to
our dismal era, such as Evas in its Venusian and Lunar aspects; Kaly; Kali-lilith; and the Kalibur Vraya.

field of correspondence from the subtle hyperborean, i.e. from the emerging symbol in the sky in synchrony
with the present and the Minne of UrThe _ Iberian face of Pyrena-Belisana-Ama of K'thaagar is transferred by
the

PARAKLLITO to the 4 GRECORROMAN goddesses par excellence, which are CERES, VESTA, JUNO and
PALAS ATENEA.


1. That the evas would be resigned by the figures of .......... eee: CERES-DemeterThe Hyperborean sees here
the birth of the

stone child and how he nourishes himself with everything that provides him with a transitory

establishment in the valplads. CHILDHOOD.

2. That pure demonic chthonic Kaly would be resigned by ............ VESTA The virya sees here the importance of
the


242


tradition and ancestors, the search for the ETERNAL LAWS and the primordial values of the origin. OLD
AGE.


3. That kaly-lilith is resigned by JUNO... The virya must understand the mystery of Amort (it is always the
IDEAL). Also the comradeship of honor. MATURITY.


243


4. That the KALIBUR vraya takes her seat in PALAS ATENEA, the warrior walkirya. If the goddess
presents helmet with antlers symbolizes the age of Aires. YOUTH (liberation is a literal rejuvenation at all
levels). It is wisdom and its COHESIVE action.


ANIMA MUNDI is a Platonic concept, the feminine expression in creation of the demiurge's breath: the
equivalent of man's soul in matter.

Magna Mater Mediterranea or the battle to contain Kali

"FREYA DANCING LIKE THE PARTRIDGE IN THE LABYRINTH, CONTAINS A MYSTERY, SHE IS
THE ROUND VOX OF ALL THE PERCEPTIBLE FACES OF THE GODDESS IN THE FENESTRA
INFERNALIS and NEVER STANDS ON ANY MONARCH BECAUSE SHE SHOWS THE SHADOW
SPHERE OF THE ANIMAL.

COLLECTIVE."


The form of the cult objects, their symbols and rites are changing SYNCRETICALLY for the already known
reasons and parallels of ICONOGRAPHY are found in the images of the gods even in remote regions
apparently geographically incommunicable and impossible to explain for a SIMPLE rational analysis (the
intringulis of the subject is left for other awakened faculties). In an indeterminate point of the antiquity the
forces of the conflict showed too many stories of GODS AND virile HEROES that struggled to free themselves
from the infernal planes or LOKAS and with them to grant a lesson or imprint that forged the ideal character of
their peoples: Alexander the Great had extended towards the East the Aryan will towards the gates of the same
Brahman kingdoms where the knowledge of the chaining power was condensed and later Augustus did the same
towards the West until FINIS TERRAE (Gallaecia in Iberia), inaugurating the imperial PAX and the era of
Roman splendor. On the other hand, there were many goddesses that hoisted the aspects of beauty, inspiration,
intuition and abundance or the potential magic of sexuality-fertilization, all those were cognitive
SUPRAVALUES that taught uniform concordance for all the peoples that were already apt to WALK on the
path of return.


It was thus that the ANIMUS MUNDI or terrestrial logos was intercepted by the vox of the demiurge in order to
unbalance one of the poles and continue the combat. The masculine could not be attacked since the shadow of
the psychosphere was accumulated on the side of the feminine (the hyperborean when in a trapped plane is
purely virile combative) for various reasons that can even manifest a GENETIC lack of the feminine essence in
a MATRIX fertilized by a self-sufficient androgynous ENTE (IDEAL OF THE DEMIURG), as not AMORT
renunciation of the siddhas traitors to virility) key means for the appearance of his DEMONIC CONSORTE
SAKTI- KALI in that epoch in which his ACTION is direct and consecutive of his hegemonic reign... The
warlike tension in the symbolic mental plane has its main expression in the Mediterranean world in the conflict
between the virile APOLINEO and the DIONYSIAC, the latter concept remaining as the form in which the
synarchic strategy would penetrate to destroy all construction of the warlike spirit: so it happened in Greece and
Rome with the arrival of Cybele to the Empire; but let us see how the symbol and the expression of the magna
Mater was constellated in the different stages of the essential war from the prism of the peoples that concern us.
Let us analyze, broadly speaking, the Mediterranean Numen base inherited from the ancient Middle Eastern
confrontation (Assyrian-Sumerian-Babylonian) and from the Egyptian cultural model:


1:Tartessian Pyrenna-Belisana-Belilith: The change of alphabet when the Lydian people joined the cult.

shows the mantric control of the liturgy of the goddess... The horror and fear as an initiatory shock in the forest
of Tharsis confronted with the monstrous personification of her (similar to the Indo-Aryan Kali) is a way of
instructing from the soul to the viryas who at that time did not have enough capacity to be able to access the
resolution of the mystery of the labyrinth in any other way than by a traumatic shock in their soul, to feel the
pure terror or fear that froze the blood: the virya was not devoured by the aspect.

Ouroboric (repeating the eternal chained return) of it and awakening to its «0.0... eee sphericity.

would later deform the myth with the confrontation Medusa (our goddess) vs. Perseus, cultural hero until many
centuries later (see opera and literature in different styles).


2:A pre-classical Greek period: With the mother goddess of the Minoan labyrinth carrying snakes in her arms
and bare breasts, goddess of the thicket and of wild beasts, solitary consort where the peoples who carried her
adopted her matriarchal designs.

Cults in which male kings-heads of tribes are sacrificed on dates that maintain the order of celestial
concordance.


244


3. Iberian ladies of the Mastieno-Bastetan ethnics : V-IV century BC ...Halfway between the Greek mystical
divinities and the institution of the vrayas . Ex: the Lady of Elche or Lady of Baza...The influence of the first
sailors of the substratum possibly Pelasgian and Phocaean Greeks (Ionian people of the city of Focea, current
Turkish coast) is an essential point to understand the style of the elaboration of the sculpture.The warlike
opposition to the Phoenician goddess ASTARTHE and the Punic-Carthaginian TANIT is a key point to discern
after the TROJAN WAR (conflict with a patriarchal and matrilineal background by the charm of the mystery of
AMORT) and the pre-Hellenic dark period, to which also belongs the fight that kept ORPHEUS and the triple
hékate.


4.A Roman period: Triple hékate with Selene (moon), Diana (Artemis) and Proserpina (Demeter) until Cybele-
Kybele and the struggle of the Sabines with the state religion (1) until the house of Thurdes and the virgin of
Agartha (khaatagar). The arrival of the cult of Cybele (inversion of the Minoan Gea-Rea, or mother goddess
Earth) of the prolonging the symbol of the Augustan empire, seemed to mean a degradation infiltrated in the
imperial solarity, especially when the priestly caste of Gallis and archigallos coming from Phrygian territories
(traditionally Golems) ended up adopting a dress similar to that of the ancient Iberian vrayas and established
their rites of castration and chaotic ecstatic-orgytastic euphoria (and perennial transvestism in the cases of the
priestly novices) in the spring equinox in March, assimilating in part in them also the liturgy of the cults of
Astarte, at a time when the state religion was in full confrontation with the present power of Caesar. The myth of
Attis (ancient Phrygian Adonis) proposes a total adoration to the mother-lover Cybele where eros does not find
its normal heroic expression, that is to say neither ATIS himself has a natural conception being conceived by the
goddess, nor can he consummate his incestuous love with his mother (he is punished for loving a nymph).

So he must die to be reborn, but humiliated as a virya-seed man before the powerful subjugating Goddess who
does not want her son to establish an independent male identity. (Remember that ATIS is considered the god of
vegetation and Cybele was the patroness of the harvest, seed = virya in Sanskrit).


245


Note: in the photo, statue of Cibeles, patron saint of Madrid.


If the virya and the lady cannot depart together from the hell of enchainment, the psychosphere will be torn and
there will be a struggle between the feminine and masculine for control of the characters of the spirituality of the
people.

It is outlined why in Iberia the Magna Mater was contained and expressed by the healthy channel of the liberating
hyperborean spirituality...


(1) "The fact turned into tradition by the survivors who had "forgotten" the sense of it, led them to form the
castes of virgin priestesses so common among the Incas, Aztecs, Trojans, Greeks, Romans, Hindustanis,
Egyptians, etc. The survivors of purer hyperborean lineage, that is, those who took refuge in northern Europe,
called them "virgins of Fasta", as the Frisian manuscript OERA LINDA tells; and in a less pure tradition the
Romans, for example, transformed them into "virgins of vesta". But they were also called, after the catastrophe,
"Virgins of the Sun", Priestesses of Mithra, Daughters of Agni, etc." (fragment of the thulegeselshaft history).


The Romans did not like uncontrolled states of consciousness when it came to producing the VATICINIANS
AND AUGURES, (at a point to be investigated, the relationship between the pontiffs and the Sabines had to be
severed). One theory states that the Sabines were the ones who introduced the cult of Cybele and Attis in Rome
with the foretold purpose of expelling ANIBAL in 204 BC (predicted by the Sibylline books).


(2) The goddesses of other European cultures that inhabited the present area are not mentioned here, only
those of hyperborean numen.


If the virya or the lady falls in love: Passion, dependence and sexuality


It happens that the perception and energies remain stuck in the tension of the Adam and Eve archetype in the
anchor of the heart chackra...The warrior creates remaining arcs and filaments that unite with the other person,
diluting both in a state of average consciousness, sometimes subject to the emotional ups and downs of the
feminine and sometimes to the excessive male ardor. The duration of such an idealized emerging androgyny is
usually directly related to the wear and tear that both spouses make of their genesic forces and whether there
are not other interests in their life journey that are more pressing for the union of the couples every day:
housing, common economy - inheritances, sharing of tasks, support of loneliness - old age in a time of
communal fragmentation, aesthetic ...............+ narcissismThe subject usually supports an image of the other
(mood complex).

us) which is only the projected phantasmagoric measure of its own LACK (mystery of the union in Jung) and
such a spur a sulfurous fuel called LOVE PASSION which is magnified by the reigning decadent culture as the
best desired goal to feel "alive"...


On the other hand, from the work of the "Gnostic" Samael A.Weor, the author of this entry only has a few
words about the use of sexuality, after applying our discursive trident to it:


1 .Genera: create children. Use SACRO

2. Degenerates: the use promoted by the culture of the iron age in which we live, exalted uranus.
Orgasmolatry already cited. LUDIC use.

3. Regenerates: way of spiritual liberation. LUCIFERIC use.

The smile of the goddess: AZOTH of albedo.


The hyperborean tradition tells that the spirit is chained by a mystery of Amort, a fact that, as such, becomes a
terrible diminution of the potential arc of states of consciousness that the virya can experience as immanent to

| ds joeepeerererer erste rr tare tear reareer ore ers enre mer erer erect epee steer re near error etre unmanifested divine power, thus leaving the
Selbst limited in his condition,

passing through the loops of the spiral spiral path until it is positioned in Tau where it can already form

the infinite staircase (provided it does not get lost and fall asleep for good) ................

forms prevents the conscious subject self from perceiving states in which matter and space are permeable, i.e.
one remains subject to the "perfect" reality of the created, turned towards the future time of the structures that
are about to realize their "seed" (such license is the semantic change of the very imposition of our monad by that
of the bijas with form function) and mutilated in its oo... cece eeeeceseeeeceseeeseceeecsecseeeseenseeaeens real autonomy.

main symptoms in the face of such a disaster is the psychic dependence on supra-structures that phylogenetically
reduce it to the needs of the most primitive brains and the collective, i.e. there is always a NEED to belong to
something or someone (material or symbolic), which causes the end of the suffering or


246


METAPHYSICAL anguish before the unknowable infinite and in humans of lower energy level a comfortable
accommodation in egregores that vitalize the power of their misplaced will.


This is how Kaly, the great goddess of destruction, gains the strength for her reign and Age.... This is how the
great MATERNAL COMPLEX occupies all stages of perception and social structures, where the IRON (iron
age called the Greco-Roman culture to the age of Kaly indoaria, metal of mars, of the ARIO-ARIES, giving the
solution for the liberation in the name itself, did not fall into the Bramanian cultural trap of naming this period
of time after her, as a positive patroness of a pantheon of complementary gods) is the epitome of weaponry and
warrior necessity to provoke right angles in creation, i.e. OPPOSITION RUNES or WEAPONS...AIl that does
not face with such a belligerent disposition its captivity will be reduced to a PRIMORDIAL UTTER which is
the demiurgic opposition (denied wife of Sanat kumara-jehovah) to the trans-infinite black Sun, a point of
indetermination between the past and the future (imagine a lying 8, toroidal vortex) where forms are destroyed
to form others and where there is no possibility of continuity in the thread of memory as any kind of
immortality since only the most basic laws of conservation-recycling of matter apply (1)..


But the virya knows that he is not here to perform an "imitatio dei" (which would lead him to a dead end, an
ideal ANDROGYNATE Manu), that having exhausted the complementary polar possibility of his original
partner and which can only lead him to a serene-morbid form of Contemplation that prides itself on its state of
final realization (the 3 heads of the dragon and its crown)....While the distant echo of the feminine continues to
lash him, its presence is a still living PROMISE of being able to be as a god WITHOUT FENCE and its
remoteness is a resentment of the wound, where all sense of fullness is denied, where the chasm of pain as
SOLITUDE is that of not being able to recognize himself in ANYTHING OTHER THAN WHAT HE
HIMSELF IS, from the resonance of PHYSICAL AFFECTION to the sensation of a RECONSTITUTING
HARMONY....and it is in this state, apparent dead end, where the rescue of the goddess, the thread of Ariadne,
the eternal feminine, the AZOTH ... appears. The minné looks back again evoking in the memory the presence
of her, (to win her eternal face) and if he has been able to purify the links of kaly and sees her (even in certain
virtuous women of flesh and blood, but will no longer suffer for her possession ever), she will smile at him and
will return to be like the eternal adolescent in love with the KALY-LIlith, pure INSPIRATION, ENERGY
AND DRIVER OF MYSTERY...The

Hyperborean sense of BEAUTY is oes eeeeeeeteereeeeeee recalledEach sublimation brings one closer to the siddhi
possibilities,

only the highest HY DROGENOS( misterio rubedo) are the ones that allow us to go deeper inside, since
pontification requires the confrontation with the lunar mother ................ complexAnd the signs of
femininity and the

deities continue, as well as the depth of the virya's perception on the bridge.


Continuing the thread of the first part of this message, we see in the illustration above (without comment in the
first part) the embodiment of the archetype of the androgynous (double arcane King-Queen, with solar lion)
pure winged with the tree of the solarization of the lunar rhythms in the background, the wings of the reptilian
pointing a species design next to the Kundalini Manu serpents crowned one contained in the cup of the right
hand ( giving its fruit of expression ), another rebellious-coiled (as in the statue of Lucifer of the Retiro in
Madrid ) supported by the left hand ( via ) which are minor daughters of the Dragon of the ground and their
three demiurgic aspected heads..


247


Also seen in the background is the Phoenix-Pelican in an act of bleeding and self-fertilization, an expression of
the mystery that sustains the inward gaze in the rising of the blood.

This classic engraving has a very repeated iconography in multiple ancient alchemy treatises and later in this
new era has seen its rebirth with the deep psychology in parallelism to alchemy in multiple publications... It has
a clear DEMIURGICAL expression and its purpose is to effeminate-weaken with the worst aspects of the black
goddesses to the Western culture, leading to the synarchic initiation or the final total destruction. The
hyperborean spirits have defined gender since their fall and for them the mystery of the union has nothing to do
with an expression of the dragon of Sodom: the genital and soul expression of EROS towards the same sex
(homosexuality) or towards an ideal state of pansexualistic PROGRESSION for the future Humanity, the
constellated entelechy ...


The hyperborean (man or woman) who walks towards the mystery HHEROSGAMOS interacting with his
two hemispheres (sophia) and when taking nuptials with his anima-us are born in his psyche the features of
the other complementary sex providing him the smoothing of the way to SELBST.It is the union of
INTELLECT-ACTION (gained by the lady kalibur) with SENSITITVITY-CONTEMPLATION (gained by
the Virya) without any detriment to her femininity-masculinity in the purest traditional sense of the .word.
Hyperborean is that of the WISE WARRIOR-A in his vertical odal that transposes the limits of the form
(tirodal of the victory) BECAUSE IT CONTEMPLATES THE WEDDING OF THE ANTEPAST and THE
DOUBLE BEARS.


The emerging hyperborean woman


(In the photo, the Virgin of la VEGA de Haro, patron saint of agriculture in La Rioja, "A somewhat more modern
Ceres" dependent on the curia).

Ceres was the daughter of Saturn and Ops, wife and sister of Jupiter, mother of Proserpina and sister of Juno,
Vesta, Neptune and Pluto.


She taught men the art of cultivating the land, sowing, harvesting wheat and making bread, which led her to be
considered the goddess of agriculture. Her brother Jupiter, captivated by her beauty, begot Proserpina
(assimilated to Persephone in Greek mythology). Neptune also fell in love with her, and to escape from him
Ceres was transformed into a mare, but the god realized it and was transformed in turn into a horse, thus Ceres
was the mother of the horse Arion.


Ceres was also the patron saint of Enna (Sicily). According to legend, she prayed to Jupiter that Sicily be placed
in the heavens. The result, because the island is triangular in shape, was the constellation Triangulum, one of
whose ancient name was "Sicily".


She had twelve minor gods who assisted her and were in charge of specific aspects of agriculture: Vervactor,
who transforms the land into fallow; Reparator, who prepares it; Imporcitor (from Latin imporcare, 'to make
furrows'), who plows it into wide furrows; Insitor, who sows; Obarator, who plows the surface; Occator, who
scarifies it; Sarritor, who weeds it; Subruncinator, who clears it; Messor, who harvests; Conuector, who
transports the harvested; Conditor, who stores it; and Promitor, who distributes it.[1]


CULT: The inhabitants of Sicily, neighbors of the volcano Etna, annually commemorated the departure of Ceres
on her long journeys by running at night with lighted torches and shouting loudly. In Greece there were
numerous Demetrias, festivals of Demeter, the goddess equivalent to Ceres. The most curious were undoubtedly
those in which the followers of the goddess whipped each other with whips made of tree bark. Athens had two
solemn festivals in honor of Demeter: one called Eleusinia and the other, Thesmophoria . They were said to have
been instituted by Triptolemus . Pigs were sacrificed, because of the damage they caused to the fruits of the
earth, and libations of sweet wine were made. The Romans adopted Ceres in 496 B.C. during a devastating
famine, when the Sibylline Books advised the adoption of her Greek equivalent Demeter , along with Core
(Persephone) and Iacchus (possibly Dionysus ). Ceres was personified and honored by women with secret rituals
in the Ambarvalia festivals held in May with processions in which Roman women wore the white of the men,
who were mere spectators. It was believed that these festivals, to please the goddess, should not be celebrated by
people in mourning, which is why they were not celebrated in the year of the battle of Cannas. A temple to Ceres
was erected on the Aventine Hill in Rome. Its main festivity was the Cerealia or Ludi Ceriales (‘games of
Ceres'), instituted in the third century B.C. and celebrated annually from April 12 to 19. The cult of Ceres
became especially related to the plebeian classes, who dominated the grain trade. It is known


248


little of the rituals of this cult, being one of the few customs that were recorded the peculiar practice of tying
burning embers to the tails of foxes that were then released in the Circus Maximus.


In addition to the pig, the sow or the javelin, Ceres also admitted the ram as a sacrifice. In her festivities, the
garlands used were of myrtle or narcissus, but flowers were forbidden, because it was by gathering flowers that
Proserpina was abducted by Pluto. Only the poppy was consecrated to her, not only because it grows among the
wheat but also because Jupiter made her eat it to make her sleepy and thus give her some respite from her pain.
In Crete, Sicily, Lacedemonia and several other cities of the Peloponnesus the Eleusinian or mysteries of Ceres
were celebrated periodically, although those of Eleusis were the most famous. From here they passed to Rome,
where they survived until the reign of Theodosius. These mysteries were divided into large and small. The

The small ones were a preparation for the larger ones that were held near Athens, on the banks of the Ilius. They
conferred a kind of novitiate. After a certain period of time more or less long, the beginner was initiated to the
great mysteries, in the temple of Eleusis. The festivals of Eleusis lasted nine days, every year, in the month of
September, days in which the courts were closed. The Athenians had their children initiated into the Eleusinian
mysteries from the cradle. It was forbidden, even for women, to be driven to the temple by car or chariot. The
initiates were considered under the tutelage and protection of Ceres, so they were expected to have unbounded
happiness." Source: http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ceres (mitolog%C3%ADa)

Let us read in the magic novel: "..and "the fat", mixed with the ash, would form soap, the lye, which would wash
the symbolic stain of the "sin of Cain"; such "sin" is, naturally, to be a "farmer", sower of cereals, worshipper of
the Goddess Ama, or Ceres, or Demeter, or the Virgin of Agartha, the mother of Navutan, that is, the one who
gave the seed of wheat to men, the Seed of the Stone Child. The "mark of Cain" is, then, the Sign on the Hot
Stone, the Symbol of the Origin that causes the chaining of the eternal Spirit to Matter; that is why Cain, by
bearing this mark, can never die: he will be "immortal", as are all men who possess Spirit, although they ignore
it because they are "asleep".


Robert Graves, and Rabbi Raphael Patai, in the book "The Hebrew Myths", have extracted and synthesized the
Cain Myth from numerous Talmudic midrash. Here is one of the official Hebrew versions, which demonstrate
the luciferic spiritual character of Cain and the "created" nature of Abel: "Cain responded to God's rebuke with a
cry that blasphemers still repeat: -There is no Law and no Judge!". When shortly afterwards he found Abel in a
field, he said to him: -There is no future world, no reward for the righteous, no punishment for evildoers. This
world was not created with mercy, nor is it governed with compassion. For what other cause has your offering
been accepted and mine rejected? Abel answered simply: -Mine was accepted because I love Jehovah God;
yours was rejected because you hate him-. Then Cain decided to strike and kill

Abel".


It is interesting to learn more about the figure of Cain. According to the Bible, he was, in addition to being a
farmer, the first to build walled cities and the inventor of weights and measures. His descendant Tubal-Cain
(mythical unfolding of Cain himself) was a manufacturer of weapons and musical instruments." If this figure of
Cain is now observed, in the light of the Hyperborean Wisdom, it will be found that he possesses many of the
characteristic attributes of the Hyperborean lineages. First of all, the association of Agriculture with the
construction of walled cities is a very ancient Hyperborean strategic formula that was recently used, for
example, by the Etruscans and the Romans, and that has been expressed with perfection by the Germanic king
Henry I, the Birdcatcher. On the other hand, the invention of weights and measures, which the Hebrews
attribute to Cain, the Greeks to Hermes and the Romans to Mercury, makes it possible to identify Cain with
these two Hyperborean Gods. And finally: the accusation of murderer and the condition of manufacturer of
weapons, clearly reveals that the figure of Cain represents some fearsome warriors, the Men of Stone: to betray
or point out this quality clearly points to the denunciation of the famous mark." (Forty-sixth day)


Astrologically it is represented by a cross with an arc on its vertical axis or sickle, designating the labor or
artisan effort to be made to rise above matter, it is also related to the karmic aspects of Saturn. It is the largest
body in the asteroid belt, discovered on January 1, 1801 by Giuseppe Piazzi, being considered a dwarf planet.
Its essences as values in this personal collective unconscious of the XXI century would be: MOTHER-CHILD
RELATIONSHIP ( lineage)- NEED TO NURTURE AND HOW WE FILL -FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS-
NOUR RELATIONSHIP WITH AGRICULTURE- MENOPAUSE AND BREASTFEEDING-HOW WE
APPLY AND SATISFY-.IN THE MATURE WOMAN IS THE FEAR OF FACING THE SEPARATION
FROM THE CHILDREN AND WHAT SHE DOES IN GENERAL WITH THE FREE TIME GAINED-HOW
WE HELP- CONTRACEPTIVE METHODS- MENSTRUAL CYCLES-IDENTIFICATION WITH THE
HOMELAND-VEGETARIANISM AND VEGANISM (PHYSICALITY OF THE FOOD, NUTRITION IN
GENERAL)-INSTINCT OF


249


PERSONAL AND COMMUNITY CONSERVATION-WISDOM THAT IS BORN OUT OF THOUSANDS OF
TRIBULATIONS.


pd: dedicated to the circle Domini Canis Bolivia
Hod or mercury reverberation


Perception and the faculties of intelligence, communication, analysis, discrimination-differentiation, reasoning.
The action of the nerves, cunning, learning, calculation, orientation.

Its energy pattern isa VIBRATION-TREMOLO seeking its average tonic wave.

In a personal effort to give light to the shadow sphere, the virya must be able to increase his cultural structure in
order to be able to understand from the Minné all the networks of archetypes that constitute the perception of his
particular fenestra infernalis and thus reach a total contemplative state of essences and bijas (as codification),
symbols, links and cultural registers (with the psychic faculty of anamnesia).

n an ideal Gnosis, the two hemispheres unite the left hemisphere of reason with the dialectical subject that resigns
the language of the breath of the One and the other, the intuitive right hemisphere that opens towards the pure
Noologic.

Of course it is not a question of accumulating readings such as "best sellers", listening to music, watching
fashionable movies or those works that put the sense of the collective operating Culture entelequized towards a
goal... Nor is it about objectifying on ourselves certain archetypes ("intellectual", etc) admired by the

collective unconscious, but to reach a transcendent state towards the infinite BRIDGE...


The virya should pay attention to several references:


SYMBOL: in the sense of the school of depth psychology, without falling into reductionist dogmas about
perception.

ETHYMOLOGY: for the origins and formation of the language.

TOPONY MYM: the language located in a geographical

Valdplads. ONOMATICS: foundations of proper names.

HERALDIC: fundamentals of lineages.


Yesod or foundation of the Moon


visceral, emotional, ancestral, maternal-familial, nurturing, sleep and adaptability

The active fantasy, the developed lucid dream and the astral travel with "missions" within the demiurgic
concert... That is why it is called the "foundation" because it is from where the spiritual misdirection begins to
be built with full sense.


Its energy pattern is a PENDULAR SWINGING-REFLUX (like water)...Its four basic phases show this tensioned
dynamic

The base with which the quadrangularity of the shadow sphere moves (the instinctive snail design of the lower
chackras can be inscribed in it, like a spiral on an axial axis), affects to a greater or lesser degree the

geomagnetic, telluric and astral energies of Maya (through the energy channels "nadis" or acupuncture

channels).


1.New Moon: Renewal of forces by completion of the designs of the unfolded entelechies. Channels in neutral
state of movement, paralyzed.

2.Crescent Moon: This is where ongoing processes reach their greatest activity and power of initiative.

3.Full Moon: Produces an expansive dilation of these channels, it is the time of greater expression of the
unconscious forces...The mass is agitated, it becomes feverish...It tends to externalize the disorders of the
shadow more easily. It tends to increase sexual desire and aggressive impulses.

4. Waning Moon: Similar to the meaning of the waxing moon but with the greatest stopping power of the
processes.


The astrological reality of the LUNAR MANSIONS, the moon according to the position it follows in the sky
points to 28 groups of stars that symbolize 28 small archetypal constellations with effects on the unmanifested of
man (do SELBST IN jung in joining the moon of the unconscious with the SUN of the conscious I).


250


Coat of arms of the house of Tharsis


Fragment of the novel, twenty-fourth day:


"The King of Castile and Leon, Ferdinand III the Saint, reconquered Seville in 1248 but died there in 1252; his
son, Alfonso X the Wise, completed the campaign by conquering the Algarve and the towns of Niebla and
Huelva in 1258. The King gave this region as a dowry to his natural daughter Beatriz, who joined it to the
crown of Portugal when she married Alfonso III. As such annexation injured the ancient rights that the House of
Tharsis had over the region, the Crown of Portugal compensated the Knight Odielon de Tharsis Valter with the
title of "Count of Tarseval". In fact, in the Coat of Arms that Portugal gave to the House of Tharsis, there was
inscribed in chief the legend: "Con. Tars. et Val.", with which the title "Count of Tharsis and Valter" was
abbreviated; the later direct reading of the legend ended up joining the syllables of the abbreviation and forming
that word "Tarseval" that identified the House of Tharsis in the following centuries. The design of that coat of
arms was the product of an arduous negotiation between Odielon and the Portuguese Heralds, in which the new
Count imposed his point of view by appealing to the difference in language and a whimsical explanation of the
requested emblems.

Assuming that in the old Lucitania they no longer remembered anything about the House of Tharsis, they claimed
the engraving of many of the family symbols on the Coat of Arms: and they were

accepting, thus, the presence of the roosters as "representation of the Holy Spirit to right and left of the Arms of
Tharsis"; to the unicorn barbel, chimerical animal, as "the symbol of the Demon that surrounds the navel of the
House of Tharsis"; to the fortress in the navel as "equivalent to the old Property of the House of Tharsis"; to the
rivers Odiel and Tinto as "proper of the country and necessary to define the scene"; etc.And, finally, they
included the image of the Wise Sword "as an expression of the Lady, at that time the Virgin of the Grotto, to
whom the Knights of Tharsis were consecrated"; on the blade, the Heralds engraved the War Cry of the Lords
of Tharsis: "Honor et Mortis". The next King of Castile and Leon, Sancho IV, reintegrated the region of Huelva
to the Crown of Castile and installed D. Juan Mate de Luna as Lord, but assimilated the title and the Arms of
the House of Tharsis to that Kingdom. As we will see next, the County of Tarseval, victim of great mortality
years before, was then enfeoffed by a Catalan Knight, who had yielded rights of his flourishing Mediterranean
County in exchange for those distant Andalusian regions".


And...Fragment of the previous fifth day:

"It was then when they adopted the Unicorn Barbel as the symbol of the House of Tharsis. At first they
represented that mythical fish in their coats of arms or in primitive coats of arms, but in the Middle Ages, as will
be seen, it was heraldically incorporated into the family coat of arms. The barbel knight, barbus eques, is the
most common in the rivers of Spain, especially the Odiel that flowed a few meters from Tharsis; the fish is so
named because of four barbels that has in the lower jaw, which is very protruding. However, the barbel referred
to by the Lords of Tharsis was a fish with a frontal horn and five barbels. The myth that justified the symbol
affirmed that the barbel, moving along the Odiel River, was similar to the Soul passing through the transcendent
Time of Life: a representation of the animal man. But the descendants of the white Atlanteans were not like the
animal man, for they possessed an Uncreated Spirit chained in the created Soul: therefore the barbel did not
represent them concretely. Hence the addition of the spiral horn, which corresponded to the instrument used by
the Traitor Gods to enchain the Uncreated Spirit, i.e. the Key.


251


Kalachakra [it was the spiral of DNA, which also represents the Serpent or knowledge]. Naturally, the Uncreated
Spirit was unrepresentable, and that is why it was insinuated by leaving unfinished, in the representations of the
unicorn barbel, the tip of the horn: beyond the horn, at an infinite distance, was the Uncreated Spirit, absurdly
related to the Created Matter. And the beard of the barbel, of course, signified the inheritance of Navutan, the
number of Venus."


Comment a few more things about the symbols of the shield. The Pisces fish barbel as the demon of the
Omphalos (place of settlement of the first people of the blood pact) Tartessian of the house of Tharsis is
directly related to the era of Pisces and the Manu Vaivasnata the seventh of fourteen.


According to the Bhagavata Purana (8.24.13), the avatar Matsya ('fish' in Sanskrit) of Vishnu appeared to King
Manu (whose original name was Satyavrata, then king of Dravida) when he was washing his hands in a river.
The little fish asked him to save it, so the king put it inside his lota (copper vessel), the fish grew, and the king
had to put it in a puddle. It grew again and the king put it in a lake. It grew again and the king put it in the ocean.
Matsya told the king that a flood would come. The king built a big ship, where he housed his family and the
semen of all the animals to repopulate the Earth. He hooked the ship to the horn of the Matsya fish, which
dragged them through the flood.


This story is very similar to other stories of the global flood in Sumerian (pre-Hindu) mythology, both of which
preceded the biblical story of Noah's ark.
Source:http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manu_(Hinduism)


A Manu Dravidia (brown Atlanteans), a people that was conquered by the invasions of the European Indo-
Aryan blood...Vishnu the preserver has as Avatara the unicorn fish Matsya (Pre.symbol of the demon of
Tharsis) and the king Manu Vaisvanata -Satyavrata drives the ship with the species to preserve tied to the horn
of the fish, while the latter tells him the Matsya-Purana, the most ancient Purana text

between the fish of the Hindustani texts and that of the Tharsis lineage would lie in the fact that this one is of a
defined species, the 5 beards (Virility-Virya Venusian in the Mental-crown) and in the ringed form of the
infinite-numinous horn that insinuates the mystery of the enchainment and is also revealed in the hilt of the
WISE SWORD. In the background also appears the mountains of the western Sierra Morena (exactly in the
Sierra de Huelva), with several auriferous veins showing the legendary mineral wealth of the area and its
angular oppositional potential. The Balsamic moons, Eighth phase of the lunar cycle (analogy with Venus)
would show the Phontos men and the constellation-horizon of the Kaliyuga that in that nocturnal phase is the
point where the black Goddesses of Kaly have less power, although it subtracts also as it is understood, imperial
splendor in the limiting matter together with the burden of the decisions of the ancestors or the TRANSITION
towards the most absolute mental objectivity from the experience, a new way of distilling the whole cycle (just
imminent) past reorienting towards the responsibility of the future.

pact.


The symbol of the fish would agglutinate the sense of the unconscious SHADOW of the lineage of Tharsis, that
is to say the negative aspects of the Manu of the Age of Pisces since the distant disaster of Atlantis, the
pilgrimage and blood pact of the Atlantean white peoples and with the apogee of the birth of Christ (many point
here to the beginning of the Age of Pisces) .

fall, its translation would show: DECEIT-TRAIT-CONFUSION-MARTIRIO( remember the death of the

black fish and the Dorché) - VICTIMISM-DIFFUSED THOUGHT-ADDICTION-INCOSTANCE-
CRUELTY-VELEID WILL-SEDUCTION-EGREGOR FAGOCITANT-.DECEPTIVE PERCEPTUAL
EXPERIENCES OF THE PINEAL GLAND-MELANCHOLIA-DESPERATION-MISPLACEMENT-
PERINATAL AND INTER-NATIONAL PERIOD TRAUMA-CONSPIRATORIAL SECRECY-
DISTRACTION-CIVIL WARS-REPRESSED AGGRESSIVENESS-REPRESSIVE-LIBERTARIANISM E
INFIDELITYLet us not forget that the synarchy celebrates the FALL OF THE EMPIRE as the great milestone of
this era.

ROMANO, and in the features described we also find by timeless extension of our Minné the shadow of Rome.


Ilipa Magna and Moneda


252


7
;


llipa Magna


_


Antiqvac


Terr sie


Ilipa Magna was the last deep-water port of Hispalis and where in 207 BC a decisive battle took place against
Carthage and the legions of Cornelius Scipio in the Second Punic War (After this, Italica was founded as a
settlement for veterans and the wounded). It was a strategic point in the civil war between Caesar and
Pompey.... There was also a much earlier Tartessian-Turdetan settlement that controlled the mineral transport to
the Guadalquivir.


Given its importance the enclave came to mint its own coinage, (Photo of one of the first half of S.II ac) note
the reader where you can trace the first sketches of the symbol of the coat of arms of the house of Tharsis,
although in this case the fish instead of a unicorn barbel is a Sandalwood-Tarpon-Arencon (very appreciated
and of great physical power, other sources point to be a Tuna) and the moon keeps an incipient taurine-
prosperous potential to grow ...


The motif of the ear of corn is possibly the most abundant in the numismatics of the lower Roman Guadalquivir
in a period that spans several centuries.
The current name of Ilipa Magna is Alcala del Rio (province of Seville). Kings


of Rome


The history of Romulus and Remus (in the absence of investigating with all possible faculties) has its basis in
the LINEAGE OF THE FOUNDERS OF TROY and in the primordial Aryan siddhas, they carried the blood of
these (basically DORIA) and reinforced by the incident of RHEA SILVIA (daughter of the dethroned king
Numitor, forced by this to belong to the Vestal cult) that is fertilized while sleeping next to a river by MARS,
both being the parents of ROMULUS AND REMUS...This would renew since ENEAS (son of AFRODITA
VENUS- FREYA goddess and ANCHISES), the blood with the direct divine contact... Sometimes matrilineal,
sometimes patrilineal depending on the greater or lesser opposition to the intensity of the KALIYUGA...The
she-wolf LUPERCALIA suckled the twins is the pure expression of the warrior power and its transmitted
force...The legend also tells that Luperco could have been a faun (the feeric creatures usually refer us to the
demiurgic hierarchies) that was transformed into the Capitoline she-wolf in the posteriority...


Zeus Electra Teucro /Dardano Batia/stioque Erictonio Ilo/Tros Calirroe/Ilo Asaraco Ganimedes
Cleopatra/Laomedonte Temiste Capis/Priamo Hécuba Anquises Afrodita Latino/Cretsa Aeneas Lavinia/Ascanio
Silvio/Silvio Aeneas Silvio/Bruto de Troya Latino

Silvio/Alba/Atis/Capis/Capetus/Tiberinus/Agrippa/Romulus Silvius/Aventinus/Procas/Numitor Amulius/Rea Silvia
Mars/Hersilia Romulus Remus


The death of Remus at the hands of Romulus in the incident of the hyperborean plow or Pomerium(1) seems to
confirm the archetype of the Double, typical of the genesis of the cosmogonic concepts, one of the two brothers
concentrates all the Shadow of the lineage and is killed by the other for the correct concretion or realization of
a FOUNDATIONAL MYTH (in this case Remus seemed to want to designate ETRUSCAN ancient proto-
Mediterranean matrices, as opposed to the revealed and overwhelming novelty of ROMULUS, what is clear is
that they did not agree with the auguric design they witnessed).


pd :Other legends see as precursor of the history to Julo, son of Aeneas (who founded Lavinio, Lavinia was his
wife of which he was widowed) founding Alba Longa to the south of the Tiber (two cities before Rome and
close), of the 12 kings of the first Rhea (the mother of Romulus and Remus) would be the queen of the last of
them, Numitor, cruelly overthrown by his brother Amulio (which would overthrow Romulus as a colophon).It
is this one that launches the


203


... After the incident, they would be taken in the roots of a fig tree, where the she-wolf finds them and nurses
them in a cave on Mount Palatine until they are found by the chief shepherd of King Faustulus, who left them
in the hands of Larentia, his wife, for their education....Some sources point out that it could be this prostitute
also meaning that would add to that of the LUPA (she-wolf) as possible review that suggests here, the twins as
Sons of Kaly...


Pomerium and odal


From the beginning of the second day of the magic novel:

"The magical enclosure of the fields, and the layout of the walled cities, was to be carried out in the earth by
means of a stone plow that the white Atlanteans bequeathed to the native peoples for that purpose: it was a
lithic instrument designed and built by them, which they never had to get rid of and which they would only use
to found the agricultural and urban sectors in the occupied land".


Pomerium was the name given to this enclosure from Rome, traced by the pontiffs and surveyors after the
precise rites with the plow...Within it there were strict laws and could not be established cults to other gods that
were not the patrons of the enclave, with the exception of Venus and the Magna Mater (I will talk about the
struggle of what means the SAKTI-kALI covered here)...Its limits would be shaped by the arrangement of
certain stones called CIPPI.


Romulus would be the one who created the pomerium of Rome to enclose the 7 hills and their 7 rays.
The emerging memory of Turdetania


The Wisdom of the Crystal Books of Agartha states: "The White Atlanteans after the sinking of Atlantis begin a
voyage of conquests, a group penetrates in America and develops their strategies, others enter Europe through the
door of Hercules, which was located in the Iberian Peninsula and enter into contact with the Iberian peoples,
finding in the Tartessos a loyal and spiritual people with whom they sign the first Blood Pact. The Tartessians are
instructed by the White Atlanteans in the mystery of the Tongue of the Birds and in the secret of the Living Stone
(megalithic art). Inheritors of the Atlantean mysteries of the

Tartessos are the Turdetans, they were instructed in the secret of the language of the Birds. But the Turdetans

did not receive the secret of the Living Stone because this mystery was mastered by the White Atlanteans and

the Tartessians, and once it fulfilled its operational mission which allowed the development of megalithic
strategies throughout Europe, its science was "lost" with the disappearance of the Tartessians. The White
Atlanteans after the Blood Pact with the Tartessians march describing two journeys, one expedition goes to the
north of Europe and signs the Blood Pact with the Nordic peoples, heirs of the Cro-Magnon, who receive the
mission of guarding the door of Thule to Agartha, these races fulfill their mission and are awaiting their action

in the history that is inscribed in the IV century with the "barbarian" invasions, who come to the rescue of the
Romans after the empire falls into the hands of the Christian priests. The second group of White Atlanteans
continued their strategic journey through the Mediterranean, sealing Blood Pacts with different peoples, the
Ligurians, the Etruscans and finally the Greeks are added to the strategies of the White Atlanteans, receiving the
cultures of these peoples the influence of the warriors of Atlantis. The White Atlanteans, after fulfilling their
mission by signing their blood pacts with the peoples of Europe, left and returned to Agartha through the Boreal
Gate or Thule Gate, their heirs would pay honors by resisting the attacks of the Semitic peoples guided by the
Golen priests. Thanks to the White treason of the Celtic peoples (the Celts are the first people or race of the
White treason), in the Bronze Age they invade all Europe guided by the DRUID PRIESTS, conquer the peoples
of the blood pact, and destroy the Gnostic ways and their Hyperborean sciences.


It is therefore important to understand that this first action of war against the Dark Atlanteans and their peoples
of the Cultural Pact takes place after the collapse of Atlantis, (between 6000 or 5000 years before Christ) and
was inscribed in the mystery of the House of Tharsis. The second action of war is triggered by the return of the
Siddhas of Agartha at the beginning of the Iron Age with the descent into the world of the demiurge of the
Hyperborean races, who carried on their banners and emblems the SIGN OF ORIGIN AND THE THREE
INCREATED RUNES. This second action of war ALLOWS TO DEFINITIVELY UNLEASH THE
ESSENTIAL WAR IN THE CREATED ONE. Combat that has not yet concluded and that is still being fought
on all war fronts, and the Hyperborean Virya must understand that today, as yesterday, he is the main actor,
and that VICTORY depends on his will and courage.


254


We will give a small review of these first two peoples who received the direct influence of the White
Atlanteans. The Tartessos of the Latin language "Tartessus" was the name by which the Greeks knew the first
civilization of the West allied and heir of the WHITE ATALTANS. Heir to the megalithic culture of the Iberian
southwest, it supposedly developed in the triangle formed by the current provinces of Huelva, Seville and
Cadiz, on the southwest coast of the Iberian Peninsula. Its axis was the river Tartessos, which the Romans later
called Betis (formerly "Oleum flumen" = river of olive oil) and the Arabs called Guadalquivir (meaning large
river). However, nothing is certain and several authors try to place the Tartessos river in the mouths of the Odiel
and the Tinto (Huelva estuary), in the Mar Menor, in the mouths of the Guadiana or in the Tagus itself. In 2001,
the old Castellar river that passes through Castellar (Jaén) was named Tartessos river. The Tartessians
developed a language and writing different from that of the neighboring peoples and had cultural influences of
the White Atlanteans who taught and instructed in the Language of the Birds and the secret of the Living Stone
to this people. Tartessos had had a great Greek influence, which supposedly led to the disappearance of its
monarchy at the hands of the Phoenopunics as revenge for their support of the Phocians after the Battle of
Alalia in the 6th century B.C. From this disappearance arose a new civilization, descendant of Tartessos, the
Turdetans, who adapted to the new geopolitical conditions of their time. The Turdetans are inbred of the
Tartessos and receive all their cultural influence, keeping their mysteries until the Phoenician Carthaginian
invasions who, guided by the Atlantean Morenos, destroy these two civilizations.


Having lost the commercial and cultural link that Tartessos had with the Greeks (the Pelasgian Greeks had a
link with the Tartessos because both races were part of the Blood Pact and assisted each other in this strategic
action), the Turdetania was immersed in the Carthaginian influence, although it developed its own evolution of
the previous culture, so that the Turdetan population knew itself to be descendants of the ancient Tartessians,
and at the arrival of the Romans, it still maintained its own signs of identity. Rome avenges in the Punic wars
these two civilizations heirs of the White Atlanteans and takes the initiatory mysteries of the Tartessians and the
Turdetans, especially the mystery of the LANGUAGE OF THE BIRDS and their alphabet, the Latin alphabet
participates in it. Imperial Rome is the heir in time of all these Hyperborean kabalas and is perhaps the people
who did the most in history to defend the mystery of the Tongue of the BIRDS, the secret of the Carved Stone
and the art of forging Weapons of War. "


(Excerpt "From the Crystal Books of Agartha THE MYSTERY OF THE HOUSE OF TURDES". Gustavo
Brondino)


255


"Victor" (Victory or victorious shield) is the name of the unique symbol used by General Francisco Franco
during his mandate, since November 1, 1936, when he was appointed Generalissimo. There are two opposing
theories about its origins:


1 Derived from the Crismons (almost at the end of the Empire) and the Roman shields, it would later appear to
designate the doctors of the University of Salamanca from the XIV century and of Alcala de Henares later on.


That it was the talisman devised by a BLACK MAGICIAN of Tangier called CORINTIO HAZA to provide
success and protection, apparently he was a seer and healer who had a lot of weight in the Franco regime
occupying the


256


archetypal position of "advisor" not recognized in this case... This guy would also have had a lot of influence on
Charles de Gaulle and other military personalities of the time.


What is true, and what no author writing on the subject has noticed, is that there are many different types of
"Victor" with very important differences in their rubrical traits (they are included in only one type, gnostic
blindness)...

The precise case of the one that concerns us here is very peculiar, it presents a central V, the right angle of the
opposition in the matter and the 5 in the mental plane, in which a TAU, pole of the cold fire of the hyperboreans,
is clearly DEGRADED because it is connected in its center by a circle with an internalized stroke, it is the SUN
with logoic matter of Sanat Kumara, the one intercepted by the Kalachackra designs and that blocks like a
colossal obstacle?In the lateral strokes of the V on the left is a C, the waning moon almost balsamic (reminiscent
of the coat of arms of Tharsis) and on the right the main strokes of the astrological symbol of Saturn-Crone:
Both Francisco Franco and Philip II were ruled by this in their respective mandates. It is clear that the weakened
moon and Saturn-judge together with the Solar designs hindering the spiritual flowering were the severe ruling
arcana of the four decades of Franco's regime... These could mean in essence: AUSTERITY-SUBMITTANCE
TO THE

ECCLESIASTIC POWER-DUELO, TERRIBLE KARMIC EMOTIONAL PAIN (the result of war)
(confronting the same blood) -PRIVATIONS -CONSCIOUSNESS OF UNION (homeland) -PENURIES -
DEVELOPMENT

IN THE MATERIAL-SEVERITY-IMPOTENCE-ISOLATION.


Madrid Coat of Arms: The bear and the strawberry tree...Community Flag


It would not be bear as it is said since the symbol directs directly to the constellation of the MAJOR BEAR
AND ITS SEVEN STARS, nor strawberry tree since this is the fruit of the strawberry tree name of a very
characteristic tree of the Mediterranean mountain and that conserves here clear stamp in common with the tree
of the life of the kabalah, and the 10 fruits or sephiroth. The major bear MATER consists of 19 stars, only 7 are
well visible from the earth (they constitute the famous Chariot), of them the two brighter ones point (Merak
alpha and Dubhe beta) to POLARIS, the polar star or star of the North of the minor bear, yellow supergiant that
must be looked at to orient us towards the north in the night from this hemisphere.


The constellation of the greater bear would transmit the 7 rays (see the "Trinidad oppositorum" entry) in
relation to the radiating topography of the Sierra de Guadarrama (central system) towards the whole peninsula.
The crown, harness and volutes are symbols of monarchy.


In the flag of Madrid the 7 stars are repeated on a crimson background (inherited from the banner of Castile,
the council of Madrid was born in the Reconquest).


The sacred Callao of Madrid


Here you can see the oldest coat of arms of Madrid dating from the 12th century. A Callao or flint stone half
submerged in water, flanked by two intertwined links that cause sparks of friction and seem to suggest by pure
pareidolia two dragons (basal chaining) carrying in their jaws a blue band (laurels) with a Latin inscription: "Sic
gloria labore", that is the glory is achieved by work (both material and spiritual).Madrid by its geographical
location is the geomantic center of the entire peninsula between the two plateaus, heart chackra and motor plexus
of the Iberian volitional-economic energies.

These inscriptions were accompanied by a legend in Spanish that read: "Fui sobre agua edificada, mis


257


walls of fire are, this is my insignia and coat of arms". Several places seem to dispute the possible original
lithic location, all coincide with the abundance of subway water or confluence of watercourses. If it denotes a
cult to the goddess this one does not belong to the cast of later "KALYS" (black goddesses of the iron age).
Aryan mysteries of the foundational rune stone and the pontificates, seat of the spirit. Fire and water
crystallized as rune (ice) of the transdimensional passage, the stone of the ray-SIEG, the METEORITE-
AEROLITE that falls to fertilize: Greek omphalos. LITHO-fanic.


Spanish deck of cards and objects of the epic chivalric cycle


This entry is for the internal understanding of the virya. We will not write more or delve into the meaning of
CARTOMANT. 4 are the ASES (aesir) of the Spanish deck:


1. SWORDS-warriors.Fire 2.SPADES-servants.Earth 3.CUPS-priests. Water 4. Air
4 objects of power, 4 ATAVISMES and ARCANIC SYMBOLS diffused in the MINNE: Wise Sword, Staff of
Command, Stone of Venus and Vessel (graal).


Malkuth or Earth kingdom


The expression of substance. The maximum density of the entelechies deployed for a specific time. It is the
realm, because it is the conditioned "now" (the higher one ascends the tree, the greater the possibility of
disengaging in the creation of one's own time with the power of runic opposition).

It is where Karma is so dense that only suffering is experienced, with an impossibility of being able to see an
inner orientation being achieved because of the cause-effect unfolded.

The astrological ascendant.


Its energy pattern has no recognizable symmetrical shape and is DYSPHORMIC.
Its energy pattern has no recognizable symmetrical shape is AMORPHIC until it begins to form a definite
SPIRAL; the contact with its center is not able to show any oblique geometric figure and with the appearance of


Y \


( Se recomienda al VIRYA lector de este texto no observar por mucho tiempo esta imagen por motivos obvios
Logics of autosuggestion).


Here we would be at the point where most of humanity is (it is the sense of growth in childhood and
adolescence and especially in the pasues, since it is the immersion in the symbiotic "magic time"), where the
entelechies carry their purpose with greater force and there is greater submission to the sign of spiral pain:
karma shows its maximum virulence action-reaction. Perception is chained in the physicality of the organism in
an undifferentiated manner, subjected to the grossest of Manichean Good-Evil dualities (stimulus-response
inherited from the incarnational mineral-animal and plant kingdoms) as opinion, and the expression of behavior
through the shadow.


The shadow would be all that negative, repressed, unconscious, traumatic and unbalanced part of the psychic
constitution. it has a quadrangular shape and is shaped by the prototypical geometry of the yantras (which
demarcate milestones or constitutive milestones between the evolutionary stages of the plan of the one) that lead
to the resolution of the specific states of consciousness for the usefulness of the individual in the planes of
Maya. it is quadrangular and its presence in the WEST can be studied from the theory of the four humors of


258


Hippocrates: sanguine, choleric, phlegmatic and melancholic, in which each predominance of the elements in our
particular disposition would show a deficiency in dealing with the world. It would have two divisions:


-Personal shadow: Ontogenetic, shaped by the personal journey through the psychic constitution of the current
incarnation as well as by the recorded memory of other incarnations (although it is not normal for these
recordings to emerge if there is not a more or less intentional operation of the chakra system). The support of a
real oppositional hyperborean system can trigger in the virya a psychosomatization of certain complexes
leading to the partial destruction of his microcosm.


-Phylogenetic: with atavisms of the animal species that constitute in the past of evolution the human mineral,
vegetable and especially animal subject, which are activated in the physical morphogenetic features of the
initiates who are updating the matrices of certain initiatory myths.


-Collective shadow: shaped by the action of the psychosphere (collective unconscious), geochrony of a region.
The fractal of time, lineage karma and emergent programmings proper to the fractal of time inhabited in the
comprehensive present.


Table of constitutional quadrangularity, according to astrology and Jung, (main attribution to Galen, 2nd
century AD).

Air-Blood-Blood-Blood-Blood-Blood-PENSITIVE: understanding comes using the

rational mind. Earth-Black-Bilis-Melancholic-SENSITIVE: understanding comes using

the senses. Fire-Yellow-Bilis-Coleric-INTUITIVE: understanding comes using intuition.
Water-Phlegm-Phlegmatic-SENTIMENTALS: understanding comes through feelings.


(((Jung (1994) determined that human beings are distinguished into extraverts or introverts according to their
attitude towards the outside world and the inner world, which establishes the general type of disposition of the
person. Extraverts have the center of their personality slightly displaced towards the consciousness, their psychic
energy is mainly oriented towards the external world, seeking a greater adaptation to the environment and they
are people who easily communicate to others the difficulties they encounter. On the contrary, introverts have the
center of their personality slightly displaced towards the unconscious,

are people who feel great attraction to their inner world, which leads them to withdraw energy from the outside
world, that is, to abstract from the environment.


Once the attitude preference - Extraversion or Introversion - has been determined, the preferences can be
identified between the poles of the functions of perception of reality and of the decision criteria. Jung (1937),
when speaking of function, referred to "a certain psychic activity which in different circumstances remains, in
principle, invariable; and energetically, it corresponds to a norm of appearance of the libido".

Malkuth is also related to the INSTINCTS, REFLECTS and the unrecorded Memory of physical events.


Hyperborean resignatory task: Being blocked or limited with no way out, it constellates the archetype HADES-
inferno. This shephirot is thus showing how the INVERSION OF THE SYMBOLS IS EXECUTED FROM
THE MOST SUBTLE PLANES (ANCHOR OF TAU) and is also the realm of the qliphot or tree of death with
all its toxic, demonological and entropic viral power.


259


About SYN-ARKHE


It was the grandfather of Pericles (the main Athenian governor of the classical era), Clistenes in 510 BC who
introduced the changes in the Greek system of government for the birth of the synarchy...It would grant a
radical change to the onomastics of the Hellenic country since the traditional concept of power fell on the
GENOS (clan, lineage, i.e. on the blood) of the tribal descendants of the Doric and Ionian tribes that settled
during the so-called "Dark Ages" in the territory (the alleged lack of historical sources is the

The reason for calling this period between the end of the Mycenaean world and the archaic age). ......... For
Clistenes would be the DEMOS ("people") who had to gain participation before the tribal chiefs for it
reformed the Pythagorean constitution and looked for the ANAMEIXIS ( mixture of all the population)
granting rights of soil and birth to all, including slaves metecos and foreigners, against a concept as important
as HETAIROI (the chivalrous brotherhood of blood that grants the fact of fighting together, the ancient
HONORIFIC bonds of the blood pact, name that later on the elite cavalry of ALEXANDER THE GREAT) He
was by birth an Alkmeonid: from Ancient Greek / Alkmaionidai , is one of the eupatric families (PRIESTS) of
Athens claimed to be native Athenians and descendants of Neleus son of Poseidon mythical king of Pylos, and
Tyre, and claimed to have been expelled from his kingdom by the Dorids. Isagoras was the political rival of
Clystenes, concerned about maintaining the ancient order and with relations of XENIA (aristocratic
collaboration) with the SPARTAN king Cleomenes I to whom he asked for help to maintain in the PATHRIA
the structure of powet ..........:cceee

expelled from the city. Those who supported Clisthenes offered resistance and trapped Isagoras and
Cleomenes in the Acropolis for two days. On the third day they made a truce, allowed them to escape, but
executed hundreds of Isagoras' supporters. Clistenes when returning to the city would become an archon (he
was already prostates defender of foreigners and hegemon) thus being born the concept of SYNAKHENi to
say that the

hyperborean gnosis would continue with all its development and essential battle in Greece, but here we already
notice a first important collapse of the IRON AGE...

"Arkhe" ("principle", "origin", "source", "primordial substance") together with "physis" (natural manifestation)
are two of the key concepts of the metaphysics of the PRESOCRATIC philosophers, the former being a special
key to understand the whole history of thought and esotericism of the Mediterranean world (from proportion
and symmetry to the Orphic or proto-Atlantean Kabbalah),

with, at the same time" to mean that it is the form of government closest to justice and balance (karmic laws,
plan of the one) although as a paradox it can also be interpreted as UNIFORMITY, that is to say, "loss of
excellence" "of the original" In Spanish the preposition "sin" is pure negation.


Greek columns and stone opposition


Consider that the Greek Doric temples were the first manifestation of sacred hyperborean architecture, being the
heirs of the MEGARHON or great Mycenaean hall, a building used for assemblies, banquets, war councils or
songs of the rhapsods and 0.0... ec eeeeesceeeneeeeceeceeeeeesecaeeeeeeeaeeeeeres aedos.

which seeks verticality and sphericity in its energy sphere. Every Greek column consists of 3 basic parts:
capital, shaft and base, which also show the analogy of the upper, middle and lower part of the human body. In
them we can appreciate the underlying tension of the myths of the periods in which each representative style
was born:


1 Doric: About VII b.C........ E. The simplest and most forceful with a capital of singular aspect. presents the
The external shape of a lenticular anchor. Its Greek name, "sea urchin" (its shape was reminiscent of the empty
skeleton of this animal), and therefore had, like this type of anchor, a central hole. It appears in éntasis (also
seen in the rest of the styles) in the shaft which is the reflection of Tau, the Vril and the chest swollen by the
vital tension of combat. A virtuous attitude for the so-called descent of the Heraclides. The non-existence of the
basa shows the unwillingness to settle in the matter... Some authors also point out the existence of a collar in
some constructions between the part of union of the shaft and the capital: a symbol of the laureate victory.


2. Ionic: Its main difference is the capital that appears divided by the spiral volutes of the rings of Python -
serpent that signs the egg of the world and that later Apollo would face. There are authors who see in this style
a derivative of the Aeolian (by "mechanical crushing" of the form) in this style appears crowning appears a
palmette, VENUS refulgent, between the

sthsboenusess The abacus (upper part of the capital) may show resemblance with the shields of the hoplites.


260


3. Corinthian:The capital appears topped by two crowns with 8 acanthus leaves...It gives a variegated and
floral aspect, announcing that the magna mater would soon dominate the wills of the warriors..Coribantes...
"Cor" - heart....


Thus we have that in the Doric the sphere erhe would be isolated in a runic way: spikes tyr of the hedgehog
arquémona in the fall, in the Ionic it would fall lost of the traps of the path elix-snail by the cultural serpent,
although the hero of that time can return to create his path by the imposition of the will and in Corinthian only
the archetypal fruits of the tree of life remain in this inverted Valplads: explosion of the uncontrolled egg. There
is also a Tuscan and composite style Pd: "the astral and psychic energies vary according to a law of evolution
contained in the DESIGN OF THE SNAIL, the vital macro and microcosmic energies do so according to laws
contained in the DESIGN OF THE SERPENT" (see them fd, volume II).


Crystals or the use of the mineral kingdom


Excerpt from the book "Quartz Crystals" by Sally Barbosa (read with the predisposition free of any New Age
influence).


"Crystals are carriers of great energy and can serve a human being all his or her life. There are different categories


of crystals, among them:


1. Power Crystals: These are of the first order and relatively few in number. They are true swords of Light
that cut through apparent darkness 5. quickly and efficiently initiating changes in the conscious alertness of
many.


2. Devic crystals: They are used by the devas or nature spirits as a dwelling or base and it is best to let this be
so as not to break the existing interdimensional balance.


3. Synchronizing crystals: They serve to synchronize specific vibratory frequencies in the process of
meditation and lead the wearer to flow in harmony with higher vibratory frequencies.


4. Energetic crystals: They are programmed to receive high intensities of interdimensional energies.
5. Healing crystals: These evoke a response of harmony and balance and the human being who uses it to heal
himself and heal others receives the message, giving healing as a response to the stimulus. It dissolves


energetic congestion and imbalance, absorbing and reactivating its innate total perfection.


6. Battery crystals: They attract, store and periodically emanate energies. They are used cyclically by letting
them charge to be used when they are ready and so on.


7. Archetypal crystals: They store messages or codes that are received by specific individuals in certain periods
of history, revealing higher knowledge when activated.


8. Library crystals: They are similar to the archetypal crystals but receive and store more information.
9. Transmitting crystals: They transmit light with clarity and integrity; they are excellent for sending light from
one place to another.


10. Vision crystals: Enlarge and clarify the internal vision or third eye.


11. Musical crystals: They are very effective as agents of attunement with the higher planes of knowledge and
as agents of sanction.


12. Surgical crystals: Used in psychic surgery and for very precise alterations in the energetic pattern


of the aura. The use of the laser beam is closely related to surgery.
of the LIGHT."


OPPOSITION RUNIC


261


HAGAL + TIRODAL DE LA VICTORIA + GUIBUR


This symbol (chained runes) gathers all the secret of the chaining to the tree and how to emulate the triumphal
liberation feat of Odin-Wotan-Navutan until the appearance of the symbol of the origin... The introductory
semantic expression of how to achieve this feat appears described in the praxis of the HYPERBorean YOGA
revealed by the siddhas of Agartha in this Kairos of Victory (see the book "THE HYPERBORNE YOGA" by
Gustavo Brondino). IMPORTANT: the kabalah tree in the sleeping pasu and virya fits the geometrical and
chakric disposition of the human body, not so in the initiated viryas.


The various resdes of theosophical knowledge and derivatives indicate that man has

possesses SEVEN potential BODIES (the entelechied perfection which has as its mold the ideal Manu)
(1)

The Physical or Sthula Sharira The Etheric, Linga

Sharira The Astral, Kamas (principle of desire)

the Mental or lower Manas,

the Causal, Arupic or higher Manas,

the Buddhic or intuitive, the Atmic.


These 7 bodies are not possessed until the priestly initiate in his covenanted evolution alchemizes them and is
energized in ritual ceremonies where he operates on the energy of his templates allowing him to work in the
dimensions of Maya...There are new age texts that affirm that all the population possesses them (even if some
can "drag them" from other incarnations) which is a gross farce more for the purpose of EQUALITARISTS
and appeasers.


The hyperborean initiate does not have them (only if the specific strategy requires it, he can have them but they


are not brought to the Mant perfection described in the previous descriptions) and WALKS towards the Gnostic
Reversion in VRAJA matter or to free himself in the form of a spirit sphere a


262


once disembodied thanks to the help of his eternal comrades.


(1) The subtle mold or Manu template is also related to the appearance-fall of races subject to the spiral turns
of the MACROCOSMIC KUNDALINI and its time scales (in years, in the following box) 360 days (and
more) make 1

Krita Yuga has 1,728,000 Treta

Yuga has 1,296,000 Dvapara

Yuga has 864,000 Kali Yuga

has 432,000

Maha Yuga, or the four preceding ones, has 4,320,000

71 Maha Yugas, form the reign of one Manu, or 306,720,000 14

Manus is 4,294,080,000

Add the dawns and twilights between Manus 25,920,000 These 14 reigns with their dawns and twilights add up
to 1,000 Maha Yugas or one Kalpa or Day of Brahma 4,320,000,000,000

Brahma's night is equal to his Day and such a

Day and such a Night add together

360 of these Days constitute the year of Brahma

100 of these Years constitute the year of Brahma.

a Life of Brahma

311,040,000,000,000,000,

000

8,640,000,000

3,110,400,000,000


Geometric pontoon


Pontonic: "Action of uniting the contemplative unintelligible with the gnostic praxis".
In the figure above we can define the following geometric axioms:


I.Line (continuous trace): means any state of consciousness maintained and averaged in terms of its base energy
quantum. Everything outside of the Continuous Stroke is demiurgic plane. It is the attainment of runic ecstasy.


2. Angle: Zone of maximum intensity and consequent suffering of opposition for the virya in the
enchainment. The right angle or edge indicates the "kairotic" power (if I may use the expression) of a
conscious state and its initiatic proximity.


3. Intersections (internal hagal runes can be traced on them): indicate a zone of ACTIVE PARADOX, linked
in this case to the interaction between the external and internal labyrinth, between the ELIX and
LABRELIX path, BETWEEN THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE COLLECTIVE.


4. Angular confrontation: Two edges faced by discontinuous strokes show the place where the SUBRUNE
CRISIS occurs.


Every alchemical state of Nigredo would be composed of a subruna crisis (1) of greater or lesser intensity,
understood as a lack of will or power not to be phagocytized by the constellated archetypal emergence.


(1) They are substantially staggered in each HYPERBORIC INITIATION and PARADOXICALLY in each
perceptual moment (on a smaller dramatic scale) in which the virya is chained to this spatio-temporal dimension.


This state presents a phenomenology analogous to that of the perinatal matrices, i.e. the experiences that we keep
from our physical birth (physicality of the spiritual chaining) and are recorded in the different layers of the deep
unconscious and would present 4 phases:


1. Amnesia where the virya who does not maintain his metaphysical fence is pushed to experience

possession by the archontic symbol that shows the greatest angular emergence with EXCENTRIC force

ON HIS ARCHEMONA, thus leaving the virya experiencing playful or sacred realities, as appropriate.

This point evokes the need for dependence and fusion with the amniotic fluid and the moments lived inside the
Mother.


263


2. Dispersion: where the ludic or sacral action weakens the energy of the virya by unsynchronization of its
biorhythms and energetic asymmetry with respect to the TAU center. Where the contractions begin in the
birth canal.


3. Death: the virya experiences the greatest possible evil karma (power of the symbol of pain), but he
understands what is happening and suffers for it a time proportional to the forgetfulness of himself and the
damage caused to his physical substance. Abbreaction of the unconscious. Childbirth.


4, Rebirth: where the virya recovers his verticality and cuts "the umbilical cord" of possession: possible
samskaras will be repeated in periods of harmonic times outside of what is considered as opportunities of
Kairos and that can even manifest damages and chronic diseases... He can face again the valdplads with less or
more luciferic grace according to the magnitude of the mess he made both on himself and in the projection to
the exterior... Exit to the light.


The awakened virya is always in full internal combat with the 3 NORNAS-MOIRAS-PARCAS of the
source of knowledge or roots of the ash tree YGGDRASILL, URDHR, destiny or the
sviesVohousicesteedsisninsssdsetegsceusbbendeaenispiedseaeds bseveatavensideuscnrastsvepéeedsasvasiedecsinnstenuaeosnctsuessasasousatiaetsoemescenives pastVERDAN


present and SKULD , FUTURE or what shall ......... beThey water the tree of knowledge.
As already mentioned Saturn is the symbol of the nigredo, and each SUBRUNA crisis is a REPEATED minor
octave of the general nigredo of one of the 3 initiations.


Saturn located astrologically in each of the four elements (Air, Water, Fire, Earth) shows which is the tendon of
alchilles of the virya, that is to say which is going to be in real time the negative resistance of the archetypes of
the transcendent time of the demiurge operating on his microcosm both at personal and collective levels,

Satur in:


Air signs : You suffer from a total mental disintegration, which prevents you from thinking coherently and
assimilating new knowledge correctly. Memory fails. It is difficult to create a consistent logic on which to lay
the foundations of the psyche. It counts the future as a concern.


Water Signs: Here it is the untamed libido as a sexual force that produces a breakdown of the vital forces. As
such it can bring many problems in relationships with third parties. The past often brings its negative imprint,
feelings are not clear. IF THE VIRYA IS EROTICIZED IN HIS LIFE JOURNEY, IT ONLY REMAINS FOR
HIM TO COLLECT THE PRODUCT THANATOS.


Fire Signs: Emotionality is negative. There is a total lack of control of the soul. The intuitive-atemporal
produces confusion.


Earth signs: the virya must question how to act and what to avoid or not. They tend to "freeze" the action or
endowed with a rhythm that seems to be out of control or does not respond to expectations. It is the present that
worries.


Initiation and alchemical parallelism


The runic ecstasy is a "short-circuit" of the personal energy that is conditioned by the flow of the demiurge's
breath. It is the first step to begin to recover the normality of the erhe sphere, the experience of the symbol of
the originOn ........... the other hand, the coming and going towards the uncreated noological rune happens under
an ideal effect.

cumulative reinforcement called enthesis.

In order to discern the meaning of these two words, let us first look at their cultural meanings in the Royal
Dictionary of the Academy of the Spanish Language:


1. ecstasy:.

a.m. State of the soul entirely seized by a feeling of admiration, joy, etc.

b. m. Rel. A state of the soul characterized by a certain mystical union with God through contemplation and
love, and by the suspension of the exercise of the senses.


2. entasis:
a. f. Arq. the most bulky part of the shaft of some columns.


Let's arrange the trident for the word "ecstasy" and we see that it only presents the playful poles: (a) perfect


264


(b) the fusion with the one god; Elaborated trap is the cultural discourse of those institutions that make up the
macro-structural sense of our contemporary history. Also in these degraded meanings we should consider the
evocations of a lesser nature, the choice in the pulsions of the senses stripped of any metaphysical abstraction or
referring to abstract concepts such as beauty. Let us now try to sketch a hyperborean luciferic meaning for the
one who goes through the labyrinth:


1. Ecstasy: Frontier-trait of the limiting rune or maximum energy processable by the nervous system in a state
of consciousness proper to a level of DNA transduction...Its source is the noological infinite...Its paradox lies
in that the evocative repetition of its state is a loss of real energy but produces in the subject the pleasurable
sensation of being alive or what is the same a hidden representative form of the head aspect of the love of the
demiurge on himself (see a and b above).

There can be non-pleasurable ecstasies as hedonic sense (obviating several pathologies), here the symbol of
pain would grant the access to evolutionary entelechial formal contents through the concept of sacrifice...
Ecstasy as incontinence can produce the loss of the symbol of origin.


As for the word éntasis, it appears in the dictionary quite devoid of cultural contamination. It is clear that it is
strange and distant for a society configured for the past and lost viryas, where the incipient proximity of death
provokes a dialectic of energetic suicide-sacrifice, a trophic chain.


On the other hand:


2. Antasis: Passage to the leading rune by the right angle. Energetic accumulation of the bridge. The v of

the warrior's back in the form presto for the action of war (dorsal muscles) and the chackras of the chest-
abdomen motor-volitional indicating a destiny that is triple v... A playful or sacral aspect of the word

éntasis could lie in the misdirection of the oblique possibilities of the labyrinth or Maya.

As a paradox each ecstasy would culminate in an ecstasy of the 13 plus 3: the stone eagle-spirit flies to grasp
the sinuous serpent-soul.

The general process of hyperborean spirituality would be a chaining of these in symbolic analogy to the
discovery of the runes by Navutan-Wotan hanging from the tree of fear, they are the states of consciousness
through which we must pass:


1. First inic. The symbol of the origin is near and the ego is oriented towards the selbst, isolated from the
conscious subject. The gnosis of the external labyrinth is completed, the sublimation is perfect and one does not
make sense of the world: economic success, amorous conquests, cultural creativity, unconscious ludic habits,
distancing from the institutional sacred symbols that move the masses or dogmas of thought, roughly
speaking... The symbols of the fenestra must be understood with a luciferic attitude, here intervenes the
development of our personal esoteric gnosis. The will is reinforced by the paraclete and the virya has a greater
consciousness of his perceptive autonomy. END OF THE SATURNAL NIGREDO (MAXIMUM TENSION
BY FACING THE SYMBOL OF PAIN AND SPIRITUAL ENCANNEMENT IN THE

SEPHIROT-center of gravity MALKUT, AN ATHETIC COSMIC SINSENT) and shadow clarification. Personal
unconscious

Its KEY IS THE WILL, ITS SHAPE THE TRIDENT GUIBUR, UNCOMPOSED IN A TYR (FIRST
MEANDER) OF PUSH THAT LEADS THE VIRYA TO BE INTERESTED IN THE MYSTERIES OF HIS
BLOOD, THE ESSENTIAL GNOSTIC PREDISPOSITION TO SEEK ISOLATION IN HIS INNER
ARCHEMONE (SECOND MEANDER TOWARDS THE INNER LABYRINTH TIRODINGUIBUR BY
YESOD AND MIDDLE PILLAR) AND FLANKED BY THE PROBLEM OF THE TWO REMAINING
BRANCHES HOD MERCURIAL (LOGOS): THE PRESSURING INFLUENCE OF THE CULTURAL AND
THE CONDITIONING FACTORS OF A BRAIN EVOLVING WITHIN THE COSMIC PLAN TOWARDS
THE SENSE OF THE DISCOVERY OF THE ONE AND ITS MACRO-STRUCTURES.


The power of the RATIONAL-LOGICAL mind. The left hemisphere, masculine... The learning through the
knowledge of cause, the theory that embraces the unfolding from the past of the whole cultural macro-
structure... The pain of a "sentient" living being that perceives himself as lucid and finite, which ends up
leading him to the purest PRAGMATISM and RATIONALITY as a way to face his daily existence (being thus
cut off any possibility of transcendence).It is what this monstrous society usually asks as a drama to the young
student for the correct fitting in and social success... It is also the problem of the HYPERSPECIALIZATION
OF KNOWLEDGE (which changes at an astonishing speed at the rhythm of an unnecessary and cryptic
technology due to the business interests), the loss of the ORAL knowledge.


265


of the ancestors. It is the passage from the snail design to the serpent as the higher form of intellect based on the
archetypal and instinctive memory...This path is the beginning of the pillar of severity...


AND THE NETZCHACH OR ANIMAL-SENTIMENTAL COMPLEX (EROS): mystery of amort and
absence of it, being in a practical way the use of the libidinal as an integrated force.


2.Second inic. The self is situated in the selbst. Here we would face the possibility of pontification with a
personal mission, the gnostic work, the presence of SHE in the concavity (see Wotan and Freya), the
charismatic state of grace that acts as a bridge-guide for the rest of the comrades in the framework of THE
Minné. END OF THE LUNAR ALBEDO. Collective unconscious.

At this point the moon yesod overlaps with the sun Thipheret, but there remain 4 shepirots crossing the Victory
rune Hod (mercury), Netzchah (venus) and two superior ones chesed (jupiter) and geburah (mars), which
clearly indicates a transit towards the conditions of COLLECTIVE ACTION and EXPANSIVE
CREATIVITY, WITH THE LEADERSHIP FUNCTION aseity by the forces of social dispersion and the aging
of the microcosm (bija scalar codification).


Minne de Odal


All viryas in our past (or present) to a greater or lesser degree, when going through the external trace of the
limiting rune of the inner labyrinth, the ODAL, have fallen into the saturnal trap of the nigredo at the time of
communication, a psychological problem called SOLIPSISM, from the Latin "ego solus ipse" (roughly
translatable as "I alone exist") is the metaphysical belief that the only thing one can be sure of is the existence
of one's own mind, and the reality that apparently surrounds one is unknowable and may be no more than part
of the mental states of one's own self. Thus, all objects, persons, etc., that one experiences would be merely
emanations of one's mind (1) and, therefore, the only thing of which one could be certain is of the existence of
oneself. (Source:

http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solipsismo).


Installed in such a complex, there is no possibility whatsoever of establishing a common nexus with our
comrades, both those here and those on the other side, since every relationship becomes a pure eclipsed
expression of the Ego or natal astrological Sun, which is essence or monad reverted for the imitatio Dei of the
demiurge... Destructive criticism, suspicion, misappropriation, pettiness, anger and other disturbing states of the
soul possess us, blinding us in our own projection of the non-integrated psychological complexes.


If the will of the virya crosses the interior of the rune, the perception of the Noological will appear and with it the
awakened faculties, runic achievements -siddhis and the eternal joy of the SPIRIT oriented from the blood,
PARAKLITO of the SOPHIA, albedo remnant in perpetual transit towards the origin, sanguine HONOR and
commitment with all that authentic comrade chained like him who suffers.


Thus the virya will reach a distant future in his process of liberation in what will be yet another

paradox, although here remains a new mystery.

1 - THE charismatic link between viryas is demonstrated by the phenomenon of SYNCHRONICITY THAT
CREATES .....

Likewise, we must not confuse the necessary solitude that is necessary to isolate oneself from the
transcendental time of the demiurge (and that each individual and unique psyche demands) with
psychopathologies and asocial personalities that constellate archetypes like that of the ERMITAN (sacrifice of
the virya's capacity for action to an ideal of communion with the deity, in this case substituted by an ego of
megalomaniacal proportions).

The whole hyperborean history is an example of Martial teamwork and everyone did it including the avataras.


In the second initiation the key is the VALOR,...Guibur Trident of Shiva becomes the sword.


266


And within Odal the trident of Shiva is emanated out as potential choice forms of strategy as the collective
unconscious is faced with Wotan's PHILIP OF THE SWORD (willful luciferic grace), which waits once again
to be turned at the exit to the siddha state (end of the spiral and the end of the spiral).

of inverted wotan inside the RUNIC capillary...


~ piRECCION CENT p,
gst LA REORIENT4(~ s


hn


gh®* OsTRO ESPIR EGON
mR Iru4h


oricntacion


acta


$ tayo-piedra
es C5


Es principio


ES PONTONICA
40S CONDUCE 4,
YO ABSOLUTO

tinico de


LSH TAS
Ta uyzrw0o0?} 4
‘d OLNAWVON! 14>


wanna nnennnnnn = n --- staircase traced).


Steps of anamnesia (Fundamentals V, fragment)

"First step:... AFFIRM the O.C.R. (referent cultural object "R") Second step: AFFIRM the O..C.E. (emergent
cultural object "E") with respect to the O.C.R.

Third step: AFFIRM AND RETENTION to the real system. Fourth step: LOCATE the "I" in i.H.P.C. with
respect to the

O.C.E. Fifth step: LOCATE on the O.C.E. the tapasigno (R). Sixth step: OPEN the cultural register RESIGNING
the tapasigno

(R).

Seventh step: RESIGN step by step the axiological superobjects of the chronocultural series.

Eighth step: If necessary, physically ENTER the cultural space of the axiological super-object, i.e., ENTER
into the ENTRANCE CHAMBER.

Step 9: If necessary, specify the STRATEGIC LOCATION of the Abraxas

Source.

Tenth: If necessary, OPEN door x (J)).

Eleventh step: If necessary, physically MOVE to the core or

transient, i.e., MOVE to the BED.

665

TION.

Twelfth step: If necessary, TRANSIT INTO another space of macrocosmic significance. Thirteenth step: If
necessary, OPEN the second gate x /( J" )-

Fourteenth: If necessary, EXIT to the RETURN CHAMBER. Fifteenth: If necessary, RETURN to the usual
context of the E.C.0. THROUGH the ENTRANCE CHAMBER. Sixteenth: If necessary. EXIT the RETURN
CHAMBER THROUGH the LID (E), i.e., EXIT to the REVERSE WORLD."


267


Oracle of Apollo


Submerged the concentration towards the interior of the waters where it must find the stabilizing resignation in
the root of the fateful Tree, at the point where the perception is border between the created matter and the
personal sphere of Erhe energy, the conscious subject must discern what kind of archetype hovers over his self
threatening him with raging numinic urgency (fascinorum) in the total grasp of his belligerent WILL: Shape,
color, position , size, familiarity are attributes about the integral possibility of realization of an entelechy that
threatens personal free will and the flow of immanent time .It is the FENESTRA INFERNALIS, where we exert
momentary leverage on the reality of everyday life, Valplads battlefield.


The I is thus left isolated, selecting a tetrarch monarch, advancing in the understanding of the meaning of the
Luciferic GNOSIS (LIGHT on the unconscious with meaning that resolves the portion of our shadow) that it
sets aside with a graceful gesture ("grace" as an exalted state of being not as a joke or

comedy) any hint of Sacredness ( praising and obeying creation ) or Luddism ( profane use ) in the programming
imposed by the breath of the One.


There is no hypnagogia, there is no hypnopompia, there is no possible mental illness or disorder when the virya
creates the principle of the FENCE in his psyche, finally APPEARING THE VISION OF THE UNCREATED
SELF (MYSTERY OF JANUS) IN THE OCCULUS OF THE INNER PANTHEON, which is the expression
of the infinite pole once the TERGUM OR SPIRITUAL BACKBONE has taken hold. Such a linking of the ray
of VENUS, vril and the paraclete shows the virya the infinite possibilities of the hyperborean spirit in its
individuality since it has passed the test of the EYE OF FIRE.


For official science and the cultural subject of the sleeping mass man, there are no higher states of
consciousness, no ecstasies or energy stages to gain or lose, nothing to experience outside the security of
everyday life, which is what must be defended in order to have a sense of cohesion and self-reality.

The vector of the arrow points inward, towards other depths, transformations and possibilities of other more
oblique mysteries outlined in the following images:


268


"the rune gibur receives certain characteristic names according to its arrangement, if the rune gibur is arranged
with the three arms

upward is called POSEIDON'S TRIDENT or, not so properly, SHIVA'S TRIDSULA, and represents the weapon
of the Siddhas. On the other hand, if the rune gibur is

It is called WOTAN'S SWORD, and represents the weapon of the awakened viryas" (Fragment of the fd..).


As we cannot yet remember what the trident represents from the integral selbst Siddha (perhaps the domain of
space and time), we can only intuit its symbolic grasp from the entrance of the conductive labyrinth (virya
asleep) that support which is blood propitious for the Minné and which, pushed by the total choice, confirms to
opt for the hyperborean liberation or not.Once inside Odal (awakened virya), the trident turns (positive
anamnesia, the phagocytic symbols of the demiurge's breath are no longer perceived, they lose their power
against the encirclement) and the interior of the

labyrinth by the hilt of the sword, the tetrarch's resolving point (the two lateral arms would evoke the sparrow
hawk) in the LABRELIX Way...Its translation is the

of pure Will of action: to go out without stopping with the self projecting the won Vril and with two more
resonant octaves, Courage and victory.


Outside Odal we would be talking about the élix path and its monarchs, inside Labrelix :the lost Self, as an
effective manifestation of the chained Spirit, can only exist on a LABRELIx path formed by tetrarch points, a
path parallel and correlative to the ELIX path where the conscious subject of the pasu circulates in its blind
monarchs (moments of immanent time) during the evolutionary process of the Manu Archetype THE virya is in
ODAL FACING THE QUADRANGULARITY OF THE SHADOW SPHERE.

. FIGHT AGAINST THE DHARMA OF VOCATION AND ITS SOCIAL FUNCTION.


3. Third inic. The hyperborean spirit is reverted from selbst. Transforming into Siddha. Mysteries of the
Avatara and Tulkus: SELF-GENERATION VS SAMSARIC SUBJECTED REINCARNATION . END OF
THE

RUBEDO Black sun and beyond...Vajra antimatter and Vril.


269


Its key is VICTORY...HAGAL, tyr of the siddhas added to that of the viryas: infinite bridge TRANSITED,
HEAVEN OF THARSIS.

Ecstasy is experienced as a separative implosion unlike shamadi and analogous states of consciousness that
would melt us into meaningful experiences on the demiurge planes (evolving in their excellence, in the matrices
of the race manu)....


Andalusian flag and coat of arms , TARTESSIAN STAR HAGAL


A flag ("Arbonaira"--"Arbondaira"...Ar runa fuego del Origen ..-Bon deo... eee buenoaira de aire y ario)
y

The current coat of arms of the land of Tharsis-Turdetania is of interest to us for its particular Hyperborean
symbolism: created by Blas infante at the beginning of the 20th century, with the white Almohad and the two
green Umayyad stripes (we consider in them Semitic elements, although the green is the color of the Astro
Venus-LIGHT from the origins) shows a hyperborean HERAKLES under a semicircular arch in which it says
"Dominator Hercules Fundator", between the two columns of the Strait of Gibraltar (reference point after the
Atlantide debacle and the beginning of the pilgrimage of the white peoples through the desert of longing) and
two lions, one crouched in a waiting position and the other with its left paw raised (left path, mudra bullet)

and almost ramping... Lions have always been symbols of the magnanimous authority of the lineages of


reads "Andalucia por si para Espafia y la Humanidad" (in which we also observe a clear contaminating
Humanist element).


On the flag mentioned above we will focus on the one that preserves the star of Tartessos centered on the colors
of the shield already mentioned, very little used, an 8-pointed with overlapping triangles, a very deep symbol
that can show the right angles of the opposition on the quaternion air-earth-fire-air (material creation).


270


shelled) or transit to the transmutative quintessence pure black Sun vs. Sun in its common cultural monotheistic
meaning ...


Being the 8 symbol of the connection with the infinite and once again the Morning Star (and in the kites of the
Nativity scenes with its synarchic message of approval) .... This Tartessian star was used in the Turdetan coins
and first period of Rome, was also adopted by Islam after the various invasions in Alandalus until its maximum
diffusion in the Mudejar art, "rub al-hizb" ("lord", they called it) and is also the star of Lashkmi Hindu, consort
of Vishnu and same symbolism as our Venus-Aphrodite...


On the reason for the misunderstanding between the viryas and the classification of humanity


There is a direct correlation between the hyperborean psychological types (see aberro typology in the
fundamentals of the sh) and the phases of initiation (as tendential predominance), being these particular states of
consciousness defined by fixed symbols and a separation or meandering between them that provokes an
apparently insurmountable confrontation for the subjects that allow themselves to be captured by the entelechial
dramas in the inertia of the egoic soul (when I refer to this meaning of ego it is not a negative way of crushing
the individuality of the virya in pursuit of a diluting egregor but everything that takes him away from the
common and honorable possibility of fighting side by side with his fellows in an honorable way, to recognize
that possibility of carrying the Graal as a collective and transmute globally) the monarchs (immanent time of the
lost self) of the tetrarch are perceived as a rigid-insurmountable form that threatens the integrity of the
hypothetical self of the virya and therefore there is a repetitive spiral of fixed action-reaction that is only saved
if it gives its highest runic tone or in other words its ........ centripetal luciferic grace.

from the state of consciousness achieved or impossible?


1. Passu: They cannot comprehend any eternal gnosis. There is no uncreated spirit, therefore there is no
reversible subtle physiology disposed to eternity.


2. Sleeping Viryas: They give a cultural-rational explanation dimensionable within the horizon of the common
acceptable as beliefs of their time, topics or fashions. All the rest can be catalogued as madness, that is to say,
outside the contribution of the security of entelechiated and rigid structures predictable by their routine
finality. For him, the rest of the subjects are objects of total destruction or oblivion, they usually carry an
enormous tendency towards psychopathologies, nihilism or existential anarchy (ways of projecting the
struggle towards an undefined object).


3. Awakened Viryas:


3.1. First inic, gentleman: the step of the saturnal nigredo or runification of the SELF, riding the VOLITIVE
GUIBUR by the grace of the rune SIEG, demands to separate from what the isotropy of linear time forces
(external labyrinth), being the main stumbling block the playful typology (Saturn is known for its severe
rigidity and sour character) in constant tension with the vertical values of masculinity. One feels the loss of the
innocence and candor of the pristine, carefree existence, the personal importance of the conquest of the material
world where the value of money is the blood of the demiurge, one understands the meaning of tragedy
(appendix).


3.2 Second inic, pontiff: The step of the lunar albedo or runification of consciousness IN THE ODAL
ARCHEMONA of courage (self in the selbst) demands to appropriate the true identity (here the psychological
aggregates try to reverse the process) in the inner labyrinth, the main stumbling block being the sacral typology
(the moon is known to evoke the ancestors, the tradition, the past).Emerging faculties are born with a noological
semantics and pontonics as the basis of a real higher contact in the golden chain which is the value of the past
emerging and carried as a karma that must be released from its action for the collective unconscious

accepts compromise, plays to conflict).


3.3 Third inic, siddha: The step of the black solar rubedo, IMPLOSION IN the VICTORIOUS HAGAL,
(reversion of the spirit from the Selbst) demands to be separated from all that remains of human chained
animals, the main obstacle is to accept the total luciferic typology, where everything becomes an exponential
leap of possibilities. The ......... pontiff in the sacred trap will see this one as a peacock-legionary being where
There is only room for fear or unattainable negative comparison before such intelligence-knowledge-ubiquity.
With this I want to reach the final conclusion that there are no pure warrior, priestly or luciferic types (here the
AVATARA deserves a separate chapter), (some "better" than others) within a hyperborean group.


271


established as a society or hyperborean Glorious era this real segmentation would indicate the betrayal and final
loss of an IMPERIAL HEGEMONY where by impulse of cultural betrayal come into play infiltrated individuals
and other strategic catastrophes that break little by little the splendorous cohesion of an epoch....the paradox is
produced that all this forms a superior geometric equilibrium in constant transformation, very difficult to
observe with the adequate distance for those of us who are immersed in this enormous vital drama, BECAUSE
THE MYSTERY OF THE ORIGIN IS ALLENED IF THE SELF PERCEIVES THE INCREATED RUNES AS
ITSELF.


( appendix)... When I say that the main obstacle is the ludic typology, I am referring to the collective
unconscious of the present time in the XXI century, in previous times when the mandates of the CATHOLIC
CHURCH predominated in most of the western countries of ARIAN imprint (where the kalachackra was more
overloaded) as totalitarian ethical-moral forms imposed, the sacred typology was the main one.Of course, there
are viryas today who face serious sacred dilemmas when it comes to understanding or deepening in the
hyperborean wisdom, especially those who have gone astray in the religious and esoteric webs of the
international synarchy.

Pd: outer labyrinth (exoteric collective culture) and inner labyrinth (performance of personal energies). The


mystery of the entrance into the sacred symbol of the virya and the lower paths ( 32-28).


32.FROM Malkuth to yesod: it means CONSCIOUSNESS in the dream, the experience of sense of the material
world, where it begins to lose its central importance. Listening and empathy: receptivity... How pain is
accepted...All this understood as a form of preparation for the adequacy of the libido to the principle of the
synarchic initiatory plan (as all the paths of the middle pillar or "balance").


Types of dreams: Basically they can be divided into two types, those of recycling and those of the higher mind,
the first through the mechanisms of condensation, sublimation and displacement, present solutions from the
representation of those impressions not processed correctly by our consciousness in the vigil (the dream realm is
a sensory stronghold of the archaic conformation of the mind and also of the pedagogy instilled by higher
intelligences along with specific influences of entities and other more subtle planes) filtered through the
mapping of the seven chackras...The first four chackras would provide dreams of sexual, instinctive, emotional,
sentimental nature; the fifth: logoic-intellectual and the two superior ones (ajna-sahasrara, after the constellation
of the metarelata of the global collective unconscious) those of psychic type: lucid, prophetic, curative or
telepathic...There are also the DREAMS (they usually designate a consciousness with a wound or trauma since
the experience of one entails the loss of will and being seized by states of panic or irrational fear), which act
from any energetic center... It should also be noted that not all dreams are symbolic, some are presented in a
completely literal form (like a camera recording a recording) with a clear and precise message.

Test imposed on us: acceptance of death (without going through the bards) as proof of faith to the plan of the
one or what is more current: to accept the SIMBIOSIS with GAIA (Earth), very typical of the new age
ecologist movementsSleeping is analogous to die day by day.

Viewed as a milestone of the royal flush, this point provides only dreams of the first 4 chakras Need for
DISTINCTION principle


From Malkuth to Hod: The power of the RATIONAL-LOGICAL mind. The left hemisphere, male ................ The
learning through knowledge of cause, the theory that encompasses the unfolding from the past of the whole of the


272


The pain of a sentient living being that perceives himself as lucid and finite, which ends up leading him to the
purest PRAGMATISM and RATIONALITY as a way of facing his daily existence (thus being cut off any
possibility of transcendence)....It is what this monstrous society usually asks as a drama to the young student for
the correct fitting in and social success... It is also the problem of the HYPERSPECIALIZATION OF
KNOWLEDGE (which changes at an astonishing speed at the rhythm of an unnecessary and cryptic technology
due to the business interests), the loss of the ORAL knowledge of the ancestors. It is the passage from the snail
design to the serpent as the superior form of intellect based on the archetypal and instinctive memory... This
path is the beginning of the pillar of severity...

1.RATIONAL: it produces an increase of the cultural structure on the basis of updating personal

or individual archetypes (psychoid). The lost virya also has a representative memory (categorical

conceptual).


2. AFFECTIVE: psychophysiological memories.
3.OF BLOOD or MINNEY.


30. From yesod to Hod: In this path we would find the power of rationality over the twilight realms: the
APREHENDED impression of dreams at higher chakra levels. Also in the ethereal-astral planes of Maya
(those who understand the plan of the one)...It is proper to ONIROMANCE and dream interpretation.

In it appear the figures of METAPHOR AND ALLEGORY (as main TROPOS), as language of the creations
inspired in literature, art, etc.: the postor actions of sense in the framework of the cultural macro-structure:


1. f. Ret. Trope that consists of transferring the straight sense of voices to a figurative one, by virtue

of a tacit comparison; e.g., Las perlas del rocio (The pearls of the dew). The springtime of life. To

restrain the passions.

2. f. Application of a word or expression to an object or concept, which it does not literally denote, in order to
suggest a comparison (with another object or concept) and facilitate its understanding; e.g., the atom is a
miniature solar system.

Allegory:

1. f. Fiction by virtue of which something represents or signifies something else. Cupid's blindfold and

wings are an allegory.

2. f. Literary or artistic work or composition of allegorical sense.

3. f. Sc. and Pint. Symbolic representation of abstract ideas by means of figures, groups of figures or attributes.
4f. Ret. Figure that consists of making evident in the speech, by means of several consecutive metaphors, a
straight and a figurative sense, both complete, in order to imply one thing by expressing a different one.

If reason becomes a very aggressive recurrent instrument (as is the norm in this end of kaliyuga culture), it also
becomes an obstacle that closes the ability to perceive with other sensory forms...


29. From Malkuth to Netzchah: It means the EMOTIONAL impressions that the physical world causes us and
how we react to it. Here it would be possible to distinguish the difference between emotion and feeling: The
emotion is an instantaneous reaction to an external stimulus that makes us fall in a determined state of mind
(and that disturbs our ideal energetic balance-energetic integrity), while the feeling is the subjective
classification and sustained in the time that through the individual personality are granted to these, once
recognized the sensations that they provoke.

This path is that of EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE on which new age psychology places so much emphasis as
a way of emphasizing the heart chakra and the gregarious states more characteristic of our mammalian brain
conformation, of evolved ape-hominids chained in eternal return:One of the major traps of the iron age in which
the cultural subject of the sleeping virya is caught is that of being bent by the forces that work to anchor the
heart chackra or Anahatha to the evolutionary sense of the one's plan. Their function is to lower the belligerent
will of the subject (by blocking the plexus with their inductive force in a physically palpable way) and to create
gregarious and uniform states of consciousness. In several fronts of social manifestation such forms of
manipulation of the psychosphere of humanity can be appreciated: We have thus from professional mass sports
which is a pure substitute for the warrior mystique in the heart of the peoples, to the oblivion of Anthropology
as the science of the differences between races together with History as the memory of excellence, the
systematic disarmament and the denial of the right to self-defense among peoples who a priori are "conflictive"
because of their past (the blood reality) and not those destined to dominion, the Television-publications with
their triumphant irruption of the PINK PRESS or of the heart and the cult of gossip and frivolity, the
democracies that allow the vote to any individual over 18 years of age without taking into account his
competence (all the


273


great civilizations of the past were led by natural leaders with proven life experience and bearers of the link in
the golden chain), the musical concerts and their emotional eclecticism leading to numbness in their overall
message, the dogmas-censorship in public opinion that create expressions such as "political correctness" (UN)
prohibiting without possibility of discussion any kind of alternative and even legislating novel and despite
clearly going against the concept of democracy they present... The labor ebullition of NGOs and their
sanctimonious moralizing, the crisis of Justice and its slowness in the procedures, the Monarchies with the only
function of business public relations camouflaged as fraternal collaboration, the disappearance of psychiatric
confinement institutions, the very weakening of any value until the chaotic PERMISIVITY, the loss of parental
authority in education (in what time have we seen children committing brutal crimes on a large scale?) are
REVERSE expressions of the same...


We undoubtedly live in a world in the process of DECOMPOSITION that hides our origins and divine
potential as fiercely as possible.


It is that tone that allows the cohesion of great egregores in this iron age, words like DEMOCRACY ,
ALLIANCE OF CIVILIZATIONS (great sacrificial mass in the planetary ecosystem on a macrocosmic scale)
would not have any kind of real power of realization if they were not based on a real physical PRESSURE or
pain suffered by the lost virya (and in the process of isolating his ego) in the area of the heart plexus when
trying to leave these autonomous structures created with a clear and univocal purpose..

To such a panorama can only be opposed the advent of the imperial regal function with those leaders of the
peoples totally installed in a sanguine mysticism and a Paraclete that insufflates the sufficient grace and
charisma to facilitate the rebirth of a new imperial MESSIAH.


From Yesod to netzchach: All the processes of balancing and submission to sentimental and emotional forces
in social and family interactions. The romantic fantasies and idealization of the spouse, the impossibility of
cutting ties with institutions, couples, groups, affiliations... The reproduction vector as the only way to achieve
permanence.


END OF FIRST TEXT


274


TRIP TO THE CENTER OF THE EARTH

“It is not the state that creates Us; we are the that we create the state ”.
( Adolf Hitler )

1- Introduction

2- A trip to center of the earth

3- Perception hyperborean of the world

4- Our vision of the world is distorted by the mind of the Demiurge.
5- Traveling by the poles

6- Beyond the end of the world

7- Doors in southern Chile

8- Conclusion: traveling the journey to the world of the gods

one- Introduction

Let's forget about a moment of everything we have learned so far...


The whole universe of the Demiurge with all its galaxies, suns, planets ... fits inside the microscopic
interior of a cell, because all of it is relative.


As well as your space it is relative so is your time. We remember the past but in the same way we can
remember the future. The future is not what we have been taught to believe: your knowledge, like your
projection, can open unimagined doors for us.


Says the Quantum Physics that we can only see what we have been taught to see others throughout our
lives. Yes “ we don't know "any object before us, neither we can see it; At most we will see the
alteration on water ( or any other element ) produced by said object. Throughout At the moment our
mind receives huge amounts of information that we are not in a position to assimilate. Of all this
information that we receive we only see what we put our attention on because it is what, in the midst of
all the information, we know and are trained-usual to see. But if we learn to pay attention to things that
our mind captures but that we do not see because nobody has taught us to know them, then we can see
them.


We are a field Force “ extra-dimensional ” that, projected on the canvas of space-time generates energy-
matter. Our Force is interconnected with all the other Force and Energy fields at stake in the universe
setting them in motion, attracting them, rejecting them... We are conditioned by the influence of others
forces but finally we depend on ourselves: it is the state and the degree of our own Force that generates


275


our “ser ”and our destiny in this life and in the hereafter. This is why we say that we must be faithful to
ourselves and to ours and that we cannot yield to an enemy that seeks to destroy us.


2- A trip to the center of the earth


Various schools esotericists agree in affirming that the earth, the surface of this planet, is a place of
punishment, a tyrannized prison planet by a demon. According to these schools, the surface “ external ”
of our world would be subjected to the elements and processes of a satanic universe in which creatures


and all “ Creation ” lives on “ devour itself”; that is, creatures need to devour each other in order to
continue surviving in this club, perhaps the belly of a demon. From the satanic essence of this universe


arise the successive and endless conflicts, wars, diseases, famines ... Death and even human history.


In front of this world, this dark universe overcome by Death and where true light is unknown, ancient
myths and legends they talk about a “ interior of the earth” populated by “ a spiritual or ethereal race ”
and in turn material, but from another “ quality material ”. In this “ interior of the earth” there is
another world in which time is different from ours and where Death is unknown. Sun of pure and
supernatural light always illuminates that inconceivable world from our mortal human condition. The “
inner world ” is a world “ material ” but different from ours and where matter is not subject to the
processes it suffers in the world “ external”. There are no heat-cold dualities; birth-death; light-
darkness; joy-sadness...


To that world of “ interior of the earth” or Hyperborean is where the divine Apollo he returned to
rejuvenate after his stays on the “ land surface ”. Hyperborean is the Homeland of eternal youth
situated beyond the ice, beyond the Pole ( A-pole ). In this “ interior of the earth” interconnect worlds,
planets, galaxies ... through a different dimension where distances of space and time do not exist
according to the canons that limit us in the “ surface ”.


276


As well as from our human condition we cannot conceive of a world “ perfect ” and free from the
element Death, the inhabitants of the “ inner world ” they cannot conceive of our state of misery and
degradation social, economic, political, racial, human, scientific, physical... They cannot conceive of a
world like ours ruled by the law of Death and reigned by a degrading and devouring demon of men.


The openings polar located beyond the polar ice, are places where the worlds ( inside and outside )
interconnect and allow transit. There are also other points in various physical places on earth known as
doors to the world “ intraterrestrial ”:


- Montserrat in Barcelona,


- Akakor, in the Andean Amazon.


- Monte Roraima at the border vertex of the states of Brazil, Venezuela and Guyana.


- Mount Shasta in California ( USA ).


- Area of Guaitecas islands, Taitao peninsula, Chiloé island and Melimoyu volcano in Chile.


- etc etc etc.


Through these openings or doors connect the “ outside world ” with the world “ intraterrestrial ”.


277


As well as ours senses or our mind perceive the physical location of the kingdom of the hyperboreal or “
intraterrestrial” in the “interior of the earth ” and we can get in touch with them through the polar
openings and other doors, from their world they perceive our universe as luck cave, an evil place
inhabited by degenerate and bestial races to which They access through the window of the Black Sun.


In February of 1947 when the American admiral Byrd made his famous flight beyond of the pole, after
being welcomed in the “ inside from the land ”, the Master of “ intraterrestrial ” to said: “we have
allowed you to enter why you are noble and well known on the surface of the world”. So Byrd almost
loses his breath when he feels he was in it “ inside from the land ”. The intraterrestrial Master continued
saying with a smile: “ Se found in the domain of Arians, the Inner World of the earth ”. | mean, just “ the
cigars”, the Aryans, are welcomed in the “ interior of the earth ”. Teacher intraterrestrial continued
detailing the evil of those who had subdued the “ outside the earth ” under his rule after World War II,
pointing out as especially aberrant and evil the use of nuclear weapons on civilian population in
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Before this meeting with Teacher, the aircraft of Byrd, already in the “ interior
of the earth ”, had been arrested by a UFO in whose fuselage a swastika. Then one voice with Nordic or
German accent addressed him in English telling him that he was in good hands and that in seven
minutes he would land, the entire landing operation of his aircraft being directed by the same UFO
because the controls of Byrd they had totally lost control of the flight.


We can understand Nazism's need to regenerate the race: before returning the spirits to Hyperborean,
the Polar Homeland, it is necessary to regenerate the race because only in this way can the Pole be
crossed through the physical polar opening. Only cigars are admitted there, in Hyperborean, beyond the
Pole. So Miguel Serrano, when had in views prepare together with Anna Reitz, German aviation hero, a
journey beyond polo, thought: “ Will you admit me among you? ”.


278


3- The hyperboreal perception of the world


As we Say, from the world of hyperboreans access to our world is perceived as a Sun Black. Through him
they access our world in their vimanas, penetrating the mind of the Demiurge ( our unreal universe ).
The Demiurge universe is a kind of cell - hologram to which they are connected his creatures but nothing
we see in the Demiurge's mind is real. The entire universe, its galaxies, its stars, its suns, their planets,
are but a mental reality ( projections in the mind of the Demiurge ), inverted or upside down reflection,
the negative of a photograph of another universe. It is a hypnotic perception in which all values are
relativized by the distorted or perverted perception of the Demiurge's mind.Because we perceive the
universe through the Demiurge's mind and this, the nature of his mind, deforms reality.


Let's imagine now a universe of light where darkness and death have no place. To access our universe,
the inhabitants of that another universe will do it through openings, black suns or vortices-center of the
rotating swastika, which have its physical location at the physical poles of our planet earth and in some
other places.


The hyperboreal we are perceived as projections of the Demiurge's mind and only “ us will admit among
them ” (Miguel Serrano) if our spirit is enough pure, that is, if it is free from the aggregates of matter.


279


We can start to understand that from our human nature we do not perceive the universe directly but
through the mind of the Demiurge.


We do not perceive reality but the mind of the Demiurge: our perception of reality is but the mind of the
Demiurge. To this demiurgic mind we are linked or linked by our own physical biology. In the demiurgic
vision of reality, that is, in the mind of the Demiurge, in the universe-mind of the Demiurge, the poles of


|”


the earth are places “ physical ” by the what is possible to get out of your universe are “ roads exhaust ”.


In this way, accessing the physical poles of the earth the northern lights are mystical lights from the
world-universe of the “ interior of the earth ”.


Then we can understand that the world intraterrestrial is no longer seen simply as the interior of a
sphere ( la “ hollow earth”) but as a whole “ another universe ” where the law of time does not govern “
world exterior ” and death.


If we move forward further towards the Pole, little by little we enter another world illuminated by a
supernatural light. A greenish nature appears ( the Green Ray ) and the ice are lagging behind.


280


So, “ they” they have to allow us entry. Already “ within the earth ”, the universe is reversed and
perception is now inverse, that is, from that “ another universe ” intraterrestrial the Demiurge universe (
is perceived “ our”) as the interior hollow of a sphere (a cell? ) or “ Star of Death ”, a living being that
breathes and whose breathing gives rise to mortal time. This universe is nothing but a whole
labyrinthine fabric of galaxies, suns, planets, relative realities, velocity-distorted perceptions and the
relativity of time, space, light ... all relativized in a time and in a space of vanities and infinities “
possibilities ” that never become or essentially complete.


And in itself everything this is nothing but an enormous and abominable being that lives on its own
physiological and biochemical processes and devours itself himself and all the consciences, sufferings,
illusions, passions, fears, pains that in “ He” coexist... It is a prison universe, a kind of cavern of beings
linked to each other through from the mind of a demon.


Cyrus Reed Teed exhibited in 1869 in his work “ The lighting of Koresh” the idea that everything that
exists in the universe is contained within a sphere, where the oceans and continents form its internal
wall. Outside of this there is nothing. A dense atmosphere prevents us from seeing the other end of the
sphere. The sun that it is in the center of the world it cannot be seen because what we take by the sun is
nothing but a reflection or projection of the true Sun. “ Something like the Yellow Sun that hides the
Black Sun and this the Green Ray -say Miguel Serrano-. “ According theory of Reed -continues Serrano-
the entire universe would find content within a hollow sphere the size of our earth (... ). There is no
place in this sphere for the stars of astronomy classic. The stars are nothing but grains of light. We are
inside, living on the concave wall (... ) light rays do not propagate in a straight line but curve, which
prevents us from discovering the true curvature of our world. To test this theory the SS would have
carried out radar wave experiments during the war in the Ruger Island ”.


This theory coincides in pointing out that:


281


1- We suffer one distorted perception of reality.


2- This error of appreciation is inverse and conveys to us the illusion that we live on the outside of the
earth and that this is a sphere.


3- Reality it would be that we live inside the hollow of a kind of cavern in whose center a hologram of
projected realities unfolds.


4- What we we perceive how the outside world is actually a hologram inside a sphere.


5- The realities that we see in the hologram are projections of “ another hidden universe ”.


When science Modern explores the universe with its sophisticated devices and detection means finds
that many data collected they don't just fit inside their “ unquestionable ” scientific theories. New
theories then emerge of the type of the following: “ we do not know what 95% of the universe is made.
Only 5% of everything that exists is matter like the one we know, atoms made up of protons and
neutrons. The rest is dark matter. In fact, the future of the universe will be settled in a battle between
dark matter, that surrounds galaxies and of which we have no idea what it is made, and dark energy,
responsible for the universe is accelerating. (... ) “A team of astronomers has discovered a galaxy
completely dark matter. There are no stars in this galaxy, not a single one. 90% of the Milky Way, our
galaxy, it is in the form of dark matter ...”. By exploring the universe “ external ” Scientists have not yet
clarified what their means of detection reflect. New theories come to try clarify “ new phenomena ”
registered on their screens. In this case they put the label on the phenomenon “ dark matter ”, although
they could call her too “ anything ”, or “I don't know ”. The immense vastness of the universal hologram
is not something linear neither in time nor in space but its “ reality ” is distorted and does not respond
to the parameters that are assumed according to knowledge materialistic scientist. Thus, on indications
captured by NASA satellites, a group of heterodox scientists has elaborated the theory that the Universe
has more dimensions than the three known. According to the “ Theory of the Superstrings ”there would
be seven dimensions and the Universe would be made up of energy strings that they can adopt multiple
forms each of them being a true universe with its own physical norms, blah blah blah, etc...


282


4- Our vision is distorted by the Demiurge's mind.


Our senses physicists offer us the misleading perception that we live in the “ outside of a planet ” but we
actually live inside the cosmic cell of the Demiurge universe and its “ eternal return”. And all this
happens because we see and feel, we live through the mind of the Demiurge, but what we see and feel
through the senses “ physicists ” is not real but a kind of “ hologram ”, that is, the mind or the dream of
the Demiurge.


|2


If we reached to see the end of the physical universe or “ external” with some kind of instrument
exceptional, we would see that “ the universe ” it ends not because | have a end in itself but because we
reach a point where the universe travels away from our observation point to a speed greater than light.
Upon reaching a point that moves away from us at a speed greater than light, it leaves of being


perceived by our senses, disappearing from our field of vision.


But if any mode, maybe using some kind of fantastic “ device ”, we could see that universe that in the
distance moves away from us at a speed greater than light, would appear before us the vision or
perhaps the mirage of another unreal possibility in the time of “ eternal return ”in the future or in the
past: another possible time in time and the entire universe and its galaxies, stars and planets, until


283


finally ... see our same planet! although everything in a different time from the future or from the past,
depending on the approach or direction we have given to our observation. From the real experience of
being an eternal present projected onto the relativity of the universal hologram, we can have the
intuition that remembering the future is a similar thing to what we do by remembering the past. The
future, like the past, are not what from the immediate present ( or projected in space-time ) it might
seem like:mastering its springs can allow us to manipulate the different planes of reality of this universe
as well as finding the way out of the labyrinth.


Because, let's remember it, the physical senses are deceptive. Our physical senses see and feel through
the mind of the Demiurge. We live in the interior of a cosmic cell that creates time in its breath and a
universe of infinite non-real possibilities. The entire universe is just an unfinished or realized possibility
that repeats itself over and over again: a non-reality.


The whole universe it is a non-reality that does not exist or becomes fulfilled or consummated and
whose worlds are only reflections of light and particles dragged by the Demiurge's breath, an unreal
space, a hologram.


In the universe of the Demiurge there is no end nor is there anything, nor is there a beginning, because
through him we could never reach beyond its nothing. The demiurgic universe has no end but revolves
eternally on itself. If we could see beyond end of limit of our immediate perception of “ eternal return ”,
we would meet the same in other times of the future or the past. Is the eternal vanity, the nothingness
of “ eternal return ” who already pointed or prophesied the visionary genius of Nietzschemore than a
century ago.


284


5- Traveling by the poles


Miguel Serrano treat this mysterious theme of the “ hollow earth ” in several of his works. Already in
1947 he got sign up for a Chilean expedition to Antarctica secretly searching for survivors of Nazism.
There in that “ end of the world ”, had an encounter with a UFO and the Master revealed to him a
mission.


Serrano explains how in the “inland land” reside the siddhas, the teachers of their teacher. As we have
said, the “ inside ” it's all a “ another universe ” and also is directly connected to Venus, the Morning Star
and with Lucifer.


Through the polar openings the mystical Fire that burns in the ice penetrates the mind of the Demiurge
secretly projecting on “ Su” universe huge archetypes.


It's the spirit the one that forms the hyperboreal myth about the mind of the world and although today
there is no reflection on the “ outer land ” it did come to be reflected in previous rounds of the eternal
return and it has not died because in itself is nothing but a projection “ alien” which is not from this


285


mortal universe. “ It is the repetition or reincarnation of an idea ancient, expressed in all the most
important myths and legends of humanity ...” (“ The Golden Cord ”. Miguel Serrano ).


The myth takes the polar direction, like Apollo when he returns to the Polar Homeland of Eternal Youth.


Hitler takes the same direction: there is no historical leader to whom this dimension has been so
intensely attributed polar and extraterrestrial that makes him survive above the corpses of all his
adversaries.


There are different theories on “ Hollow Earth ” but fundamentally we understand that the polar
openings are escape gates from the world of the Demiurge and access roads to “ other universe ”. The
physical poles of the earth do not exist but are empty places whose radius of influence gives rise to “
polar holes in the ozone layer ” of the atmosphere.


Before disappearing, Hitler appointed German Head of State to Admiral Doenitz, who in 1943 made his
enigmatic statements about “ the impregnable refuge or earthly paradise for the Fuhrer somewhere on
earth ”.


Then Scorzeny he tells how in 1945, in interrogations they asked him obsessively: “ Where did you take
Hitler?”. Miguel Serrano explains how “ allies ” they never believed than Hitler would have died, “ is
more, they know he's alive ”.


286


Later in 1947, the USA organized a huge naval encirclement operation over Antarctica. Warships and
planes, paired with the most sophisticated war apparatus of the time. “ The captain ship was Mount
Olympus and the seaplane mother ship was Pine Island, the destroyers were Browsen and Henderson,
the icebreaker North Wind, the aircraft carrier Philippines Sea, the Sennet submarine, the Capacan and
Canisted oil tankers, and the Yankey and Merrik freighters. They were joined by another seaplane
mother ship: the Currituck ”. (“ The Cord Gold ”. Miguel Serrano ). To situate ourselves and place
skeptics and giggles, clarify that we are talking of a war operation on Antarctica that is perfectly
documented historically. The “ allies ”, after gather and analyze information, they had discovered that
the Third Reich had survived in and through Antarctica expedition tried to destroy it. But we know that
the “allies ” suffered a “ unexpected ” and desperate defeat having to flee hastily from the polar lands.
Evidently, This information has not been released to the public.


In a few days, Byrd travels to the north pole, getting, as we have said previously, to enter on the “ inside


|”


the earth” where it is received by a ship “ intraterrestrial ” with a swastika. Byrd knew what was written
by several of his compatriots in various books and myth had flourished in his mind. After getting to fly
1700 miles inside the earth he made his enigmatic public statements: “ That enchanted continent in the


sky. Land of deep mysteries. | want to see that land beyond the Pole, in the center of a great stranger ...


”


At the end of year 1947 and early 1948, in the southern summer, Miguel Serrano, holder del Signo, went
to Antarctica with the previously mentioned Chilean expedition. They had no chance due to lack of
means to reach the Antarctic oases and not least until the polar opening. But Serrano claims that “ had
the psychic antennas wide open ”.


The bases built by the Third Reich in lands of New Swabia gave them access to “ Interior of the Earth ”
and all its “ another universe ” reversed. Miguel Serrano publishes in “ MAYA. Reality is an illusion” a


287


document that gave you a world famous writer. The writer came from Germany and the document
consists of a letter written by a sailor from a U-boat who explained how he had accessed the “ interior of
the earth ”, because, he claimed, “Hess and Haushofer have reason: Earth is Hollow ”. The letter is dated
April 20, 1947, the birth of the Fuhrer and it says like this:


“ April 20, 1947.


Dear old Comrade:


This letter will be a surprise for you. The U-Boot 209 submarine has succeeded. jEarth is HOLY!. The
doctor Haushofer and Hess they were in the right thing. The entire crew is fine, but we can't go back.
We are not prisoners. I'm sure this message will come to you; this is the last contact with U-209. We will
meet again, comrade. I'm worried because of the way life on Earth's surface has passed since the Fuhrer
departed.


God bless our Germany forever.


With sincere greetings


( Signature ) ”


The letter was handwritten by the sailor of the submarine and the letter was authenticated by his
relatives.


In another letter from 1990 written in English, the recipient tried to explain the previous letter:


288


“ May 8, 1990.


Dear Howard and Emmajean:


Thank you very much for the two reports and the R.C., which have arrived on May 7.


The U-209 mission was one of the most fantastic in the Third Reich. It certainly had to do with the
hidden knowledge ( esoteric ) of Hitler, Himmler, Heydrich and of course the doctor Karl Haushofer...


Guided by ancient maps, the Mission aspired to be able to enter through the opening of a gigantic
mountain submarine. iThis was believed to be possible to reach the center of the Earth!. jYes, it was
thought that he would meet there Agharta!


U-209 did not return, hence the letter from an old friend on board. jln it he maintains that the goal of U-
209 was achieved, that the Earth is hollow and that it was inhabited by a superior Aryan race!. The
submarine was commanded by Heindrich Brodda.


The mission was named Asgard.


The man who wrote me the letter, while | was with my cousin, was Joseph Mundt, special envoy in the
Mission for the mysterious Ahnenerbe, low Himmler and Heydrich. This organization was, and still is, the
Center of the Ancestral Heritage of the Nordic Race, a race that came from the North and is thought to
have come out by a close opening to the Polo region, which allows reaching the center of the Earth...
Many ancient Nordic legends point to the same thing, just like indigenous American traditions.


Mundt was not in Argentina, although the letter was sent from there, assuring that U-209 had achieved
fulfill their mission, but none of their crew could return, although they were not prisoners. This seems
strange and | know that challenges credibility and reasoning, but | think there are many things that we
do not know.


289


The very strange statements of Haushofer in the Obelisk, in runic symbols, they would confirm that
beyond this place would be Agartha and that there would be much more in heaven and on earth than
man he hasn't even dreamed... As | said earlier, there was a very deep influence and esoteric
background in the Third Reich. The hidden is sometimes real and that is still not understood, because
perhaps it is an ancient wisdom that man lost, diverting his way in this world...


The “629” had an encounter with a flying disk in Africa in May 1943. Somewhere this film still exists. |
think it should be the same as the photos of a flying disk that the later took in Europe Allied pilots and
those of the Luftwaffe.


Have a good rest in Europe my dear friends. jYour blood calls you, Howard, that sacred blood German!.
May the angels protect you while you are outside. jGod bless you!.


Loyally,


Willi ( signature ) ”


The USA have the base of Mc Murdo on Ross Island of the homonymous Antarctic Sea the more they are
access to “ interior of the earth ”. The Jewish world is closed the step to “ interior of the earth” and is
condemned to follow the cycle of the eternal return and breathing of the Demiurge as it is linked to “ He
” for a satanic pact. For this reason the Jew tries by all means to maintain “ live” reality “ external ”,
feeding and offering sacrifices and “ burnt offerings ” to the Demiurge: he fears that the disappearance
of his “ God” and of “ His ” universe will mean his final and total annihilation.


290


6- Plus beyond the End of the World


Moving forward the steps that go south beyond the ice barriers of the Ross and Weddell seas in
Antarctica, we reach a point where reality begins to reverse, turning around and entering the traveler
little by little in the world “ intraterrestrial ”. Enter through the polar opening towards the interior, it is
something similar to what happens when we turn a bag making in this way that the surface of the
hollow interior from the bag becomes the outer surface and the one that was previously the outer
surface is now inside the bag.


At the point indicated which are the edges of the opening or polar hole, the navigation instruments go
crazy and lose all reference of reality. The compass begins to point chaotically. If we advance further
into the earth, the compass will point now up. But we can only continue advancing if “ they ”, the “
intraterrestrial” allow us to pass. Otherwise we would not be able to access their world and we would


[?


be returned to reality “ external” stunned and not knowing how it happened.


If we get access the “ interior of the earth” we will find a spiritual kingdom and divine, a perfect world
where life manifests all its power free from the satanic distortion of the universe “ external ”. Death, the
element of death and its processes of disease and degeneration cannot access because there everything
remains intact in its virtue.


291


Hyperborean, the Hyperborean homeland, it is a world of perfection where good and beauty are free
from all kinds of degeneration physical-mental. There the energy or manifestation is divinized and
totally dominated by the pure will.


This divine world has a different time and realization than our world “ material” degenerate, sick and
dragged by chaos. The dimensions of your universe are different from ours in such a way that through


its reality you can access distant places in the cosmos without the limitation of our space-time.


From our reality plane access to that “ another universe ” it is possible through of different doors,
windows, cracks or “ program errors”. No However, as we point out, we will never be admitted by the
gods if we do not free ourselves before the link, bond-attraction ( chaining ) for the world of death of
the Demiurge, its vices, degenerations and its “ nothing ”.


Only if we love Life ( Lilith? ) and we fight for it in ourselves and outside of ourselves we can free
ourselves: develop and realize in our being the centripetal or implosive principle, turning the Force
towards “ inside” and get turn reality around according to the principle of Black Sun.


A shamanic ritual ancient places the initiate before a spirit that rips his skin. Then the spirit covers him
with the same skin but “ invertide ” or turned around. We return to the same principle: the initiate
awakens to a sensitivity that was previously hidden by the “ shell” outer and inert skin ( the world “
external ”).


292


Only possible enter Paradise “ inside ” lit in the fire of polar ecstasy by the implosive principle.


Then we can prepare the return trip to Hyperborea. In one of his novels Hermann Hess relates how a
prisoner at night in his cell drew a train on the wall entering inside him and escaping from prison. There
is much more than meets the eye behind such an argument “ simple ”.


We are who we have to find the doors that lead to the world “ inside” and transfer them: turn reality
around. The guardians of the cavern They will try to prevent us by all means at their disposal but
stopping us is not in their hands. Know what blood is the “ Ariadne thread ”that links us to the world of
gods, our duty is to purify it and light it in the polar fire of the great transmutation. Finally, regenerated
the Force of the initiate, nature and all the reality of the universe itself is subjected to the power of its
Will by opening the doors of Paradise.


7- Doors in southern Chile


293


|”


Miguel Serrano explains in his work how they can only access the world “ intraterrestrial ” those who


have developed in themselves the implosive principle. There is no point searching the world “ external ”
if we have not started the journey within ourselves before: “ Will you admit me between you?. Then the
teacher pointed to a Underground Kingdom in the inner earth ”. (“ The Golden Cord ”. Miguel Serrano ).
Only for “ synchronicity ” we can access the world “ intraterrestrial ”. Those looking for this “ magic


world in the sky ” what the admiral quotes Byrd, without realizing the inner path they are hitting blinds.


It is what in Chile it happens to those Jewish backpackers from the Mossad and the army of the state of
Israel who walk on the ground “ in situ” and other means at the service of the international Jew that
prowl through places in the south of the Andean country in search of “ something ” that sometimes
appears on their radars and detection means but that is elusive as much as inaccessible. The world
Jewish power has information and knows that in various parts of the region there are “ abnormalities ”
but not capable to find the root of the “ problem ”. In this outward search, sometimes they have
suffered strange accidents; other times, when they try to access a certain place where they have
detected any of those “ abnormalities ” lose all status references for end up going totally lost to the
starting point but in the opposite direction. As we say, the Jew has access to the world closed “


|?


intraterrestria


The “ intraterrestrial ” they keep open in Patagonia a series of doors that connect with their world.


|”


Doors have a physical location in the world “ external ” but the reality-system program can only see how


|”


the travelers who pass through them appear and disappear. By accessing up to the “ external ” from


those doors, strange anomalies and distortions occur of the dimensions of space time.


Around the Taitao peninsula and the innumerable islands that surround it, this type of very powerful
distortions occurs, according to some, due to a high technology that produces invisible barriers,


294


surrounding the entire region and leaving the to all kinds of ships, including those of the Chilean navy.
Already in the forties the admiral Canaris sailed through the countless channels between the islands and
fjords of the region. Apparently, in the area several German colonies were established in the mid-1940s.


Let's refer to the topic of Friendship, a door “ intraterrestrial ” located in southern Chile somewhere in
the Taitao peninsula area, Chonos archipelago or Guaitecas Islands. Is There is an especially magical
region guarded by the proximity of the Melimoyu volcano. The topic Friendship begins in the eighties of
the 20th century when Chilean radio amateurs enter in contact with some “ aliens ”. In addition to
communications via radio, the “ aliens ” they are seen in various appearances of UFOs by appointment
with their contactees. The Friendship claim to have an island in southern Chile where they have a “
highly developed ” technology that, in the field of medicine, even allows them to cure all kinds of
diseases and even reverse the death process.


In your communications the Friendship claim to belong to the “ humanity ” but not to be from this
planet. Their appearance is Nordic and they dress in shape “ strange ”, showing off a trident or rune in
his suit gibur. As we say, they have great knowledge of mathematics, physics, biology, architecture...
They cover their speeches in a spiritualistic tone and they call themselves by the names of angels. They
have their headquarters on a mysterious island in the aforementioned peninsula area Taitao, Chonos
and Guaitecas archipelago. In this area there are more than 3,800 islands that make up an endless
labyrinthine framework of channels and straits where the risk of running aground on reefs and rocks is


enormous.


The investigator Spanish Josep Guijarro explains how in the beginning of the topic Friendship a sound
engineer named Ernesto de la Fuente met in the locality of Quemchi, in Island Chiloé, strangers “ gringos
” who claimed to belong to a congregation religious who called herself by that name. From the fountain
recommended a such Alberto to supply your island. Thereafter the Friendship helped Ernesto cleaning
up your finances, batters after the crisis caused by the rise in interest rates of the eighties in Chile, and
also its health.Ernesto de la Fuente came to be on the mysterious island when After becoming ill from


295


lung cancer, he received a radio communication and was invited to cure his illness. When Ernesto he
agreed to the island he did it in a boat that was guided by a magnetic system. There, according to his
perception, a gate between the rocks gave the boat access to “ an underground space equipped with
many advances and all kinds of electronic elements ”. In the island underwent treatment through “
wave motion systems and magnet therapy ” as well as tissue regeneration, managing to cure your
disease.


The Friendship they can be seen in the skies in UFO appearances. They communicate with radio with
radio amateurs and sometimes “ appear at one's house directly from nowhere ”, affirms one of the
contacted. When they radio contact a radio amateur, the Friendship can “ see” things as if they were in
the place where they were find your communicant. For example, a radio amateur chatting with Ariel (a
Friendship), | was recording the conversation on a cassette tape without having told your interlocutor.
At any given time, Ariel tells the radio amateur that the tape is stuck and when he looks at the tape, he
could see that what he was saying was true.


Octavio Ortiz, a contactee with Friendship, received a day from the North American space agency, NASA,
a newspaper in which he had to write down his communications. “ Next to the notebook, with hard
covers and with the word “ RECORD” printed on the cover they received a box of pens that had screen
prints “ U.S. GOVERNMENT ” on your back. éWhy were Americans interested in the experience of simple


an


radio amateurs? ”. (“ Alien Bases on Earth ”. Josep Guijarro ).


North of Italy There is a community of just under a hundred people that could have something to do
with all of this. This community has a different social system and its own currency. In addition to
members living in the community throughout Italy they have thousands of sympathizers. They have built
underground buildings under the mountains where they have inscribed in an unknown language ancient
knowledge of alchemy and other secrets. They make plates called “ self”, “a species large ship, which
they call cells. These devices have the power to energize the matter and food of so that they last longer
and maintain all their properties, minerals and vitamins. They also export some textiles and in


296


Ultimately, the income they receive from their products is from the community. Alberto Gesswein, who
came to be inside the underground buildings, in one of these buildings could see a machine they told
him was a teleporter and that in South America there is another. Alberto defines the device as one
meter and half in diameter with bars separated every 30 centimeters that surrounded the edges of the
set. The bars, think you remember they were golden and the circle seems to him to be white. Due to the
strange interior atmosphere, he does not remember well what They said but think they remember that
the other transporter was in Patagonia.


On numerous occasions military maneuvers have been carried out on the southern coasts of Chile,
tracking the islands and channels with powerful means detection looking for “ something ”. American
spy planes fly over the southern islands in search of mystery. The dark forces of international High
Finance, such as the financial USA Douglas Tompkins, they enter the region taking ownership, through
their mastery of money value, of land and forests of southern larch... There seems to be a real magical
war around the region.


After the war worldwide, various German communities settled in the region, being Cologne Dignity the
best known of all. This German colony is made up of several hundred people and local locals Nearby
claim to hear noises from underground machinery and engines. Some researchers say that the
inhabitants of the colony they have built a whole network of underground tunnels that
intercommunicate them with various points, even reaching the other side of the Andes, a Bariloche, in
Argentina. The idea of this type of builders of tunnels connects us with the hyperboreal myth of Agartha


[°?


and the world “ intraterrestria


It is at this point when after many trips and investigations in the region,


Josep Guijarro ends up approaching the hypothesis of what after Friendship there is a “ group far-right
eugenic linked to mind control ”, as a certain Rodrigo Fuenzalida.


297


Pebble the following question continues: “ Could the Nazis have taken an island in the Chonos
archipelago to develop your technological and breed improvement project? ”. It is at the bottom of the
question that is asked the well-known researcher where we can place ourselves before the essence of
Nazism manifested, as a projection, in this magical point of the earth.


The archipelago Chonos, the Guaitecas Islands, the Taitao Peninsula ... the mystical presence of the
Melimoyu volcano ... the escaped German communities after the war of capitalist-communist
persecution ... Colonia Dignidad...


Magnetic anomalies and space-time that occur in geographical points of the region...


And finally one mystical community called Friendship that comes to intertwine and give coherence to all
this mysterious mosaic, as a projection of the world “ intraterrestrial ”. A great projection “
intraterrestrial ” held on mind-reality “ external ” thanks to the intervention of various factors that
participate magically from an unknown war.


298


8- Conclusion: traveling the journey to the world of the gods


Called by so A huge mystery, photojournalist friends undertook a magical journey to the southern lands
of Chile. Let's see the account of the trip told by themselves in the first person:


“Myths on the founding of a new Empire ( IV Reich ) in the South American cone are very varied and
sometimes too close to plausibility. Many of them have been subjected to a bombardment of articles
that appeared especially in the press esoteric without there having been too many verifications on the
theories that the "researchers" propose. One of these myths, in our view the most supported by recent
testimonies is that of "Friendship".


For a time we collected as much information as possible on the subject and we deduced from this that
without a doubt it was a clear manifestation of a new hidden society, whose origins we placed in the
National Socialist era. The same apparently simple and immediate meaning name, suggested another
less direct reading and rearranging the acronyms NSD HI P FREI appeared, which could mean instead of
the well-known NSDAP.,: National Socialist party German -Free Hitler, or similar...


We therefore decided to carry out some investigations on the ground. Unfortunately coincided with
the attacks of the Twin Towers which extremely de-faculted the use of air transport and wasted a lot of
time. Then from an extensive interview with Miguel Serrano, he told us to go to Colonia Dignidad to
collect more information before heading to the South Pacific Coast, where the testimonies had placed
their encounters with Friendship. The worsening of the world political situation ( in those days it seemed
that the II| World War was immediate ) advised in the last moment to resign our visit to Colonia
Dignidad.... We cross all of Chile to Lake Llanquihué where we protect ourselves of world events very
close to Nueva Braunau in cabins that belonged to some Germans. They told us that it was very common
for UFOs to visit the meadows adjacent to the house of their grandfather, an old National Socialist
militant, they said that when children they loved to see the maneuvers of the UFOs and that when they
took dirt or rose they had fun seeing how his hands made the bones transparent, if they supported them
in the windows, as if they were exposed to X-rays.We cross all of Chile to Lake Llanquihué where we
protect ourselves of world events very close to Nueva Braunau in cabins that belonged to some


299


Germans. They told us that it was very common for UFOs to visit the meadows adjacent to the house of
their grandfather, an old National Socialist militant, they said that when children they loved to see the
maneuvers of the UFOs and that when they took dirt or rose they had fun seeing how his hands made
the bones transparent, if they supported them in the windows, as if they were exposed to X-rays.We
cross all of Chile to Lake Llanquihué where we protect ourselves of world events very close to Nueva
Braunau in cabins that belonged to some Germans. They told us that it was very common for UFOs to
visit the meadows adjacent to the house of their grandfather, an old National Socialist militant, they said
that when children they loved to see the maneuvers of the UFOs and that when they took dirt or rose
they had fun seeing how his hands made the bones transparent, if they supported them in the windows,
as if they were exposed to X-rays.


Finally we decided to jump to the island of Chiloé, north of the Guaitecas Islands, where they had
occurred all "encounters" with Friendship. From the moment we land we try to get in touch with
professionals from the local media, which in no case increased or nuanced the reports we brought from
Spain. We question "machis", local witches without success. Meanwhile, we met a young carabinero, an
exdecent of this police force, who invited us to spend a few days in some cabins located in a solitary lake
surrounded by jungle.It was a magnificent day despite the constant rain that fell on those lush forests.
There, again, we talk and talk about it. | know offered to get us a skipper to take us on his barge through
the multiple channels that separate myriads from islands, but he informed us that the islands were
taken by dangerous criminals who became strong there and even the body of policemen gave up on
carrying out actions in that maze, for the cruelty and savagery of those murderers, proven in the few
attempts to capture them. The most dangerous thing was the patterns themselves,ilk criminals equal to
or greater than outside the law that on many occasions they transported from island to island.


We are heading to Quellon, at the southernmost ends of the Island. There we check the accuracy of the
words from our carabinero friend. We constantly crossed the street with individuals of horrible
catadures, who they did not worry much about hiding large caliber pistols or revolvers. The maritime
police confirmed us, asking that we did not cite the source, strange phenomena and messages captured
by their stations and sightings of mysterious ships.


On the radio local, with secrecy, we were told that very often, without knowing where they appeared to
be very well dressed, there it is really very rare, tall blondes, islanders are short and brown, and with
briefcases like executive. To the shape to see of our colleagues on the radio, it was as if they came from
"none party"......


300


Despite our insistent inquiries, we were unable to find the desired "connection. We decided to appeal
to mediumistic meditation to establish contact.


We had rented a cabin in Punta Lapa, km 0 of the Panamericana, about five hundred meters from the
beach. Recruited in that small refuge, again in the persistent rain, we enter into meditation invoking the
name of Friendship. After a time we perceived an intense violet flash on our mental screen, then my
wife clearly received images of a house located on top of a promontory, with windows painted in a very
garish red color and nothing else....


That night we were awakened by noise from powerful diesel engines. The strange thing is that the one
intense noise did not come from outside but seemed to rise from the same floor under the cabin! We
got out of bed surprised and confused and we went to the window, out there there was no boat in the
sea and yet we still felt the clear and sharp tapping of the engines... Submarines, we told ourselves...


We continue our investigations and we were informed that after the war many Germans had appeared
and that among them a "Swiss" had set up the only hotel in that tiny more than city, a succession of
barracks and that "strange" people were very often seen there". We visited them and some indigenous
"chilotes" in charge of the reception and the small "Swiss" restaurant, they indicated how to find the
house of the "patterns", since they knew nothing.


We follow the coastline, always towards the SOUTH, without finding the Swiss house. Lost by roads
turned into swamps by the rain, in which we were often stuck despite driving a 4x4, finally we come to a


strange grouping of buildings in a very lonely place. There were some strange hangars, unsuspected size.


A group of elderly Germans looked at us in alarm as we approached them for help.


They didn't speak a single word of Spanish! With my macaroonic German | told them we were looking
for the Swiss house and they told us how to go back and get to it. His suspicious gaze did not depart
from us.


Thanks to indications, we reached the foot of a hill and in it was the house of meditation, with all the
details that had been release jiii


301


The mud left us once more stuck at the foot of the mysterious house. While we were trying to get the


car out from the mud a blonde angelic girl with a large sheepdog descended from her. We ask him about


his parents and she told us that they were not at home while looking amused at our futile efforts to get
the car back on the road. Finally, once the situation is overcome, we give the girl a card to give to her
parents, in which we inquired again about Friendship.


Our time on the island was ending, and thanks to the constant openwork to which the rain had
subdued, we had both fallen under a merciless flu with very high fevers. After a few days when ours
situation had worsened even more we received a call citing us the next day, that of our inevitable
departure, in the Swiss Hotel. Weakened by fever, we attended a meeting hopefully that no one
attended iii


The only bookstore on the island, he exhibited in his window a novel, "The Reich under the ice", from
his cover a large silver swastika, contemplated our departure ”.


Any maneuver of approximation brings us closer to the essence that supports the myth. If we look
closely throughout all the chapters that we have developed on the history and myths of National
Socialism, we can see how Nazism is based on a plane that reaches beyond the world of reason,
surpassing it. The mystical madness that ignites the genius of poets and inspires divine words in them
must be governed by a very sharp audacity. This “ madness” is the one that led Nazism to develop its
entire Magic Reich, its economic, ecological, social, scientific development ... its “ Unknown Science ”


[2


and finally his access to the world “ intraterrestrial ” from where they currently maintain contact with


their own.


Nietzsche reaches the same intuition that later it would reach and be in charge of developing and
launching Nazism. We can check it when in your posthumous work “ The Antichrist ” the German
philosopher says: “ Beyond the North, Ice, Death — our life, our happiness... We have discovered
happiness, we know the way, we find the departure of entire millennia of labyrinth. éWhat else has
found it?. (... ) We were enough brave, we had no indulgence with each other or with others; but for a
long time we did not know where to go with our bravery ”.


302


We know “ where to go ”. We are followers of the stele left by the powerful flight of the hyperborean
ancestors and we have found the secret of the “ departure from entire millennia of labyrinth ”.


On all pages from this study we have detailed the process of “ trip to the Interior of the Earth ”. There
comes a point on this journey when the essential self ends up forcing the world “ external ” it reverses
and “ turn around ”. Previously there is a kind of synchronization of the world “ external ” with the “
inside ” where the whole nature is transmuted: something similar to what happens when accessing “
inside ” from the earth through the polar openings.


From the Walhala the gods hold the flame of Fire that burns in the ice and greet all those who fight for
true freedom and they are faithful to the Aryan code of honor:


“My Honor is called Loyalty ”.


303


TRIP TO THE CENTER OF THE EARTH


304


On Democracy; Hypocrisy and Lies
by Tyrodal Knight, Orlando Croy Romero
On Democracy


(Or how my country was deceived).


The word democracy is a Greek word (demos and cratos) which translates as "government of the
people". This political system or way of governing in ancient Greece, was used to elect their
rulers by exclamation, which means that the most acclaimed ruled. I allude here to the Athenian
Ionians, since in peoples such as the Spartan Dorians of the heroic age the King was recognized
by blood, which is the same as charismatically. The Ionian election system (by exclamation) is
what militarily and politically weakened Athens, leading it to confront, after the wars against the
Persians (medical wars) with Sparta, which was ruled by an aristocracy of blood, that is, a
government of the best spiritually speaking, which concluded with "the Peloponnesian war"
putting an end to the Athenian Ionian hegemony, but that is another story.


The democratic system was "popularized" after the French Revolution, being the highest
manifestation of lies and hypocrisy, because it is a perverse and therefore unjust system, whose
purpose is to perpetuate mafias of all kinds in the political and economic power of a given
country. All this with the aggravating factor that this system in the contemporary age is exercised
by the "representatives" of those who have "freely" elected them. It is hard to believe the falsity
and hypocrisy of this election system.


Let the reader see if this suffragette system is not a bad staging of a sainete (with the pardon of
the sainete), being in the suffragette where the falsity of these corrupt people who give them the
name of politicians is most rigorously manifested.


"Democracy is a form of state decay."

"General Philosophy" Nietzsche.

"Democracy represents the non-belief in superior men, in elected classes:"
We are all the same" In the end they are all a selfish and plebeian herd".
"The decline of the idols" Nietzsche


This system of choice, which within the Aberro typology is framed in the ludic, together with the
economy, is the highest manifestation of the swindle.


305


(Editor's Note: Aberro typology is discussed in the work "Fundamentals of Hyperborean
Wisdom", by Luis Felipe Moyano (or "Nimrod of Rosario"). The Aberro typology is classified
into: Playful, sacralizing, and luciferic graceful).


In my homeland (Argentina), all these lies are based on what we know as the "Preamble of the
Argentine Constitution" which reads (those in parentheses are mine):


"We, the representatives of the Argentine nation (read Buenos Aires), gathered in a constituent
national congress by will and election of the provinces (that adhered to Buenos Aires) that
compose it, in fulfillment of pacts (read conspiring in favor of the synarchy), with the object of
constituting national unity (to remain under the tutelage of Buenos Aires), to strengthen justice,
to consolidate internal peace, to provide for the common defense, to promote the general welfare
(of Buenos Aires), and to secure the benefits of liberty (to exploit the provinces), for ourselves,
for our posterity (for Buenos Aires), and for all men of the world who wish to inhabit Argentine
soil; invoking the protection of God (read Englishmen), source of all reason and justice: we
order, decree and establish this constitution for the Argentine nation (read Buenos Aires)".


The reader will wonder what this has to do with democracy. Whoever lives in this mysterious
land that is Argentina, and has somehow internalized its history, will understand this reflection.
When I say that this constitution was written for and in favor of Buenos Aires, it is because for
me, Buenos Aires does not belong to Argentina. I will begin by stating that in this blessed land
there were three men, three patriots who defended the integrity and interests of the Argentine
homeland: General José de San Martin (1778-1850), Brigadier Juan Manuel de Rosas (1793-
1877), and General Juan Domingo Peron (1895-1974).


This statement is based on the fact that after Argentina's "Independence" in 1816 two hegemonic
forces fought for the power of the new Nation, namely: "The Unitarians" and "The Federals". To
call them in geopolitical terms, the "unitarios" are clearly "Atlantists", a denomination that
identifies the colonialist powers, mainly the United Kingdom (England) and the USA, which
founded a strategic alliance known as the "North Atlantic Treaty Organization" (NATO). And
the federals clearly identified with "Euro-asists", a region that can be related to the former Soviet
Union, and at present with the Russian Federation. Maritime power against continental power,
that is to say: Atlantist colonialism against continental nationalism, this confrontation being
evident in the struggles that in the 19th and 20th centuries and in the current 21st century the
peoples undertook and are undertaking for their liberation, including of course the Argentine
Nation.


Undoubtedly the Atlanticists, or the colonialists for that matter, needed a legal framework that
can be called tactical; and this framework is undoubtedly the so-called democracy, which also
needed a legal framework: "The preamble of the constitution". This preamble is of strategic
value (immovable), not so the laws that derive from it that are of tactical value (fluctuating), new
laws, amendment, etc.


306


The changes in the constitution (reform of the constitution) do not invalidate the "immovable"
because they are "of form" and not of "substance". In other words: they are changes imposed by
geostrategic and economic needs of the colonialists.


It would take many pages to expose the struggles that in our Argentina confronted the unitary
synarchs with the national forces, which is not the purpose of this reflection. I will only say that
the first constitution of nationalist profile of Argentina was formed in 1820 with the support of
the provincial governments and who did not agree with that constitution: Buenos Aires. This fact
and many others that are not relevant here, was what consolidated Juan Manuel de Rosas in
power, leading the Atlantist sinarcas forces (at that time France and England) to conspire against
his government, which caused what is historically known as the battle of "La vuelta de
Obligado" in which the Anglo-French fleet had a Pyrrhic victory, which despite it had to
recognize the Argentine sovereignty, but that is another story.


After the overthrow of Rosas in 1850 a new constitution was drafted to suit the atlantists (1853),
since then there were seven reforms of the constitution 1860, 1866, 1898, 1949, 1957, 1972,
1994, all of them to suit the atlantist sinarcas, except for the reform of 1949 because it was
drafted during the National Justicialist government of General Juan Domingo Peron, which as it
is clear was abolished by the sinarcas coup plotters.


It is since the overthrow of the Justicialist national government, which took place in 1955, where
two years later the coup plotters reformed the constitution, becoming a tactical weapon of
inestimable value for the interests of the Atlantist unitary synarchs. In the democratic system
where they claim to "freely" elect their governors, it is the system where the other tactical aspect
of the synarchy is generated: the Marxist subversion with all its ideological variables that
devastated for decades the entire Central and South American continent with the complicity of
democrats and dictators.


These subversives would have no place in a dictatorial system that is generally exercised by the
military power, whose objective is to deliver in a summary manner the wealth that is temporarily
indispensable for economic and geostrategic reasons to its Atlantist masters. From this
perspective, it is obvious to say that the unitary traitors are the ones who create the conditions for
this surrender to take place, be they dictatorial or democratic governments. We Argentines have
a long historical experience of these facts.


"Equal rights for all: this is the most marvelous injustice, for it is precisely the superior men who
suffer under this regime". ("Thus Spoke Zarathustra" Nietzsche).


307


"... The Christian-democratic mentality favors the herd animal, the dwarfing of man weakens the
great master feathers; it hates constraint, hard discipline, great responsibilities, great audacities.
The most mediocre take advantage and establish their measures of their values". ("Ecce homo
"Nietzsche).


In democratic systems, groups of subversive ideology are organized and supported by those
interests that respond to Atlanticism and tolerated by the unitary democracies, which act as
sepoys of those interests, the objective of these movements being the destabilization of
"democracy" to justify coups d'état that will bring about "internal order". This alternation
between dictatorship and democracy is the cause of the economic, political and moral
deterioration of any country, in this case Argentina. This manipulation, this baseness, this
betrayal could never be carried out if it were not with the complicity of the Unitarians. That is:
Buenos Aires.


These unitary traitors are in evidence when in the XIX century they commit a crime of lése
justice against the heroic Paraguayan people, which the sinarchy called "The war of the triple
alliance", and the nationalist Paraguayan people, "The great war". This nationalist people had a
fleet of ships built in the country, with iron and steel foundries, its own railroads, telegraphs,
hospitals and free and compulsory education, and with the lowest rate of illiteracy in the three
Americas!


The material and spiritual power of this nation, governed by the principles of the Primordial
Wisdom, is to be found in the migration to America of the Cathars with the logistic support of
the Teutonic Knights after the "defeat" inflicted by the forces of evil in the 13th century,
historically known as "The Crusade against the Albigensians", something that will be understood
by those who have been instructed in the Primordial Wisdom. All the Argentine provinces,
except for Buenos Aires, opposed this fratricidal war spiritually speaking. But this is also another
story.


It is clear and evident that these historical events were based on an institutional legal principle
known as the "Preamble of the Argentine Constitution", which, as I stated above, is of a clear
Atlantist unitary nature; being these same unitaries those who in 1946 called "zoological
alluvium" the people who en masse went to the capital city to demand the release of General
Peron, who the unitaries had imprisoned, and who even today contemptuously call "little black
heads" all those non-whites who go to Buenos Aires for work.


It must be clear that this derogatory qualification was and is coined by the white oligarchs who
are mostly concentrated in the capital, which is the same as Buenos Aires. For example: The war
for the recovery of the Malvinas Islands was planned by the unitaries of Buenos Aires and fought
by Corrientes, Entre Rios and Cordobeses, to name the ones who had the most casualties, which


308


is the same as saying, the federalists of the Argentine provinces, events that I will detail in
another reflection.


But let's go back to democracy. Argentina's national constitution, that book whose laws nobody
complies with, states: "The people only govern through their representatives". This is at the very
least humorous, only a cynic or an ignorant person can give veracity to such a fallacy. The
representatives, read politicians, were never interested in the suffragists! What's more, they
always made fun of them! These mafias made up of politicians who call themselves democratic,
will always agree to enrich themselves and perpetuate themselves in power with the never
fulfilled promise of achieving welfare for the people, who with great impudence and total
hypocrisy shout at the top of their voices Democracy is the best system we have! These parasites
would have to add: To steal and enrich us!


Why continue writing about these despicable scum who without exception are traitors to the
homeland. This is so because these corrupt people have always acted as lackeys of hidden and
sometimes not so hidden powers. This is so true that even the so-called Peronists never called
themselves National Justicialists, which is the name of General Peron's ideology, and this for a
simple reason: they are traitors who are functional to the unitary-atlantist strategies.


Dear and respected compatriot, where did the National Justicialist maxim of: social justice,
economic independence and political sovereignty go? It would be necessary to ask the so-called
Peronists, outside or inside the government.


For example: At present (December 2011) there is no social justice (25% of Argentina's
population of 43 million inhabitants is indigent and subsists on state subsidies). There is no
economic independence: (Foreign debt repayments are imposed by international organizations,
for example "The Paris Club"). National sovereignty does not exist either: (Millions of hectares
of the Homeland have been sold to foreign economic powers; for example, the fresh water
reserves "De los esteros del Ibera" in the province of Corrientes, and 3,000,000 hectares in the
north of Patagonia to China). It is all too clear that these so-called Peronists are anything but
National Justicialists, they are nothing more than traitors to the nationalist principles set forth in
the 1949 constitution and repealed after the unitary coup d'état of 1955.


This coup d'état was planned and carried out by the Unitarians of Buenos Aires, who curiously
were sons and grandsons of European emigrants, which is the same as saying that they were
white. Curious, isn't it? Does this mean that the white race in Argentina is Unitarian-Atlantist?
Yes, this is what we Argentine nationalists call oligarchs. These whites, product of the
migrations of the last 150 years, were those who fled from the poverty and the wars that in those
times plagued Europe, mainly the planned migrations at the end of the XIX century until
approximately the middle of the XX century. These migrations, mainly of Italians, are the ones
that currently make up, partially or totally, 50% of the Argentine population, seconded by the


309


migration of Spaniards, which increased after the civil war of 1936-1939. These emigrants
(strictly speaking refugees) were anarchists and communists.


Ask the Argentines who read this reflection:


Isn't it curious that the subversive organizations, 1.e., Marxists and anarchists that operated in our
country at the beginning of the 20th century were of Italian or Spanish origin?


There were also migrations of Arabs, Poles, Jews, Germans, etc.
What does this have to do with democracy, the reader may ask?


To this inquiry I answer: that migrations were planned, and in many cases facilitated when not
subsidized for a specific strategic purpose. And what is this strategic purpose? I will answer with
another question: What do you think, dear reader, but the culture that these emigrants carried?
The Primordial Wisdom teaches that "culture is a strategic weapon of the synarchy", and a
weapon in the context of a war, whether it is used in a tactical or strategic way, aims to impose
and bend the will of the enemy, and the enemy of culture, needless to say, is us, which they
know well, we are a "hard nut to crack", reason for which they move tactically and take as
objective our affections that become by the setting of affective sense, as sacred symbols of the
archetypal structure, which by the way is what the man or woman who appreciates himself or
herself as spiritual will have to face in a fierce combat, but this is also another story.


wom moo


(Editor's Note: "setting of meaning", "sacred symbols", "archetypal structure", are concepts of
the Hyperborean Wisdom, presented in Volume I of "Fundamentals of Hyperborean Wisdom"). I
of "Fundamentals of Hyperborean Wisdom").


Thus, the above argument has to do with democracy as a tactical-strategic element of
domination, applied to all the pre-Columbian peoples of America, for example, the Maya, Toltec
and Aztec people, direct descendants of the spiritual Atlantis, and further south the Inca people
who as we know are of Viking origin, and the Sioux and Blackfeet peoples of North America
who are also direct descendants of the red Atlantean race, and this to name the most important
ones.


How to subdue and dominate these people who, consciously or not, knew who they were dealing
with?


Using the only two weapons they possessed: culture and force. We are in the XVI century in
which the culture was the Judeo-Christian religion that had nothing to do with the spiritual force
that the pre-Columbian civilizations possessed, there being no way to persuade these "savage"
peoples, using the only option they had left: force.


310


They killed tens of millions in unequal wars, in the mines as slaves, by poisoning them so as not
to confront them, or simply by killing them! While "waiting" for more subtle weapons of
domination.


Dear reader, do not believe the dogmatic historians who want you to believe that all this
genocide was carried out (and is carried out!) for the "thirst" of Gold, or of material riches, which
is the same thing. It was, and is, a genocide afflicting the spirit. It was a crime against spirituality
committed in the war we wage against matter! A war that we will undoubtedly win very soon.


The most subtle weapons that the forces of evil were waiting for to subdue these heroic peoples
who were resisting in spite of their millions of casualties, were beginning to be concealed in the


heat of the so-called "French Revolution" and its three concepts: "Liberty", "Fraternity" and
"Equality", principles of a Masonic nature, fundamental in any representative democracy.


But conditions in America were not ripe for the application of such social concepts, they had to
be created, and they created them! It is known as the "War of Independence" Is the reader getting
the picture? Not in vain all these independence movements were supported politically and
financially by the English Freemasonry with the support of the so-called "Creoles", due to the
war it had with the kingdom of Spain for geopolitical reasons. But this is also another story.


So the new "independent" nations needed a legislation in which everyone would have the
possibility to express themselves freely. And what would that legislation be? Yes, you guessed it,
dear reader! The representative democracy, whose preamble and the compendium of laws
derived from it, as explained above, nobody complies with, and this for a simple reason: They
are not interested in it. Don't you think so, reader? I invite you to open at "random" the book of
the National Constitution and read any Law or paragraph and you will corroborate by yourself
that this Law has never been complied with.


Juan Manuel de Rosas. "The restorer of the laws". Father of Argentine federalism.


Despite this fallacy, corrupt and hypocritical politicians continue to claim that democracy is the
best system known, ignoring or hiding the fact that genocide continues in a more subtle way. At
the beginning they were killed in the name of civilization, which is the same as saying in the
name of God; and after the so-called Independence until today, they are killed by the "free
market"... of money. This is what I call "economic-financial holocaust".


This new genocide has killed as many or more men, women, children and the elderly than the
Spanish conquistadors in complicity with the Judeo-Christian church!


This could never have been done without the help of what we know as representative democracy.


There were patriots who took up arms against this lie because they saw the deception; they are
the ones we know by the name of "Federal Montoneras" who fought against the centralist-unitary


311


governments of Buenos Aires after the overthrow of the maximum leader of National federalism
Juan Manuel de Rosas.


Atlantist unitarianism has its representatives and referents since the coup d'état of 1810 by
Bernardino Rivadavia, through Domingo Faustino Sarmiento to the present day.


This subject Sarmiento, who has never been unmasked, is one of the most important heroes of
the Atlantist Unitarians. I will transcribe verbatim some of the thoughts of this "Sefior" who
professed a pathological hatred of all races except the white English and North American race.


Sarmiento writes in his book "Facundo":


"The blacks placed in the hands of Rosas a zealous espionage, in charge of servants and slaves,
providing them, in addition, with excellent and incorruptible soldiers of another language and of
a Savage race... Happily the continuous wars have exterminated the male part of the population."


He also despised Italians whom he called "Palurdos", "bachichas" and "ignorant".


The unitarianism of this subject is evident when he writes that: "Argentines are a harmful
amalgam of races incapable and inadequate for civilization" (Sarmiento, complete works. Ed.
Belin Hnos. Parias 1909).


Sarmiento wrote on April Ist, 1868: "With emigrants from California a North American colony
will be formed in the Chaco; it may be the origin of a territory, and one day a Yankee state. If
they conserve their type, I will see to it that they conserve their language as well" (José Maria
Rosa. "Historia Argentina”. Volume VID).


Do you feel disgusted as a reader? You haven't read anything yet!


In 1844 he stated: "Will we succeed in exterminating the Indians? For the savages of America I
feel an invincible repugnance without being able to help it. These scoundrels are nothing more
than filthy Indians whom I would send to be hanged if they reappeared. Lautaro and Caupolican
(Mapuche (Toqui) chiefs who fought against Spanish domination) are lousy Indians, because that
is how they all are, incapable of progress, their extermination is providential and useful, sublime
and great. They must be exterminated without even sparing the little one, who already has an
instinctive hatred of civilized man" (El progreso 27/9/1844; El Nacional 25/11/1876).


Not vomited yet? Maybe he will now.


"If the poor in hospitals, in beggars' asylums and orphans' homes are to die, let them die, because
the State has no charity, no soul. The beggar is an insect, like the ant. He collects waste. So he is
useful without needing to be given money. What does it matter if the State lets die those who
cannot live because of their defects? Orphans are the last beings of society, children of vicious
parents, they should be given nothing to eat". (Speech in the Senate of Buenos Aires, September
13, 1859).


312


Wait, wait, don't throw up yet!


"I hate popular barbarism...the rabble and the gaucho people are hostile to us...as long as there is
a chiripa there will be no citizens Are the masses the only source of legitimacy and power? The
poncho, the chiripa and the rancho are of savage origin and form a division between the cultured
city and the people, causing the Christians to degrade themselves...you will have the glory of
establishing throughout the Republic the power of the cultured class by annihilating the uprising
of the masses". (Letter to Mitre on September 24, 1861; in USA).


When Sarmiento found out that in Cérdoba there was a town called "Fraile muerto" (Dead Friar),
he was disgusted and ashamed of the name and had it changed immediately. He asked if any
English or North American resided there, they answered him yes and it was called Mr. Bell.
"Then call it Bell Ville" ordered the sinarca.


Domingo Faustino Sarmiento. 33rd Degree Mason.


He was interrupted by General José de San Martin in his exile in France, when he was arguing
against Rosas denying his accusations. He also put a price on the head of José Hernandez (1000
Patacones) for having written the "Martin Fierro”.


A book could be written with the statements of this traitor to the homeland, but you, dear reader,
have to vomit.


There are many historians who, in spite of these execrable statements, defend this traitor,
alluding to the works concerning the defense of the homeland, education and science in general.
What they do not say is that all these reforms were carried out by and for the Atlantist Unitarians
of Buenos Aires, because for Sarmiento (and not only for him) Argentina is Buenos Aires!


For some reason the imbeciles and useful idiots of the provinces accept as slaves that they are,
the maxim that the unitaries themselves imposed on them, such as "God attends in Buenos
Aires".


"We are a material colony because we have been spiritually colonized."

José Maria Rosa.

Argentina has a plethora of traitorous Unitarians, among whom the following stand out
- Bernardino Rivadavia (1780-1845),

- Justo José de Urquiza (1801-1870),

- Faustino Sarmiento (1811-1888),


- Bartolomé Mitre (1821-1906),


313


- Julio Argentino Roca (1843-1914).


All of them are democratic to the hilt. The 20th century also has its own, but in this case unitary
dictatorial coup plotters:


- José Félix Uriburu (1868- 1932),

- Isaac Rojas (1906- 1993),

- Eduardo Leonardi (1896-1956),

- Juan Carlos Ongania (1914-1995),
- Jorge Rafael Videla (1925-2013),


all of them unitary military men. Both the "democratic" and the de facto presidents were
functional to the synarchy, strategically alternating in power.


The reasons why the "Republic" of Buenos Aires had and still has a belligerent hatred against the
true Argentine people, are not only historical, but also anthropological and even racial.


To understand this affirmation, it is necessary to keep in mind that the white race that migrated to
Argentina began to be the majority with respect to the other mestizos in the second half of the
XIX century. These mestizos, who significantly possessed black blood, were the ones that
Sarmiento treated with contempt in his speeches and writings. They were also the most
discriminated and enslaved, in spite of the fact that in 1853 slavery had been abolished. That the
musical culture of Buenos Aires that we know with the name "Tango" is of African origin, the


mom


same as all the Latin American folk music that we know such as: "cha cha cha", "mambo",
"rumba", "salsa", "cumbia", "samba", "bamba", "conga", "milonga", "guaracha", "candombe"
etc. are of obvious African pronunciation. All these rhythms in which the percussion instruments
stand out, all have names originating in African dialects. This "music", certainly cheerful and
festive, has its origin in the black race and its later mixture with the native peoples of the region,


who in the XIX century were slaves in all South America.


Something similar happened with tango, with the aggravating factor that this music was
assimilated by the white race and incorporated to its culture, that is, to Buenos Aires. Dear
reader, search at "random" the lyrics of Tango you want and you will begin to understand what I
mean, especially if you understood what the "Principle mood", but in this case the archetypal
woman is not white, which has caused and causes havoc in the weak "portefios" and the central
region of the Republic. And the carnavalito, the samba, the chacarera and other national
expressions? No, not those, it is music of gauchos, nationalist music, with the tango we better
manage the egregore that feeds on the white race unitary-atlantist!


The "tanguero" lacks ideals, he doesn't care about his homeland, and very seldom about his
family, he is only interested in his wife... who abandoned him Did the reader notice how folk


314


music was taken out of its native interpretation? I mean by this that instruments that have nothing
to do with the traditional have been included in its interpretation, for example: the saxophone,
drums, clarinet, etc. The same thing happened with tango, but on the contrary, it was defended
and protected from all poetic and musical innovation, accepting with many reservations
interpreters such as "El sexteto mayor", "Salgan De Lio" to name the best known ones. But the
"heresiarch" of tango, Astor Piazzola, was not forgiven for having taken his "feet off the plate”.
This great musician, author and composer is slowly being forgotten because of the conspiracy of
those who were defeated by the archetypal Dama, and who are currently under her orders, so:
Shoot against Piazzolla; he does not feed our beloved mother...Binah!


One could safely say that Piazzola tried to flee from the Dama archetype (musically speaking of
course), and that was not forgiven.


Let us return to democracy. In the middle of these options are the cowards disguised as
"progressives", a term that identifies the social pariahs who currently hide behind the suffragettes
in order to achieve material gains or that someone from the political power does something for
them.


I will end with three songs from "Martin Fierro" where the envy and subsequent hatred that
Sarmiento felt for the decision and courage of the nationalist gaucho, spiritual qualities that this
guy never had, is evident.


"In danger What a Christ! The heart is enlarged,
For all the land is a field,

And no one should be surprised by that:
He who considers himself a man
Wherever he wants, he makes a wide leg".
"I don't make myself next to the footprint.
Even if they come with their throats slit,
With the soft ones I am soft,

And I'm tough on the tough,

And none in a hurry

He's seen me backtracking".


"My glory is to live so free


315


Like the bird in the sky:

I make no nest on this ground
Where there is so much to suffer,
And no one will follow me
When I soar".


(Author: Croy Romero)


On Hypocrisy and Lies
(Or of the dogma of modernity).
(Article written by the Tyrodal Knight, Orlando Croy Romero).


There is no doubt that we are living in a corrupt and decadent civilization because it is
hypocritical and lying. These two adjectives are frequently used to denominate certain behaviors
of those who are part of a given human group.


It is necessary to clarify that lie and hypocrisy are understood by the fact that these two words
have lost the punishable meaning they intrinsically have. This is so because this decadent society
is founded and sustained by these two adjectives. This is analogous to a world of drunks wanting
to teach what sobriety is. In this case the drunkards are the hypocrites.


A hypocrite is someone who feigns feelings he lacks, or expresses ideals he never follows.


The word "hypocrite" comes from the Greek Hypokrites meaning "actor". It comes from the verb
Hypokriynein which means to act or exaggerate.


It is indescribable the disgust I have for these subjects, be they men or women. This disgust is the
reason why it is difficult for me to describe them in this reflection, which is why I will limit
myself to illustrate what they really are; because "an illustration is worth a thousand words". I
will begin by removing the mask of those abominable people who claim to love children.


Dear reader, here is the man, the woman... and abortion!
Fetuses in a waste bag.


"It is said that abortion is a means to help the woman, when in reality what is being sought is an
accomplice to murder, with the aggravating factor that it is a filicidal act."


316


Victim of a hypocritical love.

"Abortion as planning is nothing other than the planning of death."
"Fetal life is denied or misrepresented to justify murder."

"To deprive the birth of a child, ethically, is a crime against childhood."


"What is serious is that the mass media, together with education, which is also massive,
encourages and promotes the murder of children before they are born."


Whoever mistreats children or prevents them from being born, it is because the innocence that
belongs to them has died within them, and in its place the seed of Evil has germinated".


The so-called humanists, be they democratic, socialists, communists, freemasons, etc., always
proclaimed the struggle for the weakest. They always proclaimed the fight for the weakest. The
poor against the rich, the black against the white, the weak against the strong. It was necessary to
take the side of one of them who curiously never took the side of the children. For this social
scum, war, the death penalty or any form of violence was condemnable, so that weapons had to
be opposed to the firing squad and the scaffold. For them, life was the first thing to be sacrificed
for, to improve the quality of life of the needy, the disinherited, in short, the weak.


The one with the gloved hand is the one who claims to love his children and children.


So far so good. One could agree or disagree with these "Malthusians", but something happened
with these "wise men", something that would be the most abominable, despicable and satanic
emerged at the threshold of the world's sense: Abortion.


This ethically unspeakable act has now become an institutionalized dogma, which is to say with
certainty that death has been legalized.


Child killed in an abortion.


The discussion regarding abortion arose because these humanist criminals were unable to deny
the life of the fetus, and took the discussion to the question of whether the fetus was a person or
not. This position of whether the fetus was a person or not, was circumvented by targeting the
mother, affirming that she is a person and therefore has the capacity to make decisions. This
position condemned the child to death, asserting that although it was a life, it was not a person!
My dear reader, if this is not hypocrisy, what the fuck is?


Those children who were saved from being killed in the womb with an abortion, left one hell to
fall into another: the hell of life, with the aggravating factor that they are totally defenseless in
the midst of a terrible war in which they are taken hostage if not killed by their captors (parents,
religious, educators, etc.), leaving many casualties on the battlefield, including many wounded,
such as those idiotized by education, internet and television.


317


There is a veiled truth, hidden, denied if not unknown; it is the fact that children are not delivered
(natural way), they are born by cesarean section (cultural way), unless the birth by the latter way
is for medical reasons, which in no way means that it is not negative for the child, since a design
has been altered by a cultural fact.


There are also late-term abortions. This, for example, is a social abortion.

Child eating garbage found in the street.

Did the reader realize that children no longer play as they once did, emulating their "elders"?
The Lord's favorite food: Pain.


The game is nothing more than the actualization of virtual (cultural) matrices through the
creation of meaning. Boys no longer play at war, nor do they play at emulating the activities of
their elders, mainly at work. Girls no longer play at being a mother and therefore with dolls.


Dear reader, there is no doubt that abortion is responsible for this decadence, fundamentally the
covert ones, such as cesarean sections and the subsequent abandonment, which is also a product
of the lack of affection and authority of the parents (fundamentally men), who in some way were
also aborted...by the social system.


With this deplorable and terrifying picture, the child passes to a social stage known as
adolescence. This stage is nothing more than a new trench where he will have to face the same
enemies with other aspects but stronger. The adjective "adolescent" lacks a clear definition,
except that semantically it means "lack", which is not important here, since what is important is
the context in which adolescence manifests itself.


This period of life is characterized as the most combative due to the "independence" that
naturally corresponds to the young person with respect to the family and social environment.


You choose: This...


The success in confrontations with the superstructure (social environment) depends on the
weapons with which they have been endowed, which apparently are not the most adequate. And
what are these indispensable and strategic weapons? Let us see:


Hatred and envy is nothing other than the hypostatic unfolding of Evil in the archetypal structure.


There is a manifest envy towards young people on the part of the elders. This is the reason why
they are abandoned and left to their own devices.


...or this.


318


The profound implication of this sentence must be sought within each person responsible for his
or her education, which is where this hypostasis manifests itself, which, as I said above, is
nothing other than the manifestation of Evil in the archetypal structure.


It could well be said that youth has been given as a sacrifice to the God of modernity, that
Moloch that feeds on the pristine and noble that is youth. They, the hypocrites, the corrupt, be
they educators, judges, or whoever has a social responsibility, are the new sacrificers who
officiate as "guardians of the threshold", culture being the logistical support of this satanic
scourge.


It is of cardinal importance that young people be instructed in the different sciences or
disciplines that the superstructure offers them, so that by using the different habitual languages
and with strategic orientation, they can evaluate the reality that surrounds them and with it form
a mode of movement to avoid falling into the trap set by the enemy strategy.


Whoever lives in an urban environment and lacks this instrumentation provided by the different
habitual languages, will be in a state of total defenselessness, remaining at the mercy of the
enemy who will integrate him to the iron aspects of the superstructure.


Thus, the greater the knowledge of the variables of "reality", the greater the possibility of
forming a strategy of liberation. All this will be worthless if the young person has not been
instructed in the only spiritual manifestation of man: Art.


Yes! There is no way to purify the blood in an urban environment except by knowing in depth its
tactical variables, which are none other than the different scientific disciplines (usual languages)
if not with the mutant power, with the help of the only pure and spiritual thing of man. Art.


You choose: To live under this symbol...
..or this one.


There is no doubt that it is this instruction that young people (and not only young people) suffer
from, a lack that is evident in the idiocy in which they have submerged their minds and their
spirits. It is only necessary to see the total abandonment, the deep loneliness in which the young
people find themselves for it to be irrefutable that they are atonement victims of this perverse and
diabolical system, built and exercised by these new priests called "officials", be they politicians
or educators, who are only functional to that demon that in ancient times was known by the name
of Moloch.


But not everything ends here, because the nameless evil of this system (read civilization) could
not survive without the logistical support of its slaves who by the millions hide behind the mask
that we know by the name of "cultural subject". They are the ones who collect the food that their
Lord most desires: pain! This pain, which, according to Buddha, is found in desire, is what
becomes the guiding force in the lives of those young people who, by giving meaning to sex, fall


319


into the nets of the guiding design that governs women, which is none other than that of
procreation. This, like every design that is a priori of the subject, is fixed in the young man (and
not only in him!) who, with the tactical contribution of the superstructure, forms what we know
as family.


This institution formed with cultural projections, which converge with animal designs, is the
safest prison in which the Self, which is a reflection of the infinite Self, will never escape unless
the charismatic song of the eternal mediates between it and the world, a portent that is forbidden
to the great majority of men because they lack the inner ear, an indispensable "organ" to discern
a musical language that primordial wisdom calls "language of the birds".


But let's not get off the subject. The family institution, as any archetypal construction, is born,
evolves and dies, as long as it does not leave descendants; and in this descendants is the crux of
the matter. Without children there is no family! Yes, my dear reader... the family as we know it
is a hostage factory, for that is what children are. It is not possible to love a child when you have
murdered your brother with an abortion or are planning to do so!


The great majority of those who today are parents by design (not by conviction) have siblings,
children and grandchildren murdered in the maternal womb, being a mitigating factor if this
crime has been committed out of animality or ignorance, subhuman states that do not for that
reason cease to be punishable.


In this context the life of the couple that became a family develops, with the aggravating factor
for the man that he will be held responsible for everything he did not know or could not achieve
for the welfare of his family; and this is because of something that very few see: The woman, by
archetypal manipulation is a "partner" in the gains, never in the losses (the man is always
responsible if the woman miscarries). In such a way that the love that is proclaimed and wanted
to be demonstrated in the bosom of the family when they act as lovers, wanting to demonstrate it
with caresses, kisses and kindnesses, is undoubtedly the highest manifestation of hypocrisy and
lies.


This would be nothing serious, it would be nothing more than a pathological relationship, except
that this type of union, using what they call love, in a sea of secretions and sweat, in a banquet of
shared pleasure, they gestate the future victims that will be eliminated in an abortion, and if they
are lucky enough to come out unscathed, the superstructure in which they will be born, which is
governed by the sacrificers in their service, will do so.


They are not playing; they are looking for food in the garbage!


Don't you remember reader? Please answer these two questions inwardly.


320


Question: How can you love a son when you have murdered his brother? How can you call
"dear" or "my love" to someone who has been lied to and deceived? If this is not hypocrisy my
dear reader, what the fuck is it? Please answer.


This does not end here, there is still more! Inexorably this man marches towards a sure and
insurmountable old age, I allude here to a biological old age, since the spiritual old age has long
since been lost. It is outrageous the contempt, indifference and even hatred with which this
society, this Judeo-Christian culture treats the elderly. This treatment is based on the fact that this
old man is close to death, and the hypocrite and the coward are frightened by this insurmountable
fact. This is one of the reasons why the elderly are abandoned to their fate.


I ask, who would have the courage to live next to death? Not the hypocrite and the coward, of
course. So shoot at the old! And that's what they do.


Seen from the transcendent, the elder is a warrior without knowing that he is one. This is a truth
that has a profound metaphysical implication that has a direct relationship with the spiritual
chaining, something that will be understood by those who were and are instructed in the
primordial wisdom.


Will they understand?
Elderly man dead in the street. One more casualty. The enemy is relentless.


This warrior, without knowing that he is one, has been tried to be eliminated from the womb, and
for reasons that are not relevant, he reached the current situation, which is analogous to what he
was in the womb.


Yes, my dear reader. The child is born on a battlefield and this fact forces him to fight whether
he wants to or not, and if he comes out of the combat unscathed, the enemy will never forgive
him and the punishment will be contempt, abandonment and scorn, or extreme abandonment as
illustrated in the photo above.


If you do not believe what you read, I invite the reader to visit this old people's home, which is
given the academic name of "Old People's Home" when in reality they are dungeons that only
that of a


infinite hypocrisy and wickedness can bear. Badly eaten, mistreated when not punished, this is
how the coward and the hypocrite treats the one who is pointing out his certain and
insurmountable future, which is death, with the aggravating factor that this conspiracy is carried
out with the complicity of the children! How can they go for a walk in a shopping mall with an
old man? No sir, he is not modern, what are people going to say!


Novice children, defeated in the first combat. Victims of hypocrisy.


Veteran of a thousand lost battles. Resisted until here.


321


This execrable society has a sick, satanically sick contempt for children and the elderly. Some
for going into combat, and the others for resisting in combat. Do you understand? You must
understand or you are lost!


A society that does not care for children and the elderly must inevitably agree with abortion,
since it is the cause of such genocide.


Someone said: "I am the alpha and the omega, the first and the last".
Was he alluding to children and the elderly?


He also said, "Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of
heaven belongs to such as these."


Obviously I was not alluding to the children in the illustration above, much less the aborted ones.
Or was I!


If this is not hypocrisy, what the fuck is!


"Hypocrisy is the way in which the mediocre, the unworthy and the unscrupulous relate to
society. It is a worm that crawls, lies and betrays for a crumb of recognition and prominence".


"We must beware of hypocrites; they are always ready to betray, they do not know loyalty, they
always conspire, and they are experts in lying. When they give their word they never keep it; and
this for one reason: they have none!".


Ur- Man Croy.


Beyond the disgust that can be felt by this hypocritical and cowardly society, the old and the
children also have their heroes and martyrs, those who fought until the end, going through
hunger, persecutions and thousands of other vicissitudes. I will narrate actions of unknown
historical facts, because they were not taught and hidden ex-profeso for fear of being emulated.


In 1806-1807 the English invaded Buenos Aires, then a Spanish colony. Everyone resisted the
invasion, when I say everyone I mean men and women, old people and children. In those actions,
the boundless courage of a child stood out, who among the shrapnel logistically supported the
resistance, reaching gunpowder projectiles and throwing stones and boiling water at the invader.
This child, wounded in combat, was distinguished for his courage; he was only 13 years old. His
name was Juan


Manuel de Rosas. The restorer and father of Argentine federalism.


In 1810, General Manuel Belgrano, on his way to Paraguay with a small army of 250 men, had
an encounter with the Spanish colonialists. Prior to that battle the general attended a meeting
with his officers in which a group of countrymen were present to be accepted as volunteers,


322


among them there was a boy of only 12 years old who begged to be accepted as a volunteer. He
was accepted with conditions that are not relevant.


On March 9, 1811, the bloody battle of Tacuari took place. At the front of the infantry,
haranguing the soldiers and beating the drum, was the 12 year old boy who was killed by a rifle
discharge. His name was Pedrito Rios. He was baptized with the name of "El tamborcito de
Tacuari”.


In the second half of the XIX century the heroic people of Paraguay engaged in a war against
Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay known as "The War of the Triple Alliance", which according to
respectable historians fought to the dogs (this is not a metaphor) together with soldiers, women,
children and old people in defense of the Paraguayan homeland. The sacrifice and courage of
these people can only be compared to the defense of Stalingrad or the defense of Berlin in the
Second World War, don't you think so? Take a closer look at that feat and you will see. I will
give you a fact: Paraguayan casualties in the war were 1,000,000 between civilians and military,
75% of the population, and this between 1865-1870! (Here the hypocritical and cowardly
Argentines were frightened because in Malvinas 600 patriots died, hiding that the British had
more than 1100 dead soldiers! But that is another story of which I will comment later, because
there is a total ignorance of the battle of Malvinas and the heroism shown by "boys" as the
cowards and hypocrites pejoratively call the patriotic soldiers who fought in Malvinas. Said and
documented by British officers)!


The final combat took place in "Cerro Cora". The forces of the triple alliance counted with 4600
soldiers, the Paraguayan with 480 defenders, 350 were children, old men and women! None of
them deserted, none surrendered! One of the last to fall was the Fuhrer of the Paraguayan
homeland, Marshal Francisco Solano Lopez. All this would be just another war anecdote if it
were not for the fact that the chief of staff of Marshal Lopez (his son) had the rank of colonel. He
died in combat at the head of his men. He was only 16 years old. His name was "Panchito"
Solano Lopez.


The paradigm of the courage of the old and the children was given in World War I, in the
defense of Berlin. The following illustrations will eloquently summarize what would take many
pages to explain.


The Fihrer decorating children in the defense of Berlin.
"Old men" learning the handling of the anti-tank "panzerfaust".


Waiting for the Russian attack. The two end of the courage. The boy was 15 years old, surely
died.


The Fihrer greeting Hitler Youth children at the defense of Berlin.


Old man learning how to handle the "panzarfaust" anti-tank weapon.


323


This fact, which is not understood and feared by the historians of lies, will be marked with fire in
the memory of all those who feel a boundless contempt for hypocrisy, lies and cowardice.


Words are few, they are not enough to accurately describe the loyalty and courage of this people,
who, like any people who claim to be heroic, will immolate themselves before accepting any
condition that would curtail their freedom.


It must be clear that a people like the one described above is not composed of common citizens
fearful of the laws imposed by hypocrites and cowards. It is composed of heroes! Because a
child, an old man or a woman, by risking their lives for an ideal or for the homeland, which is the
same thing, not evaluating the strength of the enemy, with supreme principles such as honor and
loyalty, cease to be human to participate in the eternal, whether they know it or not!


Whoever reading this reflection does not feel disgust, hatred and the certain desire to destroy
everything, it is for the simple reason that through his veins does not run blood, it runs shit; shit
emanating from the center of this sewer that hypocrites call heart, refuge of cowards and liars.


Since I was a child I was always moved by extreme poverty and destitution, I felt great pity for
the elderly and the children, sometimes feeding them what I took to school as a snack, my
mother collaborating in this. I felt contempt for my classmates when they mocked and laughed at
them, even fighting for it; curiously the teachers always took sides against me. Yes! Something
ran through my veins and I can attest that it was not the shit that ran and still runs to those who
were classmates of the little I studied, and by extension to the vast majority of men and women,
especially those who have friends. Because friends were those who made fun of old people and
indigent children, and now I can say without fear of being wrong that I never had friends, that is,
I never integrated a group of hypocrites!


Whoever despises injustice and inequity cannot have friends, because to be one or to have one,
implies being an accomplice to a crime, a crime against eternity!


Regarding friendship I have something to say. I will do so in the next reflection.


Heil Sieg!


324


The Serpent
Writings of Geburah Michel Lycanon
Infinite Violence


| imagine there are many ways to approach a particular event. | could conceive of a dialogue, a
cup of coffee, an argument that leads to a good shit-stirring and then a barrage of pleadings at
the police station to determine who started the fight. Then a night in the cell, a "hosing down"
with ice water, a few slaps on the wrists, profile pictures, filling out the rap sheet, and finally
free on the streets to get back into a fistfight with another son of a bitch. It's the cycle of divine
violence, pure hostility that if it weren't for law enforcement would result in a massacre worthy
of "the law of the strongest". Maybe this way | would find someone capable of giving me an
honorable death with my balls on straight. It's bullshit!


Writing "The Bow of Artemis" was also an act of infinite violence. Each broken bone, each fall
from the ravine, each sharp blade cutting the skin is like a kind of pagan stigma, a silent
revelation that returns the man of Blood to his primordial origins. This apology to passions, to
hate and love, can only come from a blind fanaticism for death. When | started the play | didn't
know it, but now | understand it. The pact with death has been reestablished.


As an author, there is not much | can cite in the anecdotes of writing, or the log of the creative
act. It is not that there are no anecdotes about the creation of the novel, but simply that they
do not seem to me worthy of being told; they are irrelevant. What | can mention, at the level of
the author, is the insistent and tragicomic affirmation of the veracity of what is written. "The
artist uses lies to tell the truth and the politician, to hide it". But don't judge me, you still don't
know how this mysterious story will turn, | swear that "| only dare what is worthy of a man;
whoever dares more, is not".


If you have followed the development of the novel since Episode One and are about to embark
on Episode Two, you will discover that the work is immersed in a great mystery. As you enter it,
you enter a labyrinth of extraordinary proportion. The story does not easily reveal its secrets,
but | can guarantee that at the end you may find something worthwhile. | did find it, that
something for me is called: Diana.


First Episode - Battle Prefaces


Foreword by Maria E. Torrico. Professor of Linguistics and Languages at the Universidad Mayor
de San Andrés. La Paz, Bolivia.


As a professor of Linguistics | have had the opportunity to read a wide variety of Bolivian
narrative and it is truly remarkable that Bolivian literature is going through a great moment.


325


Genres such as Science Fiction, Epic Fantasy and Supernatural Horror have begun to make
inroads in a Bolivian literary imaginary that was dominated by Creole costumbrismo for several
decades.


One of these remarkable efforts, more as a contribution to juvenile literature, is the First
Episode of "El Arco de Artemisa", a work by the French-Bolivian author Gabriel Michel, better
known by his pseudonym: Gaburah Lycanon Michel. It is in itself a novel trilogy whose first
installment opens cultural registers and makes an idyllic transposition to the loves of youth,
adolescence, puberty and, why not, also of childhood; that is to say, to the first love. It
reencounters us with abandoned dreams, with the factual situation of seeing oneself growing
up overnight and, tacitly, with primal fears. However, the guiding thread of the work - in
contrast to its adolescent narrative axes - is not the idyllic romance itself, but the Primordial
Gnosis.


The striking fusion of Hyperborean Wisdom and the most sublime idyll manages to awaken
powerful nostalgia during the reading. These elements are enhanced by Gaburah's acidic
writing, a narrative imbricated with outbursts of honesty, a form similar to that used by authors
such as Charles Bukowsky or Ernesto Sabato. In terms of content, the novel has a marked
influence of Felipe Moyano and his work "The Mystery of Belicena Villca", a fundamental text of
the so-called "Forbidden Gnosis".


This mysterious literary concoction, a gnostic mixture of quixotic adolescent infatuation, is the
final substrate of a drama of magnitudes impossible to imagine in the flat context of our current
world, and that is precisely why the novel has such an exotic bouquet.


The second edition that the author presents on this occasion is the evolution of a text that,
although at the beginning presented errors, has been consolidated in one of the most curious
and original works written by an author of Bolivian roots. It could be considered as a prurient
and exaggerated story, although very enriching for the spirit, since in all its eccentricity, "El Arco
de Artemisa" becomes exciting. For that reason and much more, this is one of those novels that
linger in the reader's memory as a reflective call; ergo an invitation to sit down ona rainy night
on acomfortable sofa, pour a cup of tea and read the novel while remembering one's first loves
as one reads. After love will come the supernatural and, finally, the impossible. It seems that
even Gaburah himself did not know how this first episode was going to end, leaving the
epilogue open to give way to the next episode.


"El Arco de Artemisa" is a fantastic, youthful, magical novel, imbued with love and tenderness;
but at the same time it is a bloody, erotic, oppressive and revealing novel. As a reader | was
enchanted from the first reading and even today its re-reading still makes me sigh the same


326


way | did the first time. This leads me to conclude, with all certainty, that Bolivian literature is
growing rapidly.


Second Episode - The Twelve Mysteries
Foreword by Mauricio Gamez, Co-publisher of the Editorial de la Casa de Tharsis.


Shady. | can think of no other suitable adjective to describe Gaburah Lycanon Michel. Even his
appearance may seem unfriendly at first glance, and when he speaks he does so with hostility,
he himself accepts it; but his texts reflect something different and that is the tenor of all his
work.


When | was given the opportunity to read the First Episode of this novel trilogy | had the
impression of jumping into a remote and longed-for past, an almost dreamlike childhood that
left me, for a few minutes, meditating in my living room. Even now, when | remember what |
experienced with the first part | can't help but draw a smile. In this Second Episode the
sensation became rational thought, the emotional became empiricism and the idyll mutated
into an epic elegy. | could not have expected less from Gaburah, but | was extraordinarily
surprised to read this second installment of "The Bow of Artemis".


The pillars of the narrative, which during the First Episode had been held by the main
characters of the novel, lie in this text in an all-powerful narrator who takes us through the
fantastic landscapes of other worlds, but from a total third-person perspective. Even the main
thread of the story ceases to be the anguish of growing up, the awakening of sexuality, the first
loves and the encounter with the fantastic and dark, to give way to a profound historical
revisionism that makes the reader doubt his own knowledge of Universal History. The main
character of this Second Episode is, without a doubt, the Arch of Artemis itself; a relic that,
according to the author, has influenced the evolution of man's development from the
beginning.


The narrative structure of "The Bow of Artemis - Second Episode, The Twelve Mysteries" is
made up of the story of the characters of the novel during their travels and subsequent
encounter with the desolation of war, the historical and revisionist account that tells us about
the origin and purpose of the Bow of Artemis, and the gnostic development of twelve
stratagems that summarize the main precepts of the Hyperborean Wisdom (more extensively
exposed by Felipe Moyano).


The development of the story starts from the most earthly scenarios taken from a raw, magical
and experimental realism, passing through the territory of an epic fantasy full of dragons,
castles and swords, until it ends in the most scientific science fiction with detailed logical,
physical and chemical explanations of the circumstances that involve the characters. This


327


particular mixture of magical realism, epic fantasy and science fiction gives the story a special
coloring that takes the reader from the terrifying and supernatural to the romantic and sexual.
In other words, this Second Episode is worthy of being called: "Potpourri of genres".


The climax of the work, distributed in two convenient installments, gravitates on a specific war
event that, towards the end of the story, impregnates the pages with blood, gunpowder and
death. In a second instance, the climax is immersed in the tragedy of the fight between twin
brothers that, as a corollary, opens the doors to a sense of abandonment, as if everything we
had known and lived throughout the work had come to a dramatic end.


This installment can be considered as one of the most accurate references that exist about that
hidden side of the author, the one that never surfaces in the presence of others. Gaburah is a
writer (or apprentice writer, as he has proclaimed himself) who shares a great knowledge of the
Forbidden Gnosis only through a well achieved narrative. And if | must point out something that
makes this work great, it is the deep treatment he gives to the Hyperborean Wisdom with such
a domestic touch. A great work for an obscure author.


Third Episode - Eternal Love
(Excerpt from the original text)


It was an era before time and space existed. 13500 billion years ago before our Lord. The great
white hole, an infinite column of compressed gravity, was opening and expanding as part of the
consciousness of living beings that were not created. They lived outside the white hole, in a
world without light or darkness, without smells, sounds, colors, wind or rain. There was no
ground and no sky, no seas or mountains. Their world with nothing was everything at the same
time, for they were everything and they were nothing. They could be everywhere at any time,
they could fill with the flow of their consciousness countless forms of life in infinite cosmoses
and be themselves their own creation.


Many of these life forms coexisted outside the white hole, so they decided to come together
and co-create a world in which to dwell together, make families, homes, and observe
themselves in the passing of their time and inner space. They did not need goals or purposes,
they existed beyond all finality. They might not live together, but they chose to live together to
observe each other, to experience the only experience that justified existing and sharing a
world and ordering themselves in a society; for they, even in the heat of war or the creation of
knowledge, valued above all things the experience of loving. They created love to understand
the infinitude of their own cosmoses, to experience an icy warmth of cold fire that fed with its
flames the purpose of existing; for there was no purpose, and that 'no purpose’ was, in itself,
the absolute finality; the possibility of 'being' and 'not being’.


328


The Arch of Artemis
(By Gustavo Aguilar)


The novel trilogy "The Arch of Artemis" is a work conceived between gnosis, fantasy, science
fiction, teenage romance, erotic discovery, visceral gore, supernatural horror and Hyperborean
Wisdom.


The first volume of the work, entitled "Primer Episodio, Prefacios de Batalla" and finalist of the
2010 National Juvenile Novel Award, was published by Circulo de Amatista in the city of La Paz -
Bolivia- on November 14, 2011. This first installment begins with the brutal murder of the
person who would become the link between the work and the author -Gaburah L. Michel-. This
character responds to the name of Rodrigo, a 19-year-old young man who is found dead and
tortured in a room of the Psychiatric Hospital of the National Health Fund of Bolivia. Rodrigo's
only posthumous testimony is a box containing diaries and several personal objects of the
people who surrounded him in life. The author, guided only by the diaries and the materials he
inherited from Rodrigo, takes on the task of literalizing everything he received and narrating it
in novel form.


The preface of the play consists of the story of the idyllic dramas and romances of the four main
characters, including the late Rodrigo among them, all teenagers of precocious development
and eccentric artistic virtuosity. The school story, imbricated with tenderness, strong tensions
and modest situations in the discovery of romance and sexuality, is interrupted by supernatural
events that take the characters out of the adolescent-school narrative and drag them into a
spiral of bloody attacks and conspiracies against them and their families. Protected by two
mysterious warriors of superhuman abilities and medieval ways, the main characters manage to
flee from their poachers and embark on a long journey to a city located in a parallel world.
There, the chosen ones will learn to fight with hyperborean techniques and prepare for war.


Three years after its publication, the "First Episode" has managed to become one of the best-
selling and most widely distributed hyperborean novels in Bolivia. After the success of the first
installment, the Circulo de Amatista, in association with the Asociacion Universal Virgen de la
Vega through its publishing house, Casa de Tharsis, is pleased to present the reissue of: "El Arco
de Artemisa - Primer Episodio, Prefacios de Batalla" (The Arch of Artemis - First Episode, Battle
Prefaces).


This re-edited edition contains several scenes cut by the author himself, as well as bonus art
within the graphic gallery and the inclusion of several censored situations, initially
contemplated in the original manuscript. Also, for greater accessibility, the novel is presented in
an exclusively digital version, designed for a comfortable reading in digital media.


329


The re-release of the "First Episode" prologues the soon publication of the "Second Episode" of
this novel trilogy, scheduled for the summer of 2014. This time we find Gaburah L. Michel
looking for a way to continue the story of the diaries of Rodrigo and the other characters, but
without leaving dialectical realism. The "Second Episode" challenges the reader to abandon
logical conventions to let himself be carried away to the world of full fantasy, but with evident
exhibitions of historical reality. The journey of the main characters continues and, in the
process, the book unveils the Twelve Mysteries that explain the Hyperborean Wisdom while
narrating various sightings of the Arch of Artemis throughout the History of mankind. This
installment is full of analogies, myths, tales, legendary battles and adventures in the most
inaccessible places. Bloodbaths become the denominator of the work which, within its story,
includes the sweet romantic and sensual nuances of the first installment, only this time
complemented with the passing of the work of fantasy and science fiction.


"The Bow of Artemis - Second Episode, The Twelve Mysteries" projects itself as one of the most
important Hyperborean novels of the last decade, taking elements from authors such as Miguel
Serrano, Zecharia Sitchin, Felipe Moyano, Jeff Long and J.R.R Tolkien; the magnificent work of
compendium of the Fundamentals of Hyperborean Wisdom, contained in the twelve
stratagems identified by the author, plus the exciting course of a story full of enigmas and
avatars, makes "The Bow of Artemis - Second Episode, The Twelve Mysteries" the most
enriching volume within the trilogy. It is undoubtedly one of the most awaited hyperborean
novels of the season that in the course of 2014 will meet again with its readers.


Gaburah L. Michel (pseudonym) is one of the first Bolivian authors who has begun to work
within the hyperborean theme through the novelistic genre. His literary works are
magnificently accompanied by musical albums that complement a relationship between music
and literature.


As a pianist, writer, philosopher and social communicator, Gaburah L. Michel has amalgamated
his diverse professions and has put them at the service of Historical Revisionism and the
denunciation of multiple truths veiled by the censorship of the system. Among the most
outstanding works of the author is the gnostic and scientific essay entitled: "The Language of
the Pasu", a great work of empirical cut that seeks to prove, through scientific evidence, the
certainty and total veracity of the Foundations of the Hyperborean Wisdom. It is also worth
mentioning his immersion in the Science Fiction genre through his latest novel, entitled:
"Praetorian, Days without Light"; a wonderful story of love and war that unfolds in outer space
and can be classified as a mixture of cyber-punk and space-opera, strongly influenced by the
work of Felipe Moyano, Jack Vance, Ray Bradbury, Gabriel Baar and Vladimir Nabokov.


Among his musical works he heads the soundtrack developed for the First Episode of "El Arco
de Artemisa". A musical album that contains delicately compiled and selected pieces, as well as


330


original works extracted from the context of the novel and that were beautifully interpreted by
the author, recorded and assembled. Also noteworthy is the album "Quasar", soundtrack of the
detective and horror novel of the same name. The gloomy and strident sound of this release
sets the most brutal paranoia and the deepest fears through a magnificent work of musical
editing. Finally it is worth mentioning the soon release of the soundtrack of "Praetorian, Dias sin
Luz", an album in which the author promises to find his audience with the most purist New Age
sound, psychedelic and synthesized, totally thought to give a sensation of existence in the
sidereal space inside the mind of the listeners.


Finally, embarked within the UFO Radio Project, Gaburah L. Michel associated with Pablo Santa
Cruz to realize the radio soap opera entitled: "Belicena Villca, the Last Inca Princess". This new
work arises within a hermetic esotericism that sees the need to emerge through the scripting of
a wonderful novel written by Pablo Santa Cruz. This time we find Gaburah L. Michel totally
dedicated to sound editing, giving atmosphere to the magnificent story of Belicena Villca
through her vicissitudes of life during her travels through America and her subsequent
confinement in a psychiatric clinic.


331


The True Meaning of Lucifer: Destroying the judeo-christian Myths


Crucifixion of Wotan, the "Cross-God" in Externsteine Germany, is the Kristo of Atlantis;
Odin-Wotan, the restorer of the knowledge of the runes (State of North Rhine-
Westphalia) The rocks consist of sandstones originating from the Cretaceous about 120
million years ago.


"An imaginary Spear or Arrow linked the castle of Wewelsburg with the ruins of the
Externsteine (Stern-Steine: "Stone Star" ["stones of the stars"]). And there Wotan,
crucified on the Iggdrasil Tree, was carved. And there is also an open tomb, carved in
the rock, where he was resurrected" Miguel Serrano - The Widower's Son


There are always two stories. One is the official story. The other is the real story. The
first, the official story, is the simplest, you believe it and that's it. To know the second,
the real story, you have to pull the thread of reality to its ultimate consequences, then
you will see something that you may not like, but you will never be able to return to the
herd.


"Belief in the validity and binding character of destiny means that men, in spite of all
daily disappointments and apparent absurdities, say an enthusiastic yes to life, and
praise full of faith the life-creating light of the sun, in spite of night, fog, ice and snow. To
have faith in destiny means once again: to live the heroic "Even So". Otto Rahn,
"Lucifer's Court".


The word "Lucifer" in Isaiah 14:12 presents a minor problem to mainstream Christianity.
It becomes a much bigger problem for biblical literalists, and becomes a major obstacle
to the claims of Mormonism John J. Robinson in A Pilgrim's Way, pp. 47-48 explains:


"Lucifer makes his appearance in the fourteenth chapter of the Old Testament book of
Isaiah, in the twelfth verse, and in no other: "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning! Thou art cut down to the ground, thou that didst weaken the
nations! "


The first problem is that Lucifer is a Latin name. So how do you find your way into a
Hebrew manuscript, written before there was a Roman language? To find the answer, |
consulted a scholar at the library of the Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati. What
Hebrew name, | asked him, was Satan, in this chapter of Isaiah, which describes the
fallen angel becoming the ruler of the demons?


The answer was a surprise. In the original Hebrew text, the fourteenth chapter of Isaiah
does not deal with a fallen angel, but with a fallen Babylonian king, who during his

lifetime had persecuted the children of Israel. It contains no mention of Satan, either by
name or reference. The Hebrew scholar could only speculate that some early Christian


332


scribes, writing in the Latin used by the Church, had decided for themselves that they
wanted the story to be about a fallen angel, a creature not even mentioned in the
original Hebrew text, and to whom they gave the name "Lucifer".


Why Lucifer? In Roman astronomy, Lucifer was the name given to the morning star (the
star we know today by another Roman name, Venus). The morning star appears in the
sky just before dawn, heralding the rising of the sun. The name derives from the Latin
worducem ferre, bearer, or to the bearer, of light. "In the Hebrew text the expression
used to describe the king of Babylon before his death is Helal, son of Shahar, which can
best be translated as" day star , son of the Dawn." The name evokes the brightness of
the golden robe of a proud king.


The scholars authorized by ... King James | to translate the Bible into ordinary English
did not use the original Hebrew texts, the versions translated and used ... largely by St.
Jerome in the fourth century. Jerome had mistranslated the Hebrew metaphor, "morning
star, son of the dawn," as "Lucifer," and over the centuries a metamorphosis took place.
Lucifer, the morning star became a rebellious angel, cast out of heaven to rule eternally
in hell. Theologians, writers and poets interweaved the myth with the doctrine of the
Fall, and in the Judeo-Christian (Catholic) tradition Lucifer is now the same as Satan,
the Devil and ironically the Prince of Darkness.


So "Lucifer" is nothing more than an ancient Latin name for the morning star, the light
bearer. Which can be confusing to Christians who identify Christ as the morning star, a
term that is used as a central theme in many Christian sermons.


Jesus refers to himself as the morning star in Revelation 22:16: "| Jesus have sent my
angel to testify to you these things in the churches | am the root and offspring of David,
the bright and morning star."


And so there are people who do not read beyond the King James version of the Bible,
who say "Lucifer is Satan: so says the Word of God ...."


Henry Neufeld, a commentator on catchy biblical topics went so far as to say.


"This passage is often related to Satan, and a similar thought is expressed in Luke
10:18 by Jesus, which was not its primary meaning. The primary meaning is given in
Isaiah 14:04 which says that when Israel is restored it will 'utter this taunt against the
king of Babylon. .." Verse 12 is a part of this song of mockery. This passage refers first
of all to the fall of that king of the land ..."


How does the confusion arise in the translation of this verse? The Hebrew passage of
this phrase says: "heleyl, ben shachar" which can be literally translated "he who shines,
son of the dawn." This phrase literally means, that the planet Venus appears as a


355


morning star. In the Septuagint, a 3rd century BC translation of the Hebrew scriptures
into Greek, it is translated as "heosphoros," which also means Venus as a morning star.


How did the translation "Lucifer" come about? This word comes from Jerome's Latin
Vulgate. Was Jerome a mistake? Not at all. In America at the time, "Lucifer" actually
meant Venus as the morning star. Isaiah is using the metaphor of a bright light, though
not the greatest light to illustrate the apparent power of the king of Babylon who then
faded away. "


Therefore, Lucifer was not equated with Satan until after Jerome. Later Christians (and
Mormons) equated "Lucifer" with "Satan".


Why is this a problem for Christians? Christians now generally believe that Lucifer (or
the Devil is equated with Satan) but is a being that has always existed (that was created
in or near the "beginning"). Therefore, they also think that the Old Testament "prophets"
believed in this creature. Isaiah's scripture is used as proof (and has been used as such
for hundreds of years). As Elaine Pagels explains, however, the concept of Satan has
evolved over the years and the early writers of the Bible did not teach such a doctrine.


The irony for those who believe that "Lucifer" refers to Satan is that the same title
("morning star" or "light bearer") is used to refer to Jesus, in 2 Peter 1:19 (see HERE)
where the Greek text has exactly the same term: "PHOSPHATE PHOROS" "LIGHT
BEARER". This is also the term used by Jesus in Revelation 22:16 (see HERE).


And why is Lucifer a much bigger problem for Mormons? Mormons claim that an ancient
record (the Book of Mormon) was written in the early 600 B.C., and the author in 600
B.C., supposedly copied Isaiah in the original words of Isaiah. When Joseph Smith
purported to translate the supposed "ancient record," he included the Lucifer verse in
the Book of Mormon. Obviously he was not copying what Isaiah actually wrote. He was
copying the King James Version of the Bible. Another book of LDS Scriptures, Doctrine
and Covenants, promotes this problem in 76:26 (see HERE) when it states the false
Christian doctrine that "Lucifer" means Satan. This erroneous doctrine also extended to
a third set of Mormon scriptures, the Pearl of Great Price, which describes a war in
heaven (see HERE) based in part, on Joseph Smith's incorrect interpretation of the
word "Lucifer," which only appears in Isaiah.


FT De Angelis, a Mormon apologist and author of The Polytheism of the Bible and The
Mystery of Lucifer, comments as follows:


"It seems of minor importance, but - the actual term used in the Greek Septuagint
version of Isaiah 14:12 (since there is no one way to accurately transcribe) is Eo (U) s
phoros, morning star / god of light.


334


The actual name, "Lucifer", goes back to the Greeks, before the Romans. Socrates and
Plato speak of this "god of light"; surprisingly, not in the context of Eos (god of dawn),
but - as a morning star - juxtaposed with the sun (Helios) and Hermes. This information
can be found in Plato's Timaeus of Plato (88e) and in Edith Hamilton's "Mythology".


In a lighter way, Arthur Clarke, in his fiction book "2.061" correctly uses the word
"Lucifer". He uses it as a name for a new sun in the solar system which is correct since
the new sun is a second "morning star," "of substance" original "light bearer" - not an
evil being of religious mythology.


David Grinspoon comments on the historical aspects of the word as follows: "The origin
of the Judeo-Christian devil as an angel fallen from heaven to the depths of hell is
reflected in the descent of Venus from the bright morning star to the darkness below it.
The underworld demon, who is feared by people today in many parts of the world, is
also called Lucifer, which was originally a Latin name for calling Venus as the morning
star." (Venus Revealed p. 17).


SOURCE

The Birth of Lucifer by Arthur C. Clark; 2010 - Counterfeit Light of the World

Lucifer Rising, by Carl Teichrib

"A generation would not be long in coming, it had never known a world without Lucifer."


Best-selling author and world-renowned scientist, Arthur C. Clarke, wrote these words in
his 2010 science fiction masterpiece: Odyssey Two, a book/film sequel to his
groundbreaking 1968 work, 2001: A Space Odyssey.


Unknown to those who only knew 2010, there was a big difference between the movie
and the novel. Strangely, the book contains a section entitled "Lucifer Rising”.


In Clarke's story line, Lucifer Rising, the hydrogen atmosphere on the planet Jupiter
ignites. The new "little" sun and shadow that followed is dubbed "Lucifer" and
illuminates the earth with its light. The result: darkness no longer existed. Fear,
suspicion and the crimes of the night disappear.


Humanity has become illuminated by the light of Lucifer. For occultists and New Agers,
the symbolism of Arthur C. Clarke's work was unmistakable. Lucifer, the "light bearer"
shines his knowledge (hidden "truth") upon all humanity, driving away fear and
ignorance, and provides humanity with the opportunity to discover its own intellect.


Comment: Is Lucifer / the Bringer of Light / Son of the Morning / Venus / Lord of
Phosphor / the "intelligent liberator" / the "last rebel" - a Promethean-style Promethean
himself? | think we might be talking about a planetary event ? (As well as Immanuel


335


Velikovsky . describes) "birth of Venus" was really an object that was ejected from
Jupiter -. And in mythology this is seen as a "rebel and an outcast."


The Phosphorous Connection


In 1669 Hennig Brandt, a Hamburg merchant and alchemist, heated the residue from
the evaporation of urine with powdered charcoal, condensing the vapor into a waxy
solid. This solid glowed in the dark, without heat, an amazing phenomenon. He called
the mysterious substance phosphorus, taken directly from the Greek phosphoros, "light-
bringing." This was also the name of the planet Venus as the morning star, "Lucifer" in
Latin. The discovery has created quite a stir, and soon no one was wasting urine.


A normal person excretes about one gram of phosphorus per day. The name
phosphorescence, which is the non-thermal emission of light after the stimulus has
been removed, was given in distinction to fluorescence. Brandt observed that the
chemiluminescence light was a consequence of the combination of phosphorus with
atmospheric oxygen to form trioxide.


It was burning, but the light is not due to thermal excitation. When the pentoxide is
formed, there is no chemiluminescence. Phosphorus is an important agricultural
fertilizer, an essential element in metabolism and biological energy transfer, a
component of matches, an ingredient in pyrotechnic applications, and also of
considerable scientific interest. Phosphorus presents many puzzles that are unsolved,
or only partially solved, which will make this discussion more than interesting.


Lucifer
By Ignacio Ondargain


In the myth, Lucifer offers man the knowledge of duality: good and evil; positive and
negative, masculine and feminine; black and white...


The CHESS BOARD is the mesh, the net, the "Matrix" and also the matrix of the
universe upon which ALL that is visible is created.


The DOUBLE helix, or DNA strand, is the genetics that sustains the dual principle of
Creation.


The human being is a creature based on DUALITY.


World power seized the CHESS BOARD, the DUAL Battlefield (black and white), the
arena of conflict between opposites.


336


And by means of this board, developing its strategies, He progresses and decides the
Destiny of the earth.


At the pinnacle of world power there are experienced players in this strategy. Their
motto is "divide and conquer".


All that can be divided is doomed to destruction. They are the lords of the earth.


In short, the archons dominate the earth by the play of opposites but their creation is
false and degenerate so their days are numbered.


Lucifer teaches the game of Chess: true and false, conflict, clash between opposites.
This world is sustained by conflict.


Lucifer makes reality visible: it is the knowledge of GOOD and EVIL, the knowledge of
the laws of the Universe.


we live.


This is why Lucifer is the Lord of War, because he shows the meaning of the Struggle,
the war of the worlds. He is Odin-Wotan who self-crucifies himself in the Tree of Spell to
attain the knowledge of the runes, the forces that mark the destiny.


He is the Christ or Kristos who brings the sword to divide and destroy that which has
fallen into decadence and depravity. He will come at the end of time to destroy the
degenerate world.


Christ in heaven, Lucifer on earth, is Christ-Lucifer.
A single principle applied on 2 different planes.


Lucifer is the fallen angel, that is, reflected on the earth of GOOD and EVIL, our fallen
world: "you are Lucifer".


In this world of degradation, conflict, war and depredation of some over others, Christ is
Lucifer, the divine spark that jumps in the heart of some men when their spirit forges
matter.


He is not a "god of peace" but of the sword. He brings conflict, not peace. He is the
angel of the Apocalypse. There is no peace for the degenerate: all that renounces THE
STRUGGLE is doomed to perish.


The bucolic and happy utopia, the "Paradise" of the lazy and the degraded is an
impossibility.


EARTH demands its share: the weak, the degenerate must die. It is the Natural Law.


557


At the End of the cycle that is already looming over our civilization and the entire world,
the Black heart of the Beast will disastrously collapse in a single night.


Of this world only a vague memory will remain, like a confused reflection washed away
by the oceans of time:


A DREAM, THE NIGHTMARE OF A DEMENTED AND DEGENERATE DEMON


Lucifer is not a "god" to worship and "Luciferism" is not a religion so "Luciferist" is a
shocking and contradictory word to me.


The LUCIFERIC VISION allows you to see reality as it is. It may take you a long time to
reach it. You may never reach it. It depends on yourself, on your nature and your
physical-mental state, on your racial condition, on your biological inheritance? WE ARE
NOT ALL THE SAME.


Anyway there are steps, there are levels and there are people more or less capable. It
is up to you what you use this power for.


It can be for "good" or for "evil".


Competing on "truth" with other religions makes no sense. It is better to let everyone
believe what he wants to believe.


Lucifer's Court


| was especially delighted with a German book published seventy years ago. It bears
the title Cesarius von Heisterbach. The author describes it as a contribution to the
history of the culture of the 12th and 13th centuries. Perhaps in my next book | will
prefix a phrase from the Gospel of St. John that | found in it: "Unite the fragments so


that nothing perishes! My remote ancestors were pagans, and the recent ones, heretics.


To exculpate them | am picking up the pieces that Rome disdained as leftovers" Otto
Rahn, The Court of Lucifer by Otto Rahn


The heretics loved the firmament, they firmly believed that after death they would have
to approach the divinity from star to star, fulfilling the stages of deification. In the
morning they prayed towards the rising sun; at sunset they looked devoutly towards the
setting sun. At night they turned to the silver moon or to the north, because the north
was sacred to them. On the other hand, they considered the south as the abode of
Satan. Satan is not Lucifer, for Lucifer means bearer of light. The Cathars had another
name for him: Luzbel. It was not the Evil One. With the negative the Jews and the
papists degraded him. As for the Grail, as is the opinion of many, it must have been a
stone fallen from Lucifer's crown.


338


Thus the Church, by claiming it for herself, made something Luciferian into something
Christian. If the mountain of Montségur is the Mountain of the Grail, then Esclarmonde
was the Lady of the Grail. After her death, the destruction of Montségur and the
extermination of the Cathars, the Castle of the Grail and the Grail itself were
abandoned. The Church, consciously, with the crusade against the Albigensians, put
into practice a war of the Cross against the Grail, and did not miss the opportunity to re-
appropriate a non-ecclesiastical symbol of belief in order to put it at the service of its
purposes. Not satisfied with this, she declared the Grail to be the chalice in which Jesus
offered supper to his disciples, the same one that would collect his Blood on Golgotha.
She even granted the Benedictine convent of Montserrat, which is south of the
Pyrenees, to be the temple of the Grail.


The Cathars, often called Luciferians by the Inquisitors, had guarded the Luciferian
stone of the Grail, north of the Pyrenees. Later, the Church claimed that south of the
same mountain, the Grail was already in the possession of its Catholic monks, passing
it off as a relic of Jesus, the Triumphant over the Prince of Darkness. We both kept
silent. Then the lady continued her story: "I need not remind you that St. Ignatius of
Loyola was the founder of the Society of Jesus. Do you know that at Montserrat, near
Barcelona, Ignatius devised the Spiritual Exercises, the organization of the Jesuit order
and, if | am not mistaken, the adoration of the bleeding heart of Jesus? You should take
care to follow these references".


At the time of the flourishing of Catharism, a prestigious hermit by the name of Joachim
Flora lived in Sicily. He was considered to be the best commentator of the Apocalypse
according to St. John. Like the locusts spoken of in the ninth chapter of the Apocalypse,
he must have considered the Cathars, "who with the strength of scorpions come out of
the bottomless depths into the abyss". They will be, Joachim argued, secretly, the very
Antichrist, their power will increase and their king is already chosen. In Greek his name
is Apollyon!


Apollo can be none other than Lucifer, wnom the Provengal heretics called Luzbel and
to whom, as they believed, justice was not done.


The Cathars interpreted the "fall" of Lucifer as the "illegitimate supplanting of the
firstborn son, Lucifer, by the Nazarene".


Several of them - who constituted the exception - believed that, in effect, Lucifer had
been out of arrogance and pride pushed out of the way by God the Father, just like the
lost son in the Gospel, and believed that on the Day of Judgment he would fall on his
knees before the Almighty to ask for forgiveness. This cosmogonic myth (it could not be
otherwise) was based on the world being a place apart from God and a place of
suffering, which could only be perfect.


359


When the eternal God-Spirit would have spiritualized, divinized and redeemed the
world, perishable and spiritless matter. In those heretics, who, as has been said,
constituted the exception, the weakening influence of the belief in Christian redemption,
though in non-Roman garb, had already had its effect. | need not concern myself with
exceptions...


The cornerstone of ecclesiastical Christianity is the doctrine of a personal God and of
Jesus, the Son of God made man. In this respect, the Cathars' representations of God
fall into profound contradictions. They said: we heretics are not theologians, but
philosophers who first seek wisdom and truth.


We recognize that God is Light, Spirit and Force. Though the earth is spring, yet it
remains bound to God. Through Light, Spirit and Force, how could the world and we
live, if the Sun did not give us life? How could we think and know, if nothing spiritual


were at work within us? How could we seek truth and wisdom, which are so hard to find,


and strive to continue to seek them in spite of all obstacles, if there were no force within
us? God is Light, Spirit and Strength. And He works in us.


God is Law and has given us laws, but, for us, not those that Moses, who took a black
woman as his wife, made known to the Jews from the top of Mount Sinai. Our code of
God is the starry Heaven and the Earth full of the most varied living beings. According
to his invariable Law, the Sun travels from east to west through the twelve signs of the
Zodiac or, between winter and summer, to their prescribed solstices. At nightfall it
leaves men, then God-Law lets the Moon and the countless stars radiate, which without
exception go through the sky fulfilling their path. We do not say that the Sun or one of
the stars is God himself. They are heralds of God and bearers of God.


(...) Paris and Rome watched the Provencal troubadour world with hatred and envy. The


French crown, then at the height of its power, had long coveted the annexation of the
Mediterranean and dominion over the richest countries of ancient Gaul. And why the
chair of Peter? Like the Cathars, for the Roman Church the troubadours (let's leave
aside for a moment the traditional differences until today) were seen as "servants of the
devil, destined to eternal damnation".


Papists were often sent to intervene against individual troubadours by means of bans.
But to no avail.


More than ever before, the troubadours categorically refused all clerical-theological
ideas and conceptions, doctrines and legends. They did not praise the god Jehovah or
Jesus of Nazareth, but the hero Heracles or the god Love. And this god was deeply
hated by the presumptuous Rome, rejected in turn by the Cathars as "Synagogue of
Satan" and "Basilica of the devil".


340


The god Love can be seen in the world, says the famous troubadour Peire Cardinal, by
a strong spirit to whom belief clarifies the eye. Of course it can be so, sings the no less
known Peire Vidal, but the god only shows himself in spring, and to see him, he
continues, it is necessary to go to the House of God, which precisely then awakens
Nature. God looks like a knight, with blond hair, and rides a steed half black as night
and half dazzling white. A carbuncle on his bridle shines like the sun. In his retinue there
is also a paladin. His name is fidelity.


It is written in the Bible that one must be faithful until death, in this way God will give the
crown of eternal life. Since the troubadours belonged, for the Holy Catholic Church of
Rome, to the servants of the devil, because they had written on their banners their
fidelity to the god Love; since they, as countless examples show, sang wonderful airs
about a crown of Lucifer, it could be - if we accept the biblical language - that they had
hit upon a Luciferian "crown of eternal life", and it could be, if we continue weaving the
threads in this sense, that the god Love had been Lucifer in his highest person.


This assumption becomes evidence if we tie the knots in another way. The god Love is
the god of spring. Apollo is no less so. So both Amor and Apollo are the god of spring.
The one who brings back the light of the Sun, accordingly, is a Light-bearer, a "Lucifer".
According to the Apocalypse of St. John, Apollyon-Apollo is considered, as we have
seen, to be the devil, and in the creed of the Roman Church, which relies for this on the
Bible and the Church Fathers, Lucifer is Satan. Consequently, the spring god Apollo-
Love, according to ecclesiastical belief, is Satan and devil. This leads to the conclusion
that the accusation of Joachim of Flora can also be applied to the troubadours "servants
of the devil": that they were Antichrists with Apollon as king.


From now on | do not need to make any further distinction between Cathars and
troubadours, the preceptors in Lucifer's court...


(...) And the light bearer, Apollo, god protector of poets and wayfarers, did not abandon
his own in their hardship. Although he too had become an outcast, an outcast, even the
devil himself. But, since he was not the Evil One, he faithfully fulfilled the divine law,
passing through forests and roads.


He let the carbuncle shine on the bridle of his steed like the sun. When he died, a singer
carried him above the clouds to the "Mountain of the Assembly in the farthest Midnight",
to the zenith of the North. What did it matter if his sons could not live in cities like other
men and could not be buried like them? In the house of the Light-Bearer there is
abundant light. More light than in the houses of God, cathedrals and churches; in there
Lucifer, in front of glass expressly darkened, on which are painted Jewish prophets and
apostles or Roman gods and saints, could find nothing and wanted to find nothing. In
the forest he was free!


341


342
