BALLISTICFINDINGSINTHE
JOHNF.KENNEDYAUTOPSY
PHOTOGRAPHS
Conspiracy and cover-up in the assassination of JFK is proven by this
study of the autopsy photographs showing four shots from the right
front and none from the rear. Let the truth be known by all.
ByRichard Tobias

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 2
Contents
Brief JFK assassination overview
Official head wounds
Parkland evidence
Purpose
Basic ballistics .
The study
Neck wound
Back wound
Second bullet wound, first head shot F8 orientation ......p 7
Parkland wound
8
Third bullet wound, second head shot .
D
Fourth andlast bullet wound,third head shot
.p 11
Bullet impact upon the skull
...p14
Head snap ..
Jet effect theory
p20
Harper fragment .
Conclusion of the study
.p26
Significance of this study .
p26
Photos
..p28
Sources.
.p45
Ricky Tobi'AS

--- PAGE BREAK ---ct upon the skull
...p14
Head snap ..
Jet effect theory
p20
Harper fragment .
Conclusion of the study
.p26
Significance of this study .
p26
Photos
..p28
Sources.
.p45
Ricky Tobi'AS

--- PAGE BREAK ---

TobiasJFKAutopsyPhotos1
BALLISTICFINDINGSINTHEJFKAUTOPSYPHOTOS
By Richard Tobias  2001 all rights reserved.
CONCLUSIONSOFTHESTUDY
This study of the autopsy photos finds that JFK was shot FOUR times from
therightfrontby at!east three differentguns none ofwhich werefiredfrom the
Sixth Floor School Book Depository. Governor Connally was shot with one bullet,
whichcamefrom theSixthFloor.Photos arelabeled at the endof this document.
BRIEFJFKASSASSINATIONOVERVIEW
On November 22, 1963, President Kennedy was shot multiple times and
killed by persons unknown. According to the fiction of the Warren Report:
Oswald for reasons unknown, acting alone fired three shots from the Sixth Floor
SchoolbookDepository above andbehindJFK.
hitting JFK in the back, exiting the neck, hitting Connally in the back, exiting his
chest, hitting his wrist exiting and entering his leg. This impossible bullet then
fell out of the leg wound and was found almost undamaged at Parkland
Hospital.
The apparent second shot missed the car hitting a curbstone causing a wound,
which was photographed, to James Tague standing near the overpass.
The apparent third shot caused the fatal head wound to JFK by entering *the
skull above and to the right of the occipital protuberance [the bony point at the
back of the head]" breaking into fragments, the larger fragment exiting the right
temple and a smaller exiting the right parietal area, with two fragments
remaining in the skull. The exiting fragments would have to cause the
windshield damage and account for all fragments recovered in the car.
TheHOUSESELECT COMMITTEE ONASSASSINATIONS (HSCA):
Accepted the Warren Report's findings of the three shots. However they decided,
based upon acoustical evidence, there was a FOURTH shot from the right front
picket fence area which did not hit JFK. Thus Oswald did not act alone and a
conspiracy probably existed.Note that they test fired a.45 cal.bulletfrom the
right front knoll area during re-enactments.]
They also found that the autopsy doctors had failed to accurately report the
wounds as they appear in the autopsy photos. Oswald's 3rd shot was moved to
enter the skull in the crown area about four inches above of the occipital
protuberance as was done by the Clark. panel in 1968.ds as they appear in the autopsy photos. Oswald's 3rd shot was moved to
enter the skull in the crown area about four inches above of the occipital
protuberance as was done by the Clark. panel in 1968.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the autopsy photos. Oswald's 3rd shot was moved to
enter the skull in the crown area about four inches above of the occipital
protuberance as was done by the Clark. panel in 1968.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tobias JFKAutopsyPhotos2
After entering the crown area thebullet dividedintoperfectlyroundfragments
causing round exit holes. The largest fragment exited the parietal area above the
right ear and the smaller exited theright templehairlinewhich is opposite of the
Warren Report. This finding is due to autopsy photos F3 and F8. [Note bullets
do not fragment into perfectly round parts nor do they cause round exit holes in
the skull's skin.] No perfectly round fragments were recovered from the car.
The locations of the fragment wounds are the same, but the fragment wound
sizes are reversed.How can the wounds move? Two fragments remained within the
skull. The exiting fragments have to be the fragments that were found in the car
and damaged the windshield; otherwise another bullet was fired.
THEOFFICIALHEADWOUNDS
From these reports the head has four wounds to be investigated:
#1.Crown area 4 inches above the occipital protuberance.
#2. Right of the occipital protuberance.
#3. Right parietal.
#4.Right temple.
These four wound locations are critical to understanding what has occurred
during the cover-up of the head wounds. The neck and back wounds will be studied
first since it was the first shot but first a brief review of the Parkland evidence.
PARKLANDEVIDENCE:According to theParklanddoctors the neck
wound was a small round smooth edge entry wound; thus no impossible MAGIC
bullet occurred. The back wound was not seen.The Parkland doctors most often
thatthisisthegeneral locationoftheWarrenReport'sentrywoundtotherightof
the occipital protuberance #2above.Dr.Crenshawreports seeinga right temple
hairline entry wound. Notice that this corresponds with location of an alleged
fragment wound #4 above. JFK's press secretary points to the right temple/parietal
area to indicate thehead shot just hours after the death.Notice that this location
also corresponds with one or both alleged fragment wounds #3 and #4.Dr. Jenkins'
Warren Commission testimony, March, 1964, ".. I thought there was a wound on
the left temple area, right at the hairline and right above the zygomatic process."
Noticethathadhesaidrightinstead ofleft;thislocationwouldcorrespondwiththe
alleged fragment wound #3 or #4 above. Did the reporter accurately record his
testimony or did he simply confuse left and right four months after the shooting?
Dr.McClelland wrote in his Commission Exhibit 392, “The cause of death was due
to ... a gunshot wound of the left temple." Doctors sometimes confuse left and right
but not the existence of a wound at a body part location. It is possible that the
located on the right side. In either case an entry wound to the temple area did existsometimes confuse left and right
but not the existence of a wound at a body part location. It is possible that the
located on the right side. In either case an entry wound to the temple area did exist

--- PAGE BREAK ---TobiasJFKAutopsyPhotos3
as reported by the witnesses, which would be #3 or #4 above or a new wound on the
left side of the head.

Left profile photo F4 does not show a wound.

PURPOSE
The JFK assassination medical evidence is so confused and contaminated
with false and deceptive disinformation that the only way to truly know the truth of
JFK's death would be to exhume the body for a proper autopsy by objective
pathologists not under government control and filmed in a public setting with many
neutral witnesses.

Since this will not occur any time soon, one must conduct a
detailed study of the autopsy photos.

Usingactual8x10copiesfromseveral differentsources andpublished as the
"Fox" set an objective study of the public autopsy photos was performed.

This
requires the assumption that the photos are true and correct and then simply look
for ballistic wounds within the photos.

Any wounds found from any direction must
manipulation will be noted because it indicates government cover-up but it does not
support a finding of the evidence of the bullet wounds.The fact that some photos
appear to be taken at different times and show different conditions of the body does
not matter to the determination of ballistic wounds within any photo.

It is the
correlationbetween theseveralphotos thatdemonstrates thewounds and thepath
of the bullets.In this study the photos are considered the best evidence of the
woundstakingpriorityover allwitnessesstatementsandtheofficialautopsyreport.

All of the wounds identified in this study are supported by at least some of the
witness reports and first day evidence.

To understand JFK's wounds one must know what bullet wounds look like
and the ballistics that caused them and photography.

BASICBALLISTICS
In the case of a high-powered rifle, high velocity bullets, the external
appearance of the entrance wound does not materially differ from that of a gunshot
wound inflicted with a handgun or ordinary rifle, low velocity bullets.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To understand JFK's wounds one must know what bullet wounds look like
and the ballistics that caused them and photography. BASICBALLISTICS
In the case of a high-powered rifle, high velocity bullets, the external
appearance of the entrance wound does not materially differ from that of a gunshot
wound inflicted with a handgun or ordinary rifle, low velocity bullets. Such entry
wounds are generally round with smooth edges, about the same size as the bullet
and a compressing margin abrasion ring is present. A compression ring is caused
when the bullet passes though the skin and the skin is crushed and its edges scrape
against the bullet. Soft tissues collapse into a vast temporary cavity produced in the
wake of the high velocity bullet. The exception occurs in skull wounds. The skull is
simply a ridged closed container filled with water. The skull including the base is
often shattered by the impact and then again by the pressure wave caused by
velocity creating a vast temporary cavity. According to Wilber the internal cranial
pressure is approximately equal to the square of the velocity of the bullet. [According to Dr.Di Maio it can be 200 atmospheres.]In addition bullet velocity
must be a minimum of 2,0o0 feet per second to cause the skull to explode. This
internal cranial pressure (4,000,000 pounds per square inch) can cause the skull to
explode causing skin rips [lacerations] at the entry wound. Thus one does not
expect to see anintact round hole of entrybut semicircles that become roundholes

--- PAGE BREAK ---TobiasJFKAutopsyPhotos4
when the lacerated skin edges are brought together.

The wound track may be 3 or 4
inches in diameter.

The size of the temporary cavity depends on the kinetic energy
of the bullet, Ekin = (m/2) V" where V = velocity and m = mass (bullet weight).

creating gaping lacerations in the tissue and usually a large ragged exit wound.

Figure X-28, near the end of this document, is a man shot in the right temple from a
30-30 rifle, from a distance of about 60 ft.

The wound of entrance is marked.

This
is very similar toJFK's wounds.The skin lacerations ALWAYS point to the round
entrywoundwith a circumferential marginal abrasion[compression ringl or an
irregular shaped exit wound.Skin tear laceration wounds from distant high
velocity bullets are a result of the intense increase in pressure within the skull due to
the temporary cavity of thebullet.

THESTUDY
Ballistic findings on the JFK autopsy photos, as labeled in High Treason II
by H.Livingstone, and the text book Medical Legal Investigation of Death,2ed, and
3ed, by Spitz and Fisher and many other sources, Wilber, Groden, Marrs, Lifton,
Twyman, Wecht, Fetzer, etc.

The lack of direct access.to the original photos and
enlargements and close-ups of the wound areas limit this study.Direct access to the
original photos in the National Archives could alter the findings of this study but
they probably would confirm the results of this study.

THENECK[FIRST]BULLETWOUND
Neck wound High Treason I, photos F1 Stare-of death: Photo F1 shows
JFK's face and neck from above and slightly to his right side.

The neck wound was
caused by the first bullet to hit JFK [about Z film 210+-] and according to the
Parkland Doctors it was a round entry wound of 4 to 7 mm.

Because the photo has
no reference object of known size near the wound actual scale cannot be
determined.--- PAGE BREAK ---

The neck wound was
caused by the first bullet to hit JFK [about Z film 210+-] and according to the
Parkland Doctors it was a round entry wound of 4 to 7 mm. Because the photo has
no reference object of known size near the wound actual scale cannot be
determined. An assumption must be made that JFK's eye cornea was the average of
about 1cm diameter then estimates ofwound size'canbe made bymeasuring the
cornea in the photo and calculating scale. Emergency tracheotomies tend to be iong
so the 2" length and size of the trach wound does not matter to ballistic wound seen
in the photo.I do not see any sign of postmortem wound alteration because the
ballisticwound isvisible thus the photo shows the trueunalteredwound.The neck
bullet wound at the skin is clearly seen in photo F1 at the mid lower skin incision as
a slight elongated “U" shape about 10 to 14 mm long. Since dia=cir/pi, a 6mm dia. circle would have an 18.8 mm circumference. Part of the bullet wound is also seen
in the upper skin incision about 5 to 10 mm. Maximum wound circumference of24
mm means a circle of 7.6 mm.It appears that if the skin were properly closed the
bullet wound would be about 6mm and round or oval but this is educated
speculation based upon difficult measurements from the photo.The photo confirms
the Parkland Doctors estimate of wound size, 4 to 7 mm. By size alone this suggests
an entry wound. The photo only suggests an entry wound skin margin as the actual
skin edge thickness is not seen and the skin edges are rounded inward towards the
wound as expected in this area of the neck.The photos used in this study are not

--- PAGE BREAK ---TobiasJFKAutopsyPhotos5
clear enough for a positive determination of direction based upon skin margin.An
enlargement of the original photo would be useful.Exit wounds very greatly in size
and shape tending to be large, generally about twice the actual bullet diameter for
moderate to low velocity, with jagged non-compressed skin margins and are often
star shaped or irregular.

[See the goatskin test Warren Com.

Exhibit 850, WC page
846 Volume 17.J Since most medium and low velocity exit wounds are about twice
the size of the entry wound a 6mm wound could not be an exit wound.

It is noted
that, no exit wound signs are seen in the skin margins of photo F1 and the wound
was small, 4 to 7 mm.

The hole in the trachea is seen at the upper midline skin edge
about 1 inch above the suprasternal notch.

Note this is above the normal tie knot
level.

The trachea wound appears about 1 cm round with jagged edges but this
would be due to surgical enlargement for the insertion of the trachea tube.This
that the bullet did not hit the shirt and tie.

The cuts in the clothing were made by a X.

?

scalpel in order to remove the tie clothing, Cover-up by Shaw p.64 and other
X~
sources.]The Parkland Doctors have described the neck wound as having a
circumferentially abraded margin about 6mm dia.High velocity exit wounds can be
very large 3-6 inches.

Entry wounds are generally about the same size and shape of
the bullet at the time of impact.

[Usually round and 1mm smaller than the bullet
dia.

due to elasticity of the skin.] Some {Spitz 3ed.} have claimed that this abraded
the Parkland Doctors.

This is disinformation and cover-up since the bullet did not
hit the tie, the circumferential entry abrasion described by the Parkland Doctors
could only have been caused by an entry wound.--- PAGE BREAK ---

due to elasticity of the skin.] Some {Spitz 3ed.} have claimed that this abraded
the Parkland Doctors. This is disinformation and cover-up since the bullet did not
hit the tie, the circumferential entry abrasion described by the Parkland Doctors
could only have been caused by an entry wound. No determination of direction of the neck wound bullet can be made from the
photo F1 other than: a neck entry wound is suggested and no exit wound signs are
present.However the backwound in photos F5positively shows an exit wound,
thus a frontal entry wound must exist in the neck in accordance with the Parkland
doctors. THEBACKWOUND
TheBack wound photos F5 shows an exitwound measuring 15 x 8mm when
using a photo printed dark enough to read the scale in the photo.The back wound
is the larger dark mark closest to the head.[Note the lower exit wound in the
goatskin test Warren Com. Exhibit 850 is about the same shape but smaller than the
F5 back wound.] The lower small round black mark in photos F5 is about 7mm dia. about the level of T3 but it is not a wound according to the observed photos in this
study. The black box on the ruler is 15 mm, which is the same size as the large
wound, also note the size of the doctor's fingers in comparison to the wound and
black box. Because the body is not perpendicular to the camera there is some photo
distortion in scale [2mm] between the wound end of the ruler and the black box end. The ruler is a 30 cm [about 12 inches] scale with extra non-scale margins at the
ends. It is 3cm wide or about 1 '/4 inch. The autopsy report, in direct conflict with
the photo,says this back wound is a 7x4mm oval located 14cm from the tip of the
right acromion process and 14cm below the tip of the right mastoid process. The
pathologists appear to have simply reduced the wound size by half but they

--- PAGE BREAK ---Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos6
correctly described the location of the large wound in spite of the use of atypical
measuring points.

Given that the ruler is over the spinal column, which is the
normal measuring point in F3 the use of atypical measuring points for the final
report is strange.

It truly appears that they used the photo F3 to obtain the final
measurements instead of the body but this is speculation.NOTE: The pathologists
claim to have probed the wound with a finger however none of them have fingers
small enough to fit in a 7x4 mm hole but they would barely fit in the actual
photographed15x8mmexithole.

The upper skin margin is seen in the photo F5 and no sign of a compression
entry abrasion is seen.In fact the full thickness of the skin edge can be seen and it is
not compressed.

Deeper tissue is seen within the wound.

A size of 15x8 mm means
this must be an exit wound about twice the size of the bullet dia.[See the goatskin
test Warren Com.

Exhibit 850 lower exit wound.] The oval shape also indicates an
exitwound ofa deformed mushroomed shaped lowvelocitybullet.By size,shape
and visible skin margin without compression this wound must be an exit wound.

If
this is an exit wound the Parkland doctors were correct and the neck wound was the
entry wound.

The lower round black spot about 7mm dia., if truly present, is probably a
blood clot.

It is seen about an inch below the larger actual wound about the spinal
level of T3, which corresponds well with the bullet hole in the shirt and coat but so
does the large wound given loose fitting cloths with suit shoulder pads and sitting
with a raised right arm.

Photo expert, Jack White thinks that this smaller spot was
taking the photo to avoid confusion.This small round black object does not have:
tissue is seen within it.

On some photos a white spot is seen within it indicating that
the white is skin within the clot on the surface of the skin.

It does not look like a
bullet wound but better photos could prove otherwise.--- PAGE BREAK ---

On some photos a white spot is seen within it indicating that
the white is skin within the clot on the surface of the skin. It does not look like a
bullet wound but better photos could prove otherwise. It does appear like a dark
room.creation to confuse the evidence but it could also be a naturally occurring
blood clot. Robert Groden, who has seen the original photo, claims that this is an entry
wound with a compression entry abrasion seen in the original photo. If it is a
Y
bullet wound then by size, shape and location it is an entry but it could not have
exitedbythefrontneckwound anditshouldhavebeenfoundwithinthechest;
and thiswould be afifthbulletwhich is not supported by existing photo and
medical evidence and the clothing.]
JFK has one and only one hole in his shirt and coat thus only one back wound can
exist and it is a large exit wound.Thehole in the cloths is about 6inches below the
top of the collar and two inches to the right of the midline seam. The hole measures
15 mm in the coat and 10 mm in the shirt. Because of the way the clothing was
handled the direction of fiberbend at thehole site cannot be used to determine
bullet direction.CPR was done on JFK while he was lying on top of his clothing on
a padded stretcher and multiple persons handled the cloths before they were
examined. Under such conditions any outward fiber bend caused by an exiting
bullet would have been replaced by a flat or an inward fiber bend due to the CPR. The clothing hole size indicates an exit wound. The back wound is an exit of the

--- PAGE BREAK ---l'obiasJFKAutopsyPhotos
7
the cloths before they were examined.Under such conditions any outward fiber
bend caused by an exiting bullet would have been replaced by a flat or an inward
fiber bend due to the CPR.

The clothing hole size indicates an exit wound.

The
back wound is an exit of the neck entry wound in seen in photo F1 and described by
the Parkland doctors.This back exit wound is about 5 cm to the right of C7-T1,
[under the right mastoid],on the photo.A neck entry about 1 inch above the
suprasternal notch with an exit 5 cm to theright of C7-T1 is ahorizontal or slightly
downward and left to right path through the body.

The autopsy report states the
apex(supra-clavicular portion) of therightpleural cavity suffered a contusionbut
the Iung was not punctured by the bullet.

According to Fisher and Spitz 2ED, p 252,
"X ray films taken during the autopsy of President John F.Kennedy indicate a fine
metallicsnowin thelowerrightneck area,suggesting thatalateralvertebra!

process was fractured by the jacketed rifle bullet."Dr.Fisher was a member ofthe
1968 Clark panel and was looking at the neck x-rays and not the chest x-rays which
are missing.

This is anatomically a very possible and probable bullet path.

The
facts are a neck entry one inch above the suprasternal notch and a back exit about 5
cm to the right of C7-T1 are depicted in photos F1 and F5.

Thus the bullet path though the neck is front to back and left to right and
horizontalorslightlydownward.It entered the neckaboutoneinch above the
suprasterna!

notch, without hitting'the tie.

It did not puncture'the lung but caused
contusions and fractured alateral vertebral process(either C-7 orT-1) before
exiting the back at about 5 cm to the right of T-1, as shown in F5.

This corresponds
satisfactorywith theholeinthe clothssince theclothswouldbewornhighandloose
when sitting and waving.--- PAGE BREAK ---

It did not puncture'the lung but caused
contusions and fractured alateral vertebral process(either C-7 orT-1) before
exiting the back at about 5 cm to the right of T-1, as shown in F5. This corresponds
satisfactorywith theholeinthe clothssince theclothswouldbewornhighandloose
when sitting and waving. Also a 6'2" man has a significant natural curvature of the
spine at this level.This bullet had to come from the front, behind the knoll fencey
closest toElmStreet and not the manholes;probably the pointwhere the cigarette
butts were found. This shot wouid have passed within 10 feet of Zapruder and was
probably fired at the point where JFK was crossing the line between north and
south of thefenceparallei toElm. The so-called magic bullet did not occur according to the autopsy photos. Governor Connally was hit by another bullet, which had to come from behind,
probably from the Sixth Eloor,-and-by Oswald, but this bullet did not pass though
JFK.The JFK was shot at about Z fim 2i0+-and Connally was hit about Z 232. THESECONDBULLETWOUNDFIRSTHEADSHOT
TheParklandWound,PhotoF8
-Photo F8 the large defect of thehead,must be correctiy and positively
2-2/0t
orientedin order to understand the threewounds depictedin thephoto.The body
is on its right side facing right on the table and the round giass on the iower left is
probably a JAR on the left side of the table. Opposite of the jar near the edge a
drain hole is seen in the tabie. The neck is on a metai rest and the skin is foided to
the left side.You are looking at the back of the head through the head to the face. DrIENT
The center of the photo is roughiy the dividing line between left andrightand above
and below the nose level. Positive landmarks in the photo: The ruler is over the
right ear and pointed towards the occipitai protuberance jbony part at the back of

--- PAGE BREAK ---TobiasjFKAutopsy Photos8
the headj or this could be the right mastoid behind the ear.At the bottom of the
photo two Dr.'s fingers are seen.

About a % inch from the lower finger notice the
steel object with 9o degree turns and straight lines.

This is the rest is supporting the
head.

Follow the lines of this rest to the left and find the glass at the end.

Notice the
headrest in the left profile photo F4.

SEE JFK Stare-of-death photo (F1).Notice the semicircle in the right temple
hairline at the end of a skin tear above right eye.Below this semicircie is a smalier
wound or dark area,probably caused by a bone fragment.Notice the size, shape
and direction of the torn skin around the semicircie skin fiap in the right tempie.in
photo F8 this semicircle becomes a perfectly round hole with white light from the
Dr.'s cloths reflected though it.

The semicircle and the bone fragment wound are
seen with lightpassing through them and the skin tear lines of F8 match the lines in
F1.

Thus the round white hole in F8 matches the semicircle at the end of the right
temple skin tear in F1.Again find the neck rest about % inch from the lower finger
in thebottom right of F8.As you slowiy follow the straight line of the rest to the left
you notice the skull overhangs part of the rest.

About midway to center is the
occipitai protuberance jor the right mastoid??] and just above it is a white highlight
in-the bone.This highlight is reflection from fractured bone edges caused by a
tangential gunshot wound as described by Dr.

Crenshaw.

See the back of the head
photo F3.The protruding brain tissue in the hair near the neck is over the occipitaf
protuberance and it is brain tissue still attached to brain within the skull.

Photographic tampering by burring the hair prevents viewing the full wound in F3.--- PAGE BREAK ---

See the back of the head
photo F3.The protruding brain tissue in the hair near the neck is over the occipitaf
protuberance and it is brain tissue still attached to brain within the skull. Photographic tampering by burring the hair prevents viewing the full wound in F3. This protruding brain passed though the white highlight seen in F8 at the occipital
protuberance,which is at the bottom about % inch to the right of the middle of the
photo.In F3 the ruier is near a skin wound in the crown area that in Groden's coior
F3 has been called the “red spot". The HSCA claims this is the Oswald entry
wound. By size and shape this is an exit wound that corresponds with the semicircie
in the bone slightly to the left center in F8. See Groden's right profile G1. The body
is not in the same condition as the photo Fi however the semicircle and fragment
wound on the skin tear in F1 can be identified in both photos. The semicircle,
fragment wound and torn skin in Fi, Gi and F8 are consistent thus these bailistic
wounds are real. Photo F8 is now properly orientated by two objects and other
photos. TheParkiandWound
See F8. The white highlight near the neck rest-as located above is light
reflection from fractured bone edges caused by a tangential-gunshot wound. This is
above and to the right of the occipitalprotuberance.By random luckajet back
area of shadow occurs where the bone is missing because of the natural shape of the
skull and the lighting. Otherwise this photo wouid have disappeared with the other
missing autopsy photos. The wound in the photo is best interpreted as if reading an
X-ray, where black is air and white is bone. The "Parkiand”" occipital wound is
clearly seen in the shadow by varying contrasts of the photo. The purpose of taking photo F8 is to demonstrate the two round holes near
the ruler at the center of the photo and not the Parkland wound which is in shadow.

--- PAGE BREAK ---TobiasJFKAutopsyPhotos
9
The purpose of taking photo F8 is to demonstrate the two round holes near
the ruler at the center of the photo and not the Parkland wound which is in shadow.

It appears that the photographer was almost attempting to photograph the bullet
path from crown of the head exit to the right temple entrance, which is the fourth
and lastbulletwound tobe discussed later.

The Parkland wound is a large hole in the back of the skull behind the right
ear ending at the occipital protuberance and measuring about 1% by 1 inches.

It is
egg shaped or oval.

This is a.tangential wound where entry and exit holes connect
forming one hole.

Direction of the bullet is from the right moving left as determined-
by thevisible inward and outwardbeveling of theskull in thephoto.Thiswas a
near miss.

Follow the gray skull surface from the lower finger to the Teft highlight
area and notice how the highlight disappears into black shadow, which is air.

This
is inward beveling of the skull.

Continuing across the highlight a full thickness of
the bone is seen starting from the insideofthe skull,which is black shadow.

This is
outward beveling.Most Parkland doctors describe this wound size and shape and
Iocation but call it an exit wound because they did not examine it in detail.

Dr.

Crenshaw describes this as a tangential wound.

Intact cerebellum tissue would be
exposedwithlittledamagefrom this-bullet.The autopsy Drs.aretellingthe truth
about an entry wound here but they are not telling about its path and exit.

The
autopsyDrs.havebeen ordered toliebuttheymanage tokeepmanyof theelements
of thetruthinthemedical record.

TheParklandwound is not seen in the x-rays however the fractureslines in
the x-rays indicate that-this was-the first shot to the head., Dr.

Mantik has
discredited the x-rays as fakes in Assassination-Science.

About Z film 310-311 the
back of JFK's hair is puffed out probably by this shot.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Mantik has
discredited the x-rays as fakes in Assassination-Science. About Z film 310-311 the
back of JFK's hair is puffed out probably by this shot. According to Lifton, p 49,
JFK's head moved forward or clockwise rotation to the right about two inches
between frames Z-312 and Z-313, which is consistent with this shot occurring about
310-311.Also the Z film has the extremely-black blob at the back of the head, which
could be very simple, and quick phototampering to hide this wound or natural
shadow.It is educated speculation that this was the first headshot given the limited
evidence. This shot came from the right front, most probably the badge man
C
position behind the fence. The bullet would have almost certainly have hit the car
but of course it was not reported and the car was immediately rebuilt thus
alternativelythebulletcouldhavehitthestreetassomehavereported andwaslost. THETHIRDBULLET WOUND,SECONDHeadShot
Photo F8 shows a .45 cal. bullet entry above the right ear. It was the THIRD
SHOT TOHIT JFK and second shot to thehead as determined by the skin tear
leading to it from the white circle last headshot to the right temple. This shot had to
occur about Z 312 and almost simultaneousiwith the last shot.The fact that the skin
tear ends at the.45wound indicates that the .45wound had to occur before the right
temple wound which caused the skin tear between Z 312-313. This .45 cal entry shot
appears to be the objective of photo F8 because it is center frame, well lighted and
near the ruler. It is about % inch above and left of the left upper corner of the ruler. It is the size of the Dr.'s fingers or 11 mm in dia. or % inch, which is about the size of
IN

--- PAGE BREAK ---TobiasJFKAutopsyPhotos10
a .45 cal.

bullet entry wound.

The ruler is 3 cm wide.

The skin edges are beveled
inward jn a circular shape.

A compression ring from a bullet entry is seen in the
skin.

The bullet scraping against the skin caused this compression ring.

The skin
was pulled into.the skull bone inward beveling and compressed forming the rings.

dark circular hole is seen in the skin.

The F8 skin tear across the right temple is
consistent with photo F1 and Groden's right profile photo G1.

Deputy Sheriff
Rodger Craig identifies a .45 cal bullet being recovered at the manhole cover on
South Elm St.

not in his “officially reported Warren Commission testimony” but in
several films and books {Mark Lane, Two Men in Dallas, Jim Garrison Tapes}.

He
claims to have reported it to the Commission but they failed to record it.

Mr.

BELIN.

So, you searched the south curb of Elm?

Mr.CRAIG.Right.

Mr.

BELIN.

Did you find anything there to indicate the ricocheted
bullet?

Mr.

CRAIG.No, we didn't find anything at that time.

(6H265)
His last statement indicates that at a later time he did find a bullet as stated in the
films and books but that is not recorded.

The recovered bullet was photographed
by the news media.

Thus this wound is presumed to be from a .45 because the photo
cannot be used for precise determination of caliber.

This compression ring could
only have been caused by a large bore bullet entering the head.

This structure is not
the ear canal and must be explained.

The HsCA calls this a fragment exit, which it
is not.

The compression ring is thicker near the ruler or back and thinner towards
the front of the head.

This suggests the possibility that this shot came from an angle
slightly behind but almost due right of JFK [perhaps a 70° angle of entry instead of
90° but it could have come from the front because JFK's head is turned to the left at
Z312]:
See High Treason 2 page 335, Zapruder frames 313-314.

Zapruder is almost
at a true 90° perpendicular to the car and JFK.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This suggests the possibility that this shot came from an angle
slightly behind but almost due right of JFK [perhaps a 70° angle of entry instead of
90° but it could have come from the front because JFK's head is turned to the left at
Z312]:
See High Treason 2 page 335, Zapruder frames 313-314. Zapruder is almost
at a true 90° perpendicular to the car and JFK. JFK's head is looking left and
downward. Notice the white streak from the top of JFK's head. The object is
moving fast about 100+ feet per second thus causing the streaking effect in 1/18" of
a second. So fast that it shows up as a streak instead of an object. It is tumbling as
indicated by the larger darker dots in the streak. The dark dots are roughly the size
of JFK's earlobes or % inch, which is roughly the size of a .45 cal. bullet. (Shutter
speed 1/60 sec. frame speed 18.1 sec., streak is 2 ft. or 7 ear lengths long with 4
revolutions.) It is not going straight up but forward of the car about 75 degrees. The streak is white/gray due to the color of lead and brain and the speed of.the. drops.The sun is at55 degrees casting shadows to the north at 15 degrees and east
thus it reflects light towards Zapruder: According to-Dr. Fetzer, Assassination
Science,p 294,the speed is 135ft/sec with a maximum ascent of 252 feet with a total
flight time of 8 seconds. This is not fast for an exiting bullet but too fast for it to be
bone or brain. As discussed above the only object found in front of the fatal
headshots was the reported .45 cal. slug on top of the ground near the manhole, seen
in Z 384-400 on the south side of Elm, a distance of about 80 feet, by Foster,

--- PAGE BREAK ---Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 11
Walthers, Craig and photographed by the news media.

A picture of the bullet was
published in the Fort Worth Star Telegram Evening Edition Nov.

23, 1963.

The
slug was taken by an unknown FBI agent, [possibly Robert M.

Barret].

[The HSCA
test fired a .45 cal.

bullet from a position near Zapruder during its re-enactments
but in error concluded that it did not strike JFK if it was fired.]
Conclusion: A .45 cal bullet was fired from a position almost in line with
Zapruder to JFK.

Dealey Plaza photos indicate that a CIA assassination camera
with a built in .45 cal.

gun could have been used to conceal the shooter in plan view
because he would appear to be taking pictures.

Otherwise the shooter was behind
Zapruder near the building or behind the fence.

The several films showing
Zapruder at the time of Z312 the last shots fail to show any possible shooters.

The
.45 struck JFK above the right ear.

Another bullet then stuck JFK's head and the
.45 is seen leaving the head in Z 314.

The .45 bullet was photographed and
recoveredatthemanhole.

THEFOURTH andlastBULLET WOUND,THIRDHead Shot
In the JFK Stare-of-death photo (F1), notice the semicircle in the right
temple hairline at the end of a tear above right eye.

This is the point of entry of a
high velocity bullet (at least 2000 ft/sec).

This was the FOURTH BULLET
3
WOUND, and THIRD Head Shot.Note the small dark mark just below it on the
skin flap.

This is a fragment wound caused by a bone or bullet fragment.

Note that
the lighting is good and you can see the floor.

Note that the semicircle flap is raised
away from the head due to underlying bone.

No bone or brain can be seen in the
black triangle near the skin flap.

On good quality photos one can count the floor.

-tiles leading to the right head wound.

As the tiles disappear-into the wound a.thin
white highlight appears in-the size and shape of the natural skull.--- PAGE BREAK ---

-tiles leading to the right head wound. As the tiles disappear-into the wound a.thin
white highlight appears in-the size and shape of the natural skull. No brain is seen
meaning that the top of head photos F6 and F7 and G1 show a brain present where
BRAN
F1 shows it missing thus different body conditions exist. If brain were present as
shown in F6, F7 and G1 one would see a thick mass of reflected light from-the brain
in a position extending beyond the normal curvature of the head in F1. fF6, F7 and
G1 show signs of being-composite photos with deliberate tampering where F1 does
not.] This thin white highlight in Fl is a frontal view the occipital bone edge as
located in F8. As discussed above this right temple semicircle becomes a round
white circle in photoF8when the skin flaps are closed.The lower fragment wound
is also seen with light passing though it. The skin flaps in F1 are consistent with F8
and a few points of light pass through the skin tear. This round hole is small about
6 mm and an inward flap of tissue can be seen hanging from the skin margin in F8. This is an entry wound by size and shape. See Figure X-28 and compare the
wounds. JFK Top of the head photos (F6 and F7), notice the jet-black perfectly round
dot within the black triangle at the point of entry, of the right temple hairline
semicircle. This dot has been placed on the photo in a darkroom to hide the wound. The background is black where the floor and walls should be seen.In-F7-the wall
can be seen over JFK but it fades to black at the edges. The round dot has changed
to a black triangle. The photos have been tampered with to concealthe wound.

--- PAGE BREAK ---Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 12
Strange photographic lines, probably matt lines, are present in F6 and F7 indicating
that the hanging brain maybe a composite photo.

Groden Superior Right Profile (G1).

In G1 the right temple triangle is gray
intact bone, which is not present in F1.

This bone should be seen in F1, F6, and F7
and thus this may be a composite photo.

The background has been blacked out with
the hairline from left to right.Noindividual hair texture can be seen and the hair
has moved from F1.

Individual hair texture can be seen near the Right Ear in G1
and F1.

The right temple fragment wound can be seen in G1 and below it the bullet
entry semicircle is well lighted and thus less visible but it is present.

In addition to
F8 both G1 and F1 confirm the presence of the semicircle and the fragment wound
on the right temple skin flap.

Deliberate photo tampering obscures these features in
F6 and F7.

The underlying bone holding the flap away from the head in F1 is not
seen in G1.

This bone does not appear fractured as Dr.

Humes reports and its
presence is inconsistent with the other photos and x-rays.

The lacerations,
semicircle, fragment wound are consistent in the photos F8, F1, G1, F6, and F7 even
though the body condition has changed.

The brain seen hanging down in F6, F7 and
G1 is not seen in F1 so the body has changed between the photos.

Photo F8, JFK Large Defect, in the center of the photo.is-a-semicircle on the
occipitaL bone edge.

This an exit wound due.to the outward beveling of the skull--
seen in the photo.

This is the right superior occipital bone near the lambda along
the lambdoid suture, which is on the missing bone.

This is about 4 inches above the
occipital protuberance.

This would be the crown of the head area, which is the head
wound near the ruler in F3 [also seen in F5] known as the red spot.

The red spot is
the exit of the right temple hairline entry wound seen as a white circle in F8.--- PAGE BREAK ---

This would be the crown of the head area, which is the head
wound near the ruler in F3 [also seen in F5] known as the red spot. The red spot is
the exit of the right temple hairline entry wound seen as a white circle in F8. Below
the occipital bone semicircle is a star shaped area of dry blood on the bone. To the
left of the dry blood is a dark black area in the folded skin flap. This is bruising
caused by the exit wound in the skin at the location of the “Red Spot". The dry
blood is the size and shape of the actual skin exit wound. Sometime during the
transport the bullet hole in the skin slipped over the occipital bone and air passed
though the hole causing the blood and tissue to dry in the size and shape of the hole. The dry blood is about 20 x 30 mm at the longest. points-of.the-star. The oval-body
of the star is about 10 x 15 mm. This is the size and shape.ofan exit wound and'not
an entry wound as claimed by the Government. The semicircle edge on the occipital
bone, the dry blood on the occipital bone and the bruising in the skin flap with the
size and appearance in F3 demonstrate that the F3 red spot wound is an exit wound
of moderate to low velocity. Also notice the positioning of the red spot wound in a
connecting the two wounds. According to Dr. Mantik this particle path indicates a
front to back bullet path. 77.1
Conclusion: The fourth shot, third head shot,entered the right temple
hairline and traversed cranial cavity in a front to back direction depositing minute
particles along its path at the top of the head exiting in the crown area about 4
inches above the occipital protuberance known as the red spot. The velocity of the
bullet with the existing skull fractures from the other two headshots was enough to
cause the head to explode. Remember according to Wilber, the internal cranial pressure is

--- PAGE BREAK ---of the
bullet with the existing skull fractures from the other two headshots was enough to
cause the head to explode. Remember according to Wilber, the internal cranial pressure is

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 13
approximately equal to the square of the velocity of the bullet. In addition bullet
velocity must be a minimum of 2,000 feet per second {yielding 4,000,000 pounds per
square inch} to cause an intact skull to explode. The size of the temporary cavity
depends on the kinetic energy of the bullet, Ekin = (m/2) V where V = velocity and m
= mass (bullet weight). The internal cranial pressure depends upon fluid physics.
Pascal's law, fluid pressure is the same in all directions. Liquid is relatively
incompressible and external force is transmitted equally throughout the volume of
the liquid. Fluids transmit pressure undiminished in a hydraulic press, which is a
closed container. The kinetic energy of a fluid is, Ekin =1/2m V2 where V = velocity
and m = mass (of the fluid). Bernoulli's equation, P + pgh + 1/2PV2 = constant
where P= absolute pressure and p=mass density of fluid. Simply put, the skull is a
closed container filled with water and when a bullet moves fast enough the skull will
explode. The fluid physics require most of the blood and brain to splatter in the
direction of the bullet path. In the case of JFK blood and brain was splattered to
theleft rear of JFK due to the frontal shots.
FicuRE X-53.Upper:lnternal surface of the skull,
showing inward bevellingof the defect in the bone
under anentrancewcund
The actual bole is shown in the lower photor
graph.Lower:Outer surface of the skull, showing out-
ward bevelling of the exit defect.
Middle:Outer surface of the
skull, to show the mechanism of.outward bevelling at
the exit.Note the raised bone fragrments by the exiting
bullet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ward bevelling of the exit defect.
Middle:Outer surface of the
skull, to show the mechanism of.outward bevelling at
the exit.Note the raised bone fragrments by the exiting
bullet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tobias JFKAutopsyPhotos14
BULLET IMPACT UPON THE SKULL
:Figure 15.
Beveling
Diagram illustrates that a missilestrikinga surface ofthe skull-whether
entering or exiting-creates a small hole on the side of imp: and a larger,
beveled-out hole as it emerges from that surface.This “beveling” cffect permits a
distinction tobemadebctween bulletentrance andcxit woundsofthcskull,since
the larger, beveled-out hole will be on the side opposite the point of impact.
.Thus,if the exterior surface of the skull exhibits beveling,the wound is an cxit; if
the interior surface does, it is an entrance.
1. The bullet hits the skin crushing it against the skull. The outer skin edge is
curved inward and stretches as the marginal abrasion compression ring is
formed as the bullet passes. A hole about the size of the bullet is formed in

--- PAGE BREAK ---Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 15
the skin.Sometimes crushed skin tags remain attached to the inner
compression ring as seen in the white circle in F8.

2.

The bullet hits the skull and it fractures in a unique cone shaped pattern of
inward beveling.

The hole in the skull surface struck by the bullet is smaller
than the hole on the exiting the surface.

Other fractures often occur parallel
to the suture lines of the skull bones.About 300 foot-pounds of energy is
transferred from the bullet to the skull to cause the fractures.

3.

Bone fragments become missiles and enter the brain.

The bullet is deformed
by the impact.

Some bullets mushroom while others fragment.

Often the
direction of the bullet path is deflected by the impactwith bone.Thus bullet
path through the body usually does not point directly to the shooter but to
the general area of the shooter.The path of the final JFK headshot is
upwards at about 30° as measured on Z 312.

The path is.also left to right
given thelookingleftheadposition indicatingasouthbridgesewer shooting
positionassuming only slightupward deflection.Because of theprobability
of deflection the shooter could be in either the lower or upper sewer or
behind the picket fence or even on or under the bridge and probably the
match JFK's Z 312 position with this frontal shot and the shooter's position.

4.

Occasionally some of the skin edge will be pulled into the bone beveling
fracture of the skull, which can be seen in the marginal compression ring of
the skin.Compression rings cause the skin to be inward beveled sothat-
when the excised skin is laid flat and viewed from theinner surfacethe
wound margins are elevated higher than the surrounding skin.

To
demonstrate, punch a hole in a sheet of paper supported by a cardboard box
with a pencil and examine the hole from both sides of the paper.

Notice the
characteristics for determining the direction of the entry.--- PAGE BREAK ---

To
demonstrate, punch a hole in a sheet of paper supported by a cardboard box
with a pencil and examine the hole from both sides of the paper. Notice the
characteristics for determining the direction of the entry. 5.As thebullet enters the brain a few inches the internal cranial pressure rises
to approximately the square of the velocity of the bullet, which is a minimum
an intact skull to explode. [JFK already has two bullets in the head so less
pressure is required.][Go to a lake and throw bullet-sized rocks into the
water and study the size and shape of the splash at varying velocities and
angles of impact. The faster the rock the bigger the splash. In a closed
container this means a bigger explosion.]
6. Pascal's law,fluid pressure is the same in all directions.A small amount of
blood is then ejected under pressure out the entry hole. [Blood does not have
to pool as some have said because the passing bullet virtually liquefies the
brain and the pressure forces it out the entry hole.] In the case of JFK the
.45 bullet is seen exiting the head and both a lower and a horizontal jet of
blood are seen going towards Connally in Z 313. This blood appears to.be
ejected from both the right temple entry and the .45 entry. No jet of blood is
seen from the occipital Parkland wound because theintact braihacted like a
plug. The Parkland wound bulletleft the brain virtually Yntact however this
initial pressure probably caused the protruding brain tissue seen in F3 and
IMTACT
BAAM

--- PAGE BREAK ---raihacted like a
plug. The Parkland wound bulletleft the brain virtually Yntact however this
initial pressure probably caused the protruding brain tissue seen in F3 and
IMTACT
BAAM

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 16
obscures the back of the head wound in the Z film.This could be photo
tampering to obscure the occipital wound but it could be natural shadowbut
it is strange. Closed containers filled with water produce the same effect
when shot. A small amount of fluid is usually ejected from the entry towards
the shooter. [This amount of fluid, less than an ounce is part of the so called
"jet effect theory"for the JFK backward head snap discussed below.]
7. As the bullet proceeds the internal cranial pressure reaches maximum and
the skull explodes. The skull fractures and the skin rips along lines of least
resistance thus the head explodes near the point of bullet entry.The skin
often rips across the entry wound leaving semicircles on the skin flaps. When
the skin flaps are brought together a complete circle of entry is formed. The
explosion reduces the pressure wave around the bullet. Remember JFK
already has two bulletwounds to the headwith multiple skull fractures thus
the bullet velocity to explode the skull is less than 2000 ft/sec.[Also notice
that the .45 cal bullet is probably inside the skull and moving at the same
time thus increasing pressure.]
8.
The bullet traverses the brain with reduced velocity and a smaller
temporary cavity. About 160 foot-pounds of energy is transferred from the
bullet to the head.
9. The deformed fragmented bullet hits the skull and it fractures in a unique
cone shaped pattern of outward bevelingJusually larger than the entry
1980
wound] as it exits the skull. An additional 300 foot-pounds of energy is
transferred from the bullet to the skull to cause the fractures.
10. The bullet exits the skin.Because the head exploded with many skin rips
and flaps with multiple skull fractures the skin exit may not be exactly over
the skull exit. Because the skull exploded reducing the pressure wave and
the slowingof thebullet tolowvelocity theexit is only 2 to3 times thebullet
diameter instead of several inches were it at high velocity. This is a situation
exit. Discounting the skin rips caused by the explosion the entry is smaller
than the exit, which is almost always the case in all ballistic wounds.
TH
OF A SECOND
THEHEADSNAP
It is the force of the lastfrontal head shot bullet that causes JFK'sbackward
head snap. We have no proof that the final frontal shot was from a Carcano nor do
we know what bullets were used thus the following is just academic speculation as to
what is possible. The numbers can be altered, within reason, as needed to fit the
true results that are seen in the Zapruder film. What this proves is that it is possible
forbullets from the front to cause the head snap and that no shots from therear
Sixth Floor occurred.
The momentum of a Carcano bullet transferred to the head according to
Wilber, p 222 is 1.1 feet per sec. This is 13.2 inches/sec and 0.733 inches per Z
frame. [Using his numbers and recalculating the momentum is actually 1.6 ft/sect transferred to the head according to
Wilber, p 222 is 1.1 feet per sec. This is 13.2 inches/sec and 0.733 inches per Z
frame. [Using his numbers and recalculating the momentum is actually 1.6 ft/sec

--- PAGE BREAK ---TobiasJFKAutopsyPhotos17
which is 19.2 inches/sec and 1.1 inches per Z frame which is about the actual head
snapmovement of12inches over10frames,Z 313-323.According toThomson the
frame.] The momentum of the bullet impact is 43 foot-pounds per second.

Momentum of a particle, P = MV.

Assuming: A Carcano 160 grain bullet times
pound) = 43 foot-pounds.

A foot-pound is the energy it takes to move one pound a
distance of one foot without any friction or resistance.

This small energy is only half
of the story.

Understand that the bullet penetrated the skull striking it two times, at
entry and exit.

This double impact is often overlooked along with the kinetic energy
transfer and the work done by the bullet.

The momentum of the first impact is 43
foot-pounds and the second impact is about half or 20 foot-pounds.

Thus at least 60
foot-pounds of momentum exists in the bullet.

JFK's momentum is the speed of the
car about 3mph or 4% ft/sec [depending upon who calculates it] but in this study it is
consideredzero.

According to Wilber the head neck mass is 34 pounds (20% of 170 lbs) but
the weight of the head neck mass is not related to a percentage of body weight so
this is a crude guess.

Simple subtraction says that 34 pounds can be moved at least
one foot [head snap distance] when acted upon by a force of 43 to 60 foot-pounds
but this is not the formula for collisions.

An assumption of 34 pounds for the head
and neck seems extreme when the head is considered as an 9" sphere its volume is
381" cubic inches.

[1 gal = 231 in?

or 3.7853 P with a weight of 8.3 Ibs/gal.] The
density of the head should approximately equal the value of water or 62.4 Ib/ft?

or 1
kg/liter because the airways would cancel out bone density leaving only water to
consider.

A 9" sphere of water weighs 13.75 Lbs [62.4 / 1728 x 381].

JFK's brain
was weighed at an exceptional 1500 grams, which is only 3′/s Ibs leaving 10 Ibs of
bone and other tissue.--- PAGE BREAK ---

A 9" sphere of water weighs 13.75 Lbs [62.4 / 1728 x 381]. JFK's brain
was weighed at an exceptional 1500 grams, which is only 3′/s Ibs leaving 10 Ibs of
bone and other tissue. If the head and neck are considered a 9" high cylinder with a
4.5" radius it has a volume of 572 in?and it would weigh 20.6 Ibs when filled with
water. According to the burn formulas the head is 14% and the neck is 4%
equaling 18% of body surface area. Thus 14% of 170 is 23.8 Ibs but the weight of
the head is not related to a percentage of body weight. Averaging 23.8 and 13.75 we
get 19 lbs. Only a small part of the neck mass is involved in the head snap because
the head pivots on the neck. The neck acts like a tether stopping maximum
backward head movement storing potential energy from the kinetic energy and
potential energy. Placing several persons supine with the head resting on bathroom
scales resulted in an average range of 8 to 10 lbs. An assumption of 15 to 20 lbs for
the head neck mass appears more realistic than 34 Ibs. I suspect that mid-neck
severed heads weigh about 15 lbs but I do not know of any corner studies
confirming this. An accurate estimate of the head neck mass is essential to the
calculations. [Using 15 Ibs, E=(% x 15)(1.8)” = 24.3 foot-pounds, using 26.5 Ibs, E=(% x
26.5)(1.8)” = 43 foot-pounds, using Wilber's 34 lbs, E=(% x 34)(1.8) = 55.08 foot-
pounds required to move the head as seen in the Z film.]
An Interview With Duncan MacPherson By Joel Grant

--- PAGE BREAK ---)” = 43 foot-pounds, using Wilber's 34 lbs, E=(% x 34)(1.8) = 55.08 foot-
pounds required to move the head as seen in the Z film.]
An Interview With Duncan MacPherson By Joel Grant

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 18
"The movement of a body due to bullet momentum cannot be greater than the
movement of the same body if it was holding the gun that fired the bullet."
Thus depending upon the rifle the recoil momentum is often enough to cause
shoulder movement of 3 to 8 inches and in some cases enough to knock the shooter
to the ground. If one placed the butt of a rifle against the head and fired the
momentum would be enough to move the head several inches.
From the testimony of Larry Sturdivan, physical scientist with the Wound Ballistics
Branch of the AberdeenProving Grounds since1964
1HSCA404 --
(re: film of skulls filled with a 20% gelatin solution the skulls are not attached to
anything to simulatethe neck)
"In fact, all 10 of the skulls that we shot did essentially the same thing. They gained
a little bit of momentum consistent with one or a little better [than a] foot-per-
secondvelocity thatwould have been imparted by the bullet and they alsolost
material toward us, that is, toward its right and, therefore, rotated towards its left."
1HSCA414 --
[JFK Exhibit JFK F-303]
Energy = % MV2
Momentum = MV
Mannlicher Carcano Bullet
Momentum Lost: (162/7000) * 800 = 18.4 Ib. ft./sec
Head of Kennedy
Velocity gained: 18.4/15 = 1.2 ft. sec
Energy deposited: 1110 Joules ~ 800 ft. lb.
[This exhibit shows a loss of velocity of 800 ft/sec upon exiting and a head weight of
15 Ib with a 162 gr. Bullet: The impact velocity was almost 2000 ft/sec. It took
about 800 ft. lb. to penetrate the skull.]
Mr. Fauntroy. The exhibits which are being placed show, as I say, a rearward thrust
of the President's head and his upper body, a fraction of a second after he was shot
in the head, and the assassination critics have insisted this rearward thrust clearly
indicates that the shot came from the front, the theory being that the force and
momentum of the bullet, Mr. Sturdivan, carried the President's head toward the
rear of the limousine.
Mr. Sturdivan. As we can see from the chart, this velocity of 1.2 feet per second is
not the kind of velocity that would throw thePresident bodily around backwards,
forwards, or in any direction no matter which direction the bullet came from.
The Government has failed to address the details of the physics involved and
minimizes the forces at work. JFK's head is moving backwards at 1.1 feet per
second just as calculated at 1.2 ft/sec.
Momentum is only half the story of the head snap. The kinetic energyinvolved and
minimizes the forces at work. JFK's head is moving backwards at 1.1 feet per
second just as calculated at 1.2 ft/sec.
Momentum is only half the story of the head snap. The kinetic energy

--- PAGE BREAK ---zes the forces at work. JFK's head is moving backwards at 1.1 feet per
second just as calculated at 1.2 ft/sec.
Momentum is only half the story of the head snap. The kinetic energy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 19
transferred from the bullet to the head must also be considered.Work of a
resultant external force on a body is equal to the change in kinetic energy of the
body. The energy required to accelerate a mass to a given velocity is proportional to
the square of the velocity E = %MV). Assume JFK's head snap is a big 10 inches
over five Z frames 313-318 for a velocity of2 inches per 1/18 sec. or 3 ft/sec.
E=(%x34)(3)²= 153 foot-pounds of energy required to do the work of moving JFK's
34 Ibs head. According to Lifton, p 49, JFK's head moved forward or clockwise
rotation two inches between frames 312 and 313. This is consistent with the
Parkland occipital wound occurring about 310-311. The .45 cal. wound occurs
about 311-313but it is not discernable in the film.The last shot occurs between 312
and 313 and head then snaps backward and left from 313 to 323 and rebound
forward motion starts at 324. Excess energy transferred to the head causes this
rebound at 324 when the neck acts like a tether.Lifton does not give the distance
the car window in front of Connally. Assume it to be a long distance of 1 foot. The
velocity is then 12 inches per 10/18ihs sec. [313-323], which is 21.6 inches per second
or 1.8 ft/sec. E=(% x 34)(1.8)² = 55.08 foot-pounds required to do the work to
move the 34 Ibs head. Let us assume an extreme head snap of 12 inches in 5 frames
[not seen in Z film] then 220 ft/pounds of energy is required to move the head.
Edgewood Arsenal ballistic tests for the WC, Wilber p 166, 6.5 mm 160 grain
Carcano tests simulating theMagicbullet:
E =mv²/2g 7000 or mv²/450,000
Bullet Location
Velocity feet/second
Energy Foot-pounds
Muzzle
2160
1638
60 yards
1900
1268
= 370 lost
After exiting14cm JFK's neck
1779
1111
= 157 lost*
After exiting Connally's rib
1514
805
=306 lost*
After exiting Connally's wrist
1432
720
= 85 lost*
*Energy lost from the
bullet and transferred
to the body
Edgewood Arsenal was attempting to prove the magic bullet thus this data is
probably misleading. Skull bones tend to fracture at about 300 ft/pounds but
the skull has different thickness and curvatures thus the amount of energy to
cause fractures is variable by location on the skull. Assumptions: It takes about
250 to 350 ft/pounds to fracture the skull, which is close to the rib fracture
energy above. Assume the energy of the above 14 cm of the neck wound is
needed to transverse the brain. Assume the energy for skull fractures is equal to
the wrist.
Using the above data:
alternate values
Skull entry = 300 ft/pounds
85
Brain
=157
157
Skull exit = 300
85is
needed to transverse the brain. Assume the energy for skull fractures is equal to
the wrist.
Using the above data:
alternate values
Skull entry = 300 ft/pounds
85
Brain
=157
157
Skull exit = 300
85

--- PAGE BREAK ---rse the brain. Assume the energy for skull fractures is equal to
the wrist.
Using the above data:
alternate values
Skull entry = 300 ft/pounds
85
Brain
=157
157
Skull exit = 300
85

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 20
757ft/poundstransferred toJFK'shead
327
Kinetic energy is the force or ability to do work. Work requires the movement or
displacement of objects. The kinetic energy transferred from the bullet to the body
is more than enough to overcome the momentum required to do the work of moving
the head backwards no matter what extreme or minimal values are used for the
academic calculations of the head snap. No matter how one manipulates the
numbers the bu!lets momentum plus kinetic energy transferred results in the work
of backward head snap of one foot in [10 Z frames], 10/18ths of a second due to a
frontal headshot. The bullet would exit with about 500 foot-pounds at a speed of
about 1185ft/sec.
Additionally the effects of the .45 cal. bullet must be considered.Momentum
of a particle, P = MV. Assuming: A .45 cal. 230 grain bullet times 800 feet per
second = 184,000 foot grains per second divided by 7000 grains (per pound) = 26
foot-pounds of momentum energy. The kinetic energy of this bullet [E=mv²/2g7000
or mv/450000] is 327 foot-pounds. Assuming 319 foot-pounds for distance to JFK
and to enter the skull and brain, leaves 8 foot-pounds remaining in the bullet thus
the velocity of the exiting bullet would be 125 ft/sec. The streaking .45 cal. bullet
seen exiting in Z 313 is moving 100 to 150 ft/sec. This speed is consistent with the
math because the speed of entry is not known nor is the energy transferred known.
What is known from the Zapruder film is that JFK's head rotates a full 90° to the
leftat Z316-323.Because theheadfreelyrotates on the spinalcoulombwhen
unconscious very little energy is required to accomplish this rotation. The head
snap as seen in the Zapruder film is true and correct and consistent with two bullets
to the right temple area.
Energy to move a 34 Ibs head mass as calculated above 55, 153 or 220
Bullet momentum
Kinetic energy transfer
43 +20 (double impact)757
or 327[last bullet]
26
319
[.45 cal bullet]
Maximum Total = 1169 foot-pounds to perform the work of the head snap
motion of one foot in 5/9ths second. The work or movement of a resultant external
force on a body is equal to the change in kinetic energy of the body. The excess
energy results in the forward rebound movement starting at Z 324 and the
movement of the exploding bone, blood and brain matter to the left rear of JFK.
The total energy transferred from the two bullets to the head is more than
enough to overcome themomentumrequired tomove theheadbackwards no
matter what extreme or minimal values are used for the academic calculations of
the head snap.
JETEFFECTTHEORY-
Luis Alverez, A Physicist Examines.the Kennedy Assassination Film,
American Journal of Physics Vol. 44, No. 9, September 1976, performed a good
study of the Zapruder Film but failed to understand his ballistic experiments.ist Examines.the Kennedy Assassination Film,
American Journal of Physics Vol. 44, No. 9, September 1976, performed a good
study of the Zapruder Film but failed to understand his ballistic experiments.

--- PAGE BREAK ---TobiasJFKAutopsyPhotos21
Alverez proposed the jet effect theory as the reason Oswald's third shot to the back
of the head caused the backward head snap.

Alverez used tape covered melons shot
with a 30-06 at 3000 ft/sec and found that the melon was propelled towards the
shooter and not away as expected.

A melon is not a head attached to a body nor
does it simulate the skull and energy transference of the bullet.

Alverez wrongly
assumes most of the kinetic energy of a bullet is transferred to heat and not
mechanical energy.

A bullets kinetic energy is transformed into the work of
penetrating the target and into the movement of the target in addition to heat.

Kinetic energy is required to crush wood as it penetrates and is then transformed
into the movement of the wood block bothhorizontally and vertically.Alverez
totally ignores his own experimental results of the large spray of melon fluid in the
direction and path of the exiting bullet.

He then ignores the fact that most of JFK's
blood and brain was blown back and left of JFK indicating a frontal shot.

Alverez
does not disprove a frontal shot as the cause for the head snap.He only suggests the
"jet effect" theory as a justification for the head snap from Oswald's third shot.

I
havenevershottapedmelonslikeAlverez.

Having shot many closed containers filed with water, the only times the
containers falls towards the shooter is when the container split causing near 99% of
the water to exit out the very large exit hole.

The lighter container is then moved
towardsthe shooterby the1%ofwater thatwasbeingforced out the entryhole due
to the increased pressure prior to the bullet exit.

Pascal's law, fluid pressure is the
same in all directions.

As the bullet penetrates the container the internal pressure
increases forcing fluid out the entry towards the shooter.

The large exit occurs and
the container bursts releasing most of the fluid away from the shooter.--- PAGE BREAK ---

As the bullet penetrates the container the internal pressure
increases forcing fluid out the entry towards the shooter. The large exit occurs and
the container bursts releasing most of the fluid away from the shooter. Due to the
lightweight of the now empty container the fluid moving towards the shooter via the
entryis able tomovethelightweightcontainer towards theshooter.Thejeteffectis
a real fact but of a very minimal force that rarely occurs in water filed heavy
containers and probably never in animal or human heads tethered by the neck.The
jet effect is limited to very lightweight containers filed with water and not heavy
bodies. The jet effect could not account for JFK's head snap as explained under
"Bullet impact to the Skull #5 and #6" above.In the case of JFK the skin flap folded
over the right ear after the explosion of the head dissipating the last of the jet effect
energy of the frontal entry. Principles of physics must be folowed in evaluating the assassination. Bullet
energy transfer to the body is obtained by measuring velocity at entry and exit. Newton's laws: momentum is conserved in a collision to wit the momentum "before"
has to equal the momentum after. Momentum is transferred along the line of flight
to the object struck. Likewise energy is conserved to wit total energy of a system of
bodies in isolation is always constant although energy transformations may occur
from one form to another within the system. Thus a change in kinetic energy must
equal a change in potential energy plus other dissipative forces such as work or
movement, friction, heat, and etc. Energy is never destroyed but transformed
within the system.Likewise fluid pressure is the same in all directions. Pascal's
law: An external pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted uniformly
throughout the volume of the liquid. Fluid transmits pressure undiminished in a
hydraulic press. The head is simply a closed container filled with water. Newton'sclosed fluid is transmitted uniformly
throughout the volume of the liquid. Fluid transmits pressure undiminished in a
hydraulic press. The head is simply a closed container filled with water. Newton's

--- PAGE BREAK ---smitted uniformly
throughout the volume of the liquid. Fluid transmits pressure undiminished in a
hydraulic press. The head is simply a closed container filled with water. Newton's

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 22
second law of motion: When a force acts upon a body, it produces an acceleration
in the direction of the force, an acceleration that is directly proportional to the force
and inversely proportional to the mass of the body. When two bullets enter the
righttemple area ofJFKwith about1100foot-poundsof force transmittedtothe
headyouhavetheheadexplodedwithaheadsnapbackandtotheleftwithblood
and brain sprayed to behind and left of JFK. The Zapruder film is consistent with
the laws of physics and the autopsy photos and the blood splatter patterns and two
bullets to the right temple area.
Take a block of wood to simulate different values of JFK's assumed head
neck mass of 10, 15, 20, 25 or 34 Ibs. Mounting the block on a skateboard reduces
the energy lost to friction but the total weight of the block and the skateboard must
equal the assumed head mass. Fire a bullet of known size, about 160 grains, and
speed, at least 2000 ft/sec, into it. Measure the distance the block moves. In the
examplebelow theblock ofwoodisfixed and doesnot move.Repeattheexperiment
with a bullet that delivers 1000 foot-pounds of total energy. This experiment proves
thehead snap tobetheresultofafrontal shot.to.the-headifa bullet canmove the
assumed head neck mass block a distance of one foot without friction.
Fig.7-4The work done in stopping a bullet is
equal totheinitialkineticenergyof thebullet.
Example 7-5 What force F is nccessary to stop a 16-g bullet, traveling at 260 m/sec, as it
penetrates into wood a distance of 12 cm?
Solution The total work required to stop the bullet will be equal to the change in kinetic.
energy.(See Fig.7-4.) Since the bullet is stopped,v, = 0, and so Eq. (7-4) yields
Fs = --mw。²
Substituting,
F(0.12 m) = -(0.016 kg)(260 m/sec)²
Dividing by 0.12 m,
(2)(0.12 m)
=-4,500 N
The minus sign indicates'that the force was opposite to the displacement. It should
be noted that this force is more than 30,000 times the weight of the bullet.
2-F/M
aoners
wtn
6) Avto rsy
Bcooy Seentter.
Dgvlc65(2)ndicates'that the force was opposite to the displacement. It should
be noted that this force is more than 30,000 times the weight of the bullet.
2-F/M
aoners
wtn
6) Avto rsy
Bcooy Seentter.
Dgvlc65(2)

--- PAGE BREAK ---rce was opposite to the displacement. It should
be noted that this force is more than 30,000 times the weight of the bullet.
2-F/M
aoners
wtn
6) Avto rsy
Bcooy Seentter.
Dgvlc65(2)

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Tobias JFK Autopsy Photos 23
Example 8-5A 12-g bullet is fired into a 2-kg block of wood suspended from a cord, as
shown in Fig.8-6.The impact of the bullet causes the block to swing10 cm above its
original level.Compute the velocity of the bullet as it strikes the block.
(m+m2)v
h=10 cm
mu
m2
u2=0
Fig.8-6Computingthemuzzlevelocityufromenergyandmomentumconsiderations
SolutionWe can compute the combinedvelocity after impact from energy considerations.
The kinetic energy of thebullet is lost to potential energy of the block and bullet as it
rises to the height h.Hence, if v is the initial velocity of the block and bullet, we have
(m+m)u²=（m+m)gh
Dividing by m + ma, we obtain
u²=2gh
from which
yz =a
Therefore,thecombinedvelocityaftercollisionis
0 = (2)(9.8 m/sec²)(0.1 m) = 1.4 m/sec²
9.8m/5ec=gnety
Themomentumequation thenbecomes
mu+mgu=（m+m)u
or, since u = 0,
(0.012 kg)u=(0.012kg+2 kg)(1.4 m/sec)
(0.012kg)u =(2.012kg)(1.4m/sec)
0.012u, = 2.82 m/sec
which gives an entrance velocity of
u=235m/sec
To simulate the JFK head snap, a block of wood equaling the weight of
assumed head mass should be suspended on two long strong wire cables for stability
toprevent spinning of theblock andshot with a Carcano160grbullet at 2000ft/sec
orsimilarbullet and measureboth theheight of displacement andhorizontal
displacement. This experiment proves the head snap to be the result of a frontal
shot to the head if a bullet canmove the assumed head neck mass block a distance of
one foothorizontally.The so-called,Luis Alvarez“jet effect”theory ofa-rearentry
With ejected brain causing a reward head snap is fiction; Construct the block of
wood so that the-bullet penetrates 3 to 4 inches and-exits instead of stopping the
bullet then repeat the experiment. Or since the JFK bullets exited after delivering
about a 1000 foot-pounds try the test with a pistol bullet delivering about 1000 foot-