Mrs.

Rapliaeln Seroy (Please Forward) 11/3/94 
/j Richard Gallon 
260 Fifth Avc.

How York, HY 10001 
Dca r Raphaela, 
Thanks for your letter of the 28th and tho two disks.

And for the other information.

I was not aware tliat Ricliard had those personal difficulties, other than his father's 
death earlier and your coneluding paragraph is not the same as your last previous letter, 
Postmarked August 8 or 9* I<v that letter you said you had more to do but it involved 
so/ething about the computer you did not understand andlhat as soon as Peter returned 
2rou' d finish it up.

I waited two months before writing.

I was angry and I had reason to 
be more tliat I go into.

I loved Ricliard for t e wonderful, thoughtful person he had been.

But there came a 
ffA 
time when he just fell silent, without any expl^ion, ever.

I can .think of nothing I did 
to explain or justify that and his virtual total silence thereafter, other than a few 
shottletters tliat were not in adcord with the fact3.

And that is something I'd never have 
expected of him.

He has not kept liio word to me and ther$ are indications that he is 
doing tliat again.

I'm baffled, is one person of whom I'd never have expected that.

UUhen he phonedto tell me he'd like to do Hoax, with Herman £raf on the line, I said 
I'd get it retyped as soon as ^ could.

I had in fact made the arrangements but the woman 
/V 
fried ,liad a son who just had an emergency operation and she had to care for him.

Richard 
said they'd do the retyoing, I agreed because they wanted it fqjTt, taking about February 
publication, and never mentioning Either paperback or butchery of the book.

I agreed to 
his editing and he agreed tp send me three retyped copies, before editing.IMe did not 
set any date but when I was under the impression it would be a hardback and for February 
appearance and tliat was September I expect the retyping to be done promptly and tliat I'd 
get those copies promptly.Richard 
said they'd do the retyoing, I agreed because they wanted it fqjTt, taking about February 
publication, and never mentioning Either paperback or butchery of the book. I agreed to 
his editing and he agreed tp send me three retyped copies, before editing.IMe did not 
set any date but when I was under the impression it would be a hardback and for February 
appearance and tliat was September I expect the retyping to be done promptly and tliat I'd 
get those copies promptly. I could and would have gotten someone else to do the typing. I liave two young women each of whom is retyping a different mans^cript for me now. I've 
completed two additional books since then and several long research pieces, all retyped. That he was not going to have it done promptly he did not tell me. The first knowledge 
I had woo when you sent me your (^Lrst computer experience. What an experience, huh? And 
for me, too, with all the extra work it meant for me. Remember, Raphaela, I've been on 
borrowed time since 1975 and have been lucky. My 1989 heart operation was the second 
I was not expeeted to survive. I've been prohibit ed lifting more than 15 pounds since 
then. I'm feeble and I'm trying to do as much as I can while * am able to. You did send me what you could when you could. But I can't use %jjfe files in the 
basement and some in my office are so overstufeed I can!t get anything out of them. I've 
rh£h£ I WU fv AUrcJ\ 
run out of stacldng space atop the file cabinet3 in my office^ So I kept what you sent 
me as I got it, because when 2 box the sets for the university and college, I want the 
last on the bottom, of couse. So what you sent is exactly as you sent it the only place 
left other than a spot on the floor-and in my office there is no such spot!- is the hearth.

--- PAGE BREAK ---2 
Unsightly!

Strikes ever one who comes heix|in the face.

% wife has not complained because 
she know I have no ^/Sternative.

But first, * do not want anything like that to linger to 
be a problem for anyone, and second the only reason its exists is because I did not get 
the retyped copy.

If I had, if Richard had done what he led me to believe he was going 
to do, you would not have had any problem integrating any tiling.

I'd have done if on the 
final copy, retyped, tliat is.

N0 part of any problem was of my creations and I was kept 
in the dark atout Richard'3 actual plans abusively.

Very abusively.

When he knew very 
well wliat he intende~7fl[oing he misled me and made even more, work for me.

An example, is 
knowing lie wa$ going to cut the hell out of it-did not even have it retyped.^ he actually 
phoned me and asked me to talk to C^hrlie ^inton and include what Charlie wanted.

Winton 
phoned me, feave me to understand he has a deep interest in the assassination, gave me 
an/ idee of wliat he wanted erddod, and I went to much troftle to try /to do that even 
though 1 e^ai^led it as assassination kid stuff, the nutty stuff oj^ oh underinformed 
theorists.

did this to me when there was so little of my life left and when he knew 
he would not use it.

Tliat kind of junk is foreign to my work.

I had to collect it from 
others and tliat wasted their time and mine.

Quite aside from all of this i3 the atrocity to our history he perpetrated.AM the 
harm to me and to my work and its meaning and value, what I work so hard for when I should 
nof be.'for my healthjbpM .

And then the typos I picked up that were not corrected!

And publishing a book with- 
out even a table of contents!

When f wrote new conclusions to fit what was left that was 
butchered without need and there are a 'dozen blank pages at the end!

1 am being criticized 
for tlie/se tilings in the field, not by readers.

% mail lias been fine and it continues.

There was no editing needed for libel.--- PAGE BREAK ---

% mail lias been fine and it continues. There was no editing needed for libel. There was no libel. There may have been what 
could* liave been an excuse for filing a frivolous suit an they do cost money to win. And 
to tliis day Posner and RII are mute. Wliat is in Case Open i3 libel if not true. None of 
that was any problem for Richard.But if lie gave a damn about libel, look what is in thai 
disgrace, ^vingstono^ self-descriptive billing the Truth! lias me an accessory in the 
JFK assassination two different ways, among other libels, and he thanks Richard fof hi3 
wonderful help and advice in it. * know Richard recused himself but he is supposed to be 
iny friend and he said and did not a thing about many libels of me in it. With an announced 
50,000 livrdback copies. I do not know what was what happened but it looks bad. I do not go into IfcIVER AGAIN!, but Richard has not kept his word on that and he did 
not do wliat I expected of him and iTe led me to believe he would do with a nod of the head. It wan fin;illy scheduled fof tills past September but without my being told it was delayed. Vi ^ 
Richard and ^erman raf tpld me it will bo out in ^arch. I see no sign of it and when C&G 
some time ago announced for 
i,Aarch and sent an author copies I have only silence. dhen Richard knows I am not able to do anything. I cannot travel, ^t is too unsafe.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nd when C&G 
some time ago announced for 
i,Aarch and sent an author copies I have only silence. dhen Richard knows I am not able to do anything. I cannot travel, ^t is too unsafe.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

A brother-in-law died last night. I will not bo at his funeral or the services. I Iiave 
not driven dut of Frederick since 1977 and when 1 went to hospitals I was and am driven. 
If a lland brushes a doorknob my skin peels back two inchd. It also peels back if I merely 
let my desk touch the back of one or an arm. And this ^old no^fun- 
ctioning artery in either leg. So I am quite limited in what I can demand RiShard has k 
known tliis for 3ome tiine.l^short, I trifted liim completely and he abused my trust. And I 
cannot tliinlc of anyone I've ever known of whom I would have expected anything like 
tliat less. I luiew Richard as a wonderful person. He had been with me. 
I am really very sorry tliis has been so troubling to you. As' I am about your 
father*s situation and what that means and does to you. But he is lucky. We are both 
past (30, in various ways infirm, me many ways, and we have no childreh 
I do appreciate what you*ve done, very much, and more, your willingness. 
One other tiling on lloax. I Jiad two peer reviews, the best possible in the field, 
both history professors, and both said tliat with normal Siting it should be submitted 
fot the 1993 ftlitzer in histcyy. One*-of those professors wa3 here when a shocking 
letter came from Richard. I merely hande d it to him. After he was ho: e he .mote 
VI 
Richard and sent me a copy, lie 3aid it in that letter, amon^ other thingp. He got no 
. i, . . ,. W 
answer or lie*d have told me. /TM 
1 ) 
Also, save for asking for three fopies of the retyped ms which he*d saifi he was 
giving retyped anyway, I made no demands on Richard. I did not even ask for a contract. 
Or any advance, know what I wanted and I trusted him to do it or tell me otherwise. 
Me did neither, and tliat also I*d.never have expected of him. 
I t:'ke tliis time and go into this part of the situation only to give you to under- 
stand tliat when I wrote him that'^Tang«y letter it was not without cause and it was^ more 
than .a year aft^r he*d goven me his word^& ^ ' 
You have impressed us as a fine anc caring |>erson and we love you for it. I hope all 
your problems v/orlc out as best as is possible, 
sincerely. 
One otlier tfea thing. When some time 
passed aftei I got that first batch from 
you and returned it with corrections and I got no Harold Weisberg 
more * phoned. Richard was not in, David spoke to me briefly. j$e was on another call, ife 
said Richard would phone me. Ue ha3 not since then.W^ O^CHjlh ^th corrections and I got no Harold Weisberg 
more * phoned. Richard was not in, David spoke to me briefly. j$e was on another call, ife 
said Richard would phone me. Ue ha3 not since then.W^ O^CHjlh ^

--- PAGE BREAK ---

J 
Because your letter says you had done all the retyping and I recall your telling 
me you had a little more to do and would require some computerassassistance from Peter 
when he a returned I decided to check it and do the boxing when I returned from my 
early morning walking, blood testing, etc* and I've done that* First x must thank you 
for your care in pacliaging. Every sheet i3 perfect. YJhile all I've done is check the 
page numbers when separating the sets, it looks beautifyl&tt neat* jTalso appreciate 
that! 
*—>) 
But it is not complete, as I remembered your telling me. The last chapter and the 
epilogue are not included. 
Because it is so difficult for me to retrieve from that filedrawer-and I'm getting 
a student to shift some of it to the basment "overflow" files - and I could not send 
you a copy of your last letter, I give you this confirmation that I really did wait 
v^to months before complaining about what seemed like an inordinate delay* 
You did begin with three sets, for the first batch you mailed* 
I do regret very^/uch tliat this has made you incomfortable.

--- PAGE BREAK ---omplaining about what seemed like an inordinate delay* 
You did begin with three sets, for the first batch you mailed* 
I do regret very^/uch tliat this has made you incomfortable.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Raphaels Eeroy's 10/28/94 letter makes several things clear. 
When Gallon said they'd get the retyping done there he was not in a position to get it 
done promptly or iai a computer even acceptably. He was not rushing the book as he 
led me to believe when I-could have Mod it done here but not by someone working full 
time, When Graf spoke of publishing in February, nobody ever telling me they planned ^ 
paperback or no index, speed was essential and I was led to believe they would rush it. 
It was Anly tha^Decenber that 1 leamdd that withiut consulting me Richard then planned 
not to keep his word for February publication and planned it for September, It was only 
when -Winton, their distfcibutor, agreed with me that it appeared a month later than then 
promised, in April, 
At his request I sent Gallen the first six of'seven^'^^to'chaptesrs I had written and cor- 
rected, I had to send him xoroxes of them because Lee Stern had the originals to retype 
but could not do immediately because she was nursing her son and preparing for the holy 
days, Raphaels's letter malces it clear that £rom the beginning Richard had decided to do 
only what he'd read, % added only a little B£ it and when it took . so long to get any 
more of it retyped that also means what he did was his initial intent and he kept that 
secret from me. 
Also bearing on this being his int ent all along, from the very first, is that he hired 
Raphaels only part-time, as she says in her letter, she would not be in his office until 
Tuesday, I think I learned from Richard's son on that call that she worked there only one 
or two days a week, that the computer was available to her only part time then. 
Having me speak to -Min^ton in early December 1993 to add to the book what '“inton wanted 
was a further deception because he did not intend to add anything and began deciding to 
massacre what I wrote. 
There are current indications I3EVER AG Ain 1 again will not appear at the $p promised time. 
It is not on the computer which has what is to be published in March on it. And March 
publication was promised this time by both uerman (graf and Richard,It could easily have 
been in the stores by 7/93 and that without any riiM~irliinw at all, 
I do not recall getting any retyped copy from Raphaela that was typed. The first she sent 
me was her first ever use of a computer and it was a real shock when I a saw it! And I 
do not recall getting any part of the tyxx retyping on the computer with a 3rd set. *t is 
as I got it and I had bad dr eams all night about boxing it with it incomplete. Her last 
previous letter did tell me, or she phoned to tell me, that wheW Peter Skutchss returned 
he'd show her what to do to complete it. It is a long ms, complete or not. Last page 788 
as I recall. I looked yesterday after getting her letter. When 1 box it I can tell if it 
is complete by comparing the last page or part with the draft. 
. *i*Oe*f* MS*complete or not. Last page 788 
as I recall. I looked yesterday after getting her letter. When 1 box it I can tell if it 
is complete by comparing the last page or part with the draft. 
. *i*Oe*f* MS*

--- PAGE BREAK ---t page 788 
as I recall. I looked yesterday after getting her letter. When 1 box it I can tell if it 
is complete by comparing the last page or part with the draft. 
. *i*Oe*f* MS*

--- PAGE BREAK ---

October 28, 1994 
To: Harold Weisberg 
From: Raphaela Seroy 
Re: Letter to Richard Gallen dated 10/13/94 
Dear Harold: 
When I first arrived at this office last winter, Richard was going 
through some personal difficulties of his own, and I truly believe he did not 
xaallv. want (or n&edl) to take on anything else. But I was desperate, 
financially and emotionally, and out of the depth and kindness of his heart, 
told me he might have some work I could do for him. He handed me your 
manuscript and instructed me to "retype it exactly": THOSE WERE THE ONLY 
"ORDERS" I HAD FROM RICHARD! (I remember sitting at the typewriter and 
thinking I must be in heaven; not only to have been given work, but to be 
typing something for Harold Weisberg)! 
I began your manuscript on a typewriter (since I was totally 
computer ignorant). After Diana and Peter showed me how to use it, I was 
still very slow with the computer. The insertions were a bit confusing, and 
I tried to be careful to match your instructions with what I had already 
inserted into the computer to make sure of every single word. So some of the 
manuscript was hand-typed and some was in the computer. Then, a personal 
crisis came up and I had to go down to Florida. 
While I was away, Richard used what I had typed, and working from that 
material, he edited out any possible libelous material, in order to get your 
book published and distributed, for you.! 
I won't bore you with my personal problems, (one of which happens to be 
with another Harold, my own father, who is 93, terribly alone, and in need). 
However, I've just returned from Florida again, and again, must go back there. 
But today, having read the letter you sent to Richard dated 10/13/94, there 
is something I must make clear to you before I leave: YOUR ANGER IS TERRIBLY 
MISPLACED! 
One time, I remember, I sent you one copy, and, much later, sent two 
copies together, which would make it three copies altogether of the work 
(incompleted) I had done so far. I think I've re-typed everything now, and 
the entire manuscript plus new insertions, etc. is on two discs. 
Today is Friday and the mail room is closed, but I will send you those discs 
next Tuesday when I come in to the office. Since computers are second nature 
to people now in school, surely someone closer to you can use these discs and 
finally clear up the mess I've made. I hope so.