THE BAG 
Having decided Oswald was the assassin, the Commission had to 
show how he got the rifle into the building. 
In its report it depends upon the word of Euell Wesley Frazier, 
|iis sister, Linnie Mae Randle, and its own imagination. 
A homemade bag, the Commission says, was found in the area from 
which the shots were fieed. This is Exhibit 142 and appears in Vol. 
XVI. But it is also Exhibit 364 which appears in the same volume. 
Although at the point unexplained, it is the mystifying means with 
which the Commission’s assistant counsel, Joseph A. Ball, introduces 
the testimony of Frazier on Wednesdays March 11, 1?6^, Vol. II, pp. 
210-45. 
Before Frazier is sworn, Mr. Ball announced, "I would 1 ike to 
assign Commission Exhibit N0. 364 to a paper sack which the FBI has 
identified as their C_1Q9 exhibit. That will be the Commission’s 
Exhibit Ho. 364 for identification at this time." When the Chairman 
agreed. Ball then announced that two FBI agents were breaking the 
rifle down or had done so and placed it in Exhibit 364. ^he Chairman 
again agreed. Then Ball said, nWe have also hero before the Commis- 
sion, Commission Ho. 142, which is a papor sack which is identified 
as FBI Exhibit No. 10." Then Ball elicits a rundown on Frazifcr, his 
family, where he lives and with whom, where ho has lived, all about 
his parents, the illness of his stepfather, and other unvital trivia. 
Frazier’s normal departure time in the morning wa3 7:20 and 
some times as late as 7:25, but he preferred the earlier time for 
reasons of parking. This might explain Marina's finding her husband 
hadn’t eaten breakfast on the morning of the 22nd when he slept 
through the alarm and she awakened him at 10 minutes after 7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ing. This might explain Marina's finding her husband 
hadn’t eaten breakfast on the morning of the 22nd when he slept 
through the alarm and she awakened him at 10 minutes after 7.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2 
Frazier took the initiative in introducing himself to Oswald 
after Oswald went to work at the Depository and also offered Oswald 
transportation any time he desired it. (p.216) 
Fr«zier and ^swa&d were both order-fillers. This was the busy 
season and there were five or six order-fillers. At least Frazier 
and Oswald were new employees. (p.217) 
The reason Oswald gave for not going home the one weekend he 
didn't wss "he said he was working on his driver's license and he 
was going to take a driving test." (p.217) Note the Commission 
found in Oswald's possessions information bearing on this. Ruth 
paine also was teaching him driving. 
Oswald didn't talk much, but he enjoyed talking about his baby 
which Frazier said was seamed to make him happy, and about the baby 
he was expecting. They also discussed Oswald's travels, including 
the fact he had been in Russia. Frazier was more interested in France 
and Germany. Oswald never talked politics, (pp.219-20). 
When Oswald was home weekends, he brought a lunch with him, ex- 
cept for the 22nd of November (p.220). 
On the 21st ^3wald asked if he could ride home with Frazier. 
When Frazier asked why, Oswald replied, BI am going home to get 3ome 
curtain rods." He said for his dwelling, (p.222) 
The morning of the 22nd Oswald got there before Frazier fin- 
ished breakfast, looked through the window where Frazier's mother, 
who had never seen him before, saw him, and walked around outside 
waiting for Frazier to finish breakfast. Oswald was na>t ahead of 
time; Frazier looked at th6 clock and saw he was running late, (p.22£) 
They walked to : the car together. Frazier noticed the package on 
If 
the back seat which Oswald said contdned curtain rods. Frazier esti-

--- PAGE BREAK ---ck and saw he was running late, (p.22£) 
They walked to : the car together. Frazier noticed the package on 
If 
the back seat which Oswald said contdned curtain rods. Frazier esti-

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3 
mated Its size at 2 feet. Its width he placed at 5 to 6 inches. 
On the way in they talked about the babies and Oswald chuckled and 
said he had fun playing with them. They did not talk about the 
visit of the President, (p.227) Frazier sat in the car and let the 
motor 
jciatrn run for a while to charge the battery after they got to work. 
After Oswald got out of the car, when he noticed Frazier wasn't 
leaving immediately, Oswald walked onko the building by himself. 
Frazier also enjoyed watching the engines switching around on the 
tracks, so by the time they got to the building Oswald was roughly 
f?0 feet ahead of him. When asked how Oswald was carrying the pack, 
age, Frazier said "he had up just like you stick it right under 
your arm/like that. ... the other part with his right hand." To 
ira>e it clearer, under questioning by Ball, he said he had It paral- 
lel to his body, right straight up and dorm, under his right arr: 
with the end in his right hand. He elso said he knew ^swald to be 
truthful (p.228). Ffazier had worked in a department store and had 
handled packaged curtain rods; he seemed to think this was a package 
of curtain rods. (This seems to indicate that ^swald bod one end 
of the package in his armpit, the ether end in the crocked palm of 
Frazier 
his hand.) (p.229). Frazier didn't see Oswald after ifcsy entered 
the building, (p.230) During the course of the morning he saw Oswald 
from time to time filling orders. When he was on the sixth floor, 
he noticed fchey "were moving stock, I believe inputting up the stock, 
straightening trp the stock." 
He had heard that the President was going by, but he didn't talk 
to Oswald or any of the other men about it. (p.232) He went outside 
to see the ^resident at lunehhour without eating lunch, and he was 
close 
pretty/jtfo Mr. Shelley and Billy Lovelady. Near them was a woman whosey of the other men about it. (p.232) He went outside 
to see the ^resident at lunehhour without eating lunch, and he was 
close 
pretty/jtfo Mr. Shelley and Billy Lovelady. Near them was a woman whose

--- PAGE BREAK ---bout it. (p.232) He went outside 
to see the ^resident at lunehhour without eating lunch, and he was 
close 
pretty/jtfo Mr. Shelley and Billy Lovelady. Near them was a woman whose

--- PAGE BREAK ---

h 
name he knows only to kina be Sarah. They were standing on the steps. 
He shows where he was standing on Commission Exhibit 362. (This is 
a chart of the first floor of the Book Depository Building and it 
appears on p.<?£8 of Vol. XVI.) (p.233) He stayed there $ until after 
the President went by. (Top of p.23l+) In the light of this and 
especially with the question already raised about Billy Lovelady and 
Oswald, isn't it odd that the Commission, while showing him a draw- 
ing, didn't show him the Aitgens photograph and ask him to identify 
himself? Or more important, to identify Lovelady.) 
With all the confusion, people screaming and running and falling, 
he decided, because of his earlier training, to stand still in order 
not to look guilty. He thought the sound came from the direction of 
the railroad tracks. In a few minutes he went back into the build- 
ing. And in just a few minutes "there were a lot of police officers 
and so forth all over the Building there." He believes he reentered 
the building before any policemen arrived, (p.234) He went down to 
the basement to eat his lunch. While on the first flJor, he was In 
the warehouse area, which he pointed out on Exhibit 362. (p.235) 
He is more specific about the location and says It was near Mr. Shel- 
ley's office and that other men were there and they were talking. 
Because of the short time,he remained in the basement/ and ate his 
lunch rapidly. 
They didn't do any Jmore work that day. They were told to go 
home between 1 and 2. (This is exactly | what Oswald had told the po- 
lice he knew was going to happen.) (p.236) Oswald had told him he 
wasn't going to Irving that day and, especially because of the curtain 
rods, Frazier didn't look for him. Before he left for home he didn't 
know swald was missing, (p.237) Shown 2 Jackets described as Oswald's,to Irving that day and, especially because of the curtain 
rods, Frazier didn't look for him. Before he left for home he didn't 
know swald was missing, (p.237) Shown 2 Jackets described as Oswald's,

--- PAGE BREAK ---and, especially because of the curtain 
rods, Frazier didn't look for him. Before he left for home he didn't 
know swald was missing, (p.237) Shown 2 Jackets described as Oswald's,

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5 
a gray-blue one. Exhibit 163, and a gray one. Exhibit 162, (Vol, 
XVI, pp.3>21 and 520,) and a "sort of o rust-brown shirt". Exhibit 
150 (p./5l5), he says he cannot identify them and that mostly Oswald 
went around in Just a T-shirt, However, on that day he had noticed 
that Oswald was wearing a gray flannel-like wool-looking jacket with 
a zipper that Frazier had seen him wear. He reiterates it was not 
one of the 2 he had been shown. (Compare this with Marina's testi- 
mony thfrfc Oswald had but 2 jackets.) The only item of Oswald's 
clothing that day he remembers is the Jacket. The jacket was plain, 
without a figure, and light gray, (p.238) Shown the bag. Exhibit 
361;, he says it is the right color but the wrong length. He reiter- 
ates one end of the package was in Oswald's armpit, the other was 
in his hand and did not "extend beyond the right hand". He again 
reiterates "he had it cupped in his hand". About the width of the 
bag, he thinks it is "just a little bit too wide". On this point 
he again says, "I think it is, (that is, too wide) because ^(you know 
yourself you have to have a big hand with that size, but like ^ say 
he had this cupped in his hand because I remember glancing at him 
when he was walking up ahead of me." 
Mr. Ball then brings out Exhibit ll;2, or FBI No. 10, which 
Frazier says was shown to him in Dallas. Asked by Ball if, when he 
first saw it, "you felt that the bag you saw was of a different color, 
didn't you)" Fr%zier replied, "Right, and I say they told me this 
one had beon treated in the lab." (p.239) Shown a part of bag 11;2 
that Ball aay3 has not been treated, Frqzier refuses to say it is 
the right color. He agrees it is similar/ 
(Comparing the two exhibits as they appear in Vol. XVI, if the 
light part of ll;2 is the allegedly untreated part, it clearly is notr refuses to say it is 
the right color. He agrees it is similar/ 
(Comparing the two exhibits as they appear in Vol. XVI, if the 
light part of ll;2 is the allegedly untreated part, it clearly is not

--- PAGE BREAK ---is 
the right color. He agrees it is similar/ 
(Comparing the two exhibits as they appear in Vol. XVI, if the 
light part of ll;2 is the allegedly untreated part, it clearly is not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

6 
the shade of 364.) 
He says that when shown the bag in Dallas "I told them that 
as far as the length there, I told them that was entirely too long." 
Although he has been specific in saying that the package he saw 
was cupped in Oswald's hand and ended in his armpit, Eall asks, "Now 
you said that some of the bag might have been beyond his hands, did 
you say?" (p.240) (He hasn't said it here; possibly ho told the po- 
lice that in Dallas), Frazier says, "Ye3, sir; I 3aid it could have, 
now ^ am not saying it was." Ball pushes him, and he says it could 
have been longer than his hands. They ask him toput tho bag under 
his airapit and he doe3, He again repeats and shows how, when he 
looked at ^swald, Oswald hold the package cupped in his hands, ball 
again pushes and say3, "you said a moment agop you weren't sure whether 
the package wa3 lpnger or shorter." Frazier's reply doesn't seem to 
make sonse, "And his handa because I couldn't see that abuut the pack- 
age," to which Ball again returns with this question, "By that, do 
you mean that you don't know whether the package extended beyond his 
hands?" Frazier asks, "This way?" Ball says, nNo; lengthwise, toward 
his feet", and Frazier gives a positive answer: "Koj now I don't mean 
that," Asked to explain what he meant, Frazier said, it could have 
extended "widthwise not lengthwise." Ball doesn't give up. He asks, 
"But you don't think it was longer than his hands?" and Frazier re- 
plies, "Eight." Ball gives up and ask3 if Frazier had ever seen Oswald 
take anything home from the Book DeposL tory and gets a negative reply. 
When the question is rephrased, he gets the same response. (p.21(l) 
Shown a picture taken during the parade, Frazier says he doesn't 
show in it because he was above Billy Lovelady who ho does Identify.n the question is rephrased, he gets the same response. (p.21(l) 
Shown a picture taken during the parade, Frazier says he doesn't 
show in it because he was above Billy Lovelady who ho does Identify.

--- PAGE BREAK ---phrased, he gets the same response. (p.21(l) 
Shown a picture taken during the parade, Frazier says he doesn't 
show in it because he was above Billy Lovelady who ho does Identify.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7 
The picture is marked Exhibit 369 and appears in Vol. XVI, p.96f>. 
It seems to be a cropped version of the Altgens picture. It has 
been enlarged more and, among other things, clearly shows no damage 
between the sunvirors. Hence, the bullet that struck the ^resident 
could not have dented the molding around the windshield. This should 
have been obvious to the Commission which, nonetheless, at one point 
in the report conjectured that this bullet could have caused the dent. 
(p.242) 
There are no locker rooms for the storage of clothing. 
(Othwr testimony before the Commission had Oswald leaving the 
Building with no jacket. This jacket, then, is yet to be acoounted 
for.) 
After Ball said he had no questions, he suddenly told Frazier 
they had the rifle in the bag. Exhibit 361j., and asked him to "stand 
up here and put this under your arm and then take a hold of it at 
the side." Frazier demurred and Ball ordered him, "Turn around." 
Frazier continued to demur with explanations which accomplished noth- 
ing. He insisted again that uswald had it "tucked under his shoulder" 
when asked by the Chairman. He also added, "he had it cupped in his 
hand.' The Chairman said, I beg your pardon)" and Frazier again 
said, "I said from where 1 noticed it he had it cupped in^his hands. 
And I don't see how you could have it anywhere other than under your 
armpit because if^you had itjcupped in | your hand it would stick over 
it." Ball asked if he could have carried it in another undescribed 
fashion, and Frazier then says, ’No, 3ir. Never in front here. Hike 
that. Now, that is what I wai talking to you about. No, I say he 
couldn't because If he had pyou would nave seen the package sticking 
up like that. From what I seen walking behind he had it under hishat. Now, that is what I wai talking to you about. No, I say he 
couldn't because If he had pyou would nave seen the package sticking 
up like that. From what I seen walking behind he had it under his

--- PAGE BREAK ---at I wai talking to you about. No, I say he 
couldn't because If he had pyou would nave seen the package sticking 
up like that. From what I seen walking behind he had it under his

--- PAGE BREAK ---

am and you couldn't tell that he had a package fran the back." 
’Then asked to demonstrate it a?.l over again, he does and agrees when 
Ball points out that the package extends "almost up to the level of 
your ear." (p.2l;3) 
Ball estimates the width of the package first at S inches, then 
3, 10 inches. Frazier says, "if you were using a yardstick or one 
of these littlo - " and is interrupted by Ball who says, "l was using 
my hand." Frazier then says, "I know^yuu were, but there aw some 
different means to measure it." Ho says, for example, it would be 
different if ^you used a yardstick or a tape measure. 
BA 11 changes the subject again and goes back to an alleged 'in- 
certainty in Frazier*s testimony about the direction from which the 
shots came. They go through the whole thing again and Frazier gives 
him a lengthy description of his opinion of the source sf the sound, 
saying, "it is ny true opinion, that is what I thought, it sounded 
like it came from over there, ir. the railroad tracks." Ball asks, 
"That sould be east and south"" and Frazier replies, "5fo; that would 
be west and south," Ball asks, "West and south'
1" Frazier then said, 
"Ho; it would be north." Ball tfcies to correct him, saying, "Ho; it 
wouldn't be north." Frazier then says, "Ye3; it wouldn't be south 
because that is in that direction." Ball sums it up by saying "Your 
direction was west and north as the source of the sound." Asked the 
opinions of others with him, Frazier replies, "it was, downward right 
back from, us, like where we were standing. If we had been standing 
somewhere else you might have gotten a different opinion, but from 
where we 'were standing on the steps there it sounded like back down 
to the right." They get out an aerial photograph and. when Frazier is 
about to mark it showing the information Ball wanted. Ball stops him.were standing on the steps there it sounded like back down 
to the right." They get out an aerial photograph and. when Frazier is 
about to mark it showing the information Ball wanted. Ball stops him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---steps there it sounded like back down 
to the right." They get out an aerial photograph and. when Frazier is 
about to mark it showing the information Ball wanted. Ball stops him.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9 
After Frazier goesothuuugh the entire explanation winding up 
with "and this is a diigh knoll up here which runs where the tracks 
are, from standing there (meaning where he was standing) it sounded 
like it came from this general area over here." At that point Ball 
had him mark the spot with a circle. (See Vol, XVI, p.944) 
At this point Frasier*s sister was called as a witness (p.245). 
However, Frazier was called for a deposition on July 24, 1964* in 
■Dallas (Vol. VII, p.53l), where he was questioned by Nr. Liebeler. 
He was asked if he had ever seen Oswald with a package similar to 
the one he carried on November 22 and said he hadn't. The question 
was rephrased and made more specific, "from Irving into the Texas 
School Book Depository Building" and again ho replied in the negative. 
Then the question was made broader, "any other time or at any other 
place?" and again he replied in the negative. 
Unless my recollection is entirely incorrect, Frazier is the 
only ono who had actually seen Oswald carrying a package. Here the 
Commission proves by its only witness that the package could not pos- 
sibly have been the package containing the rifle. 
Nrs. Handle's testimony began with a declaration that she knew 
Hnth psine only slightly, from having visited a neighbor and on on6 
occasion attending p. birthday party for one of Nrs. Taino's children. 
('op.2.^f?-6) Visiting the same neighbor, 3hc subsequently met Ill’s. 
Oswald. This was about the first week of °ctober. Mrs. Handle also 
said that TSarina "kept the yard and things like that". The women 
discussed Oswald*a need for a job, especially In view of the impending 
addition to his family, (p.246) It Ic unclear, but it is apparently 
at **rs. Randle*3 suggestion that Lee eppliod for and got the job at 
the Depository (p.21-7). Nesley told her that Oswald had corns home onto his family, (p.246) It Ic unclear, but it is apparently 
at **rs. Randle*3 suggestion that Lee eppliod for and got the job at 
the Depository (p.21-7). Nesley told her that Oswald had corns home on

--- PAGE BREAK ---6) It Ic unclear, but it is apparently 
at **rs. Randle*3 suggestion that Lee eppliod for and got the job at 
the Depository (p.21-7). Nesley told her that Oswald had corns home on

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10 
the 21st for curtain rods. The next morning she saw Oswald "as he 
crossed the street and came across my driveway to where Wesley had 
his car parked by the carport." When she saw Oswald, he was carrying 
"in his right hand, had the top sort of folded down and had a grip 
like this, and the bottom, he carried It this way, you know, and it 
almost touched the ground as he carried/it." Prior to this quotation, 
she had given an approximation of its length which Is not represented 
in the transcript. 
Mr. Ball who was questioning, says, "And where was hid hand 
gripping the middle of thepackage?" and she corrected him, saying, 
"Ho, sir; the top with Just a little bit sticking up. You know Just 
like you grab something like that." Ball reiterated that, with this 
grip, the package was almost touching the ground, and she affirmed. 
She saw him go to the car, open the right back door and put the pack- 
age down. She added, "i didn't recognize him as he walked across my 
carport and I at that moment I wondered who was fixing to come to 
my back door so I opened the door slightly and saw that it - I assumed 
he was getting in the car, but he didn't, so he come back and stood 
on the driveway." (p.214.8) She didn't know where in the back of the 
car Oswald had put the package; she knew merely that it was in the 
back. 
She was shown Exhibit 361*. and identified the color as similar 
package 
to the jaakrt she remembered. As to its length, "Well, it wasn't 
that long, I mwan it was folded down at the top as I told you. It 
definitely wasn't that long." She thought the width was about right. 
When asked to demonstrate by standing up and using the package as 
an example, she said it looked too long. Ball repeated her answer 
and she affirmed it. She then demonstrated her recollection of itsWhen asked to demonstrate by standing up and using the package as 
an example, she said it looked too long. Ball repeated her answer 
and she affirmed it. She then demonstrated her recollection of its

--- PAGE BREAK ---trate by standing up and using the package as 
an example, she said it looked too long. Ball repeated her answer 
and she affirmed it. She then demonstrated her recollection of its

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11 
length. As In the ease of her brother, the Commission Is careful 
not to represent In the record her approximation. Finally, the size 
creeps out, 2 feet or '$ust"a little bit more". 
. 
No. 
Ball then shows her the "discolored* bag, which is _exhibit/ll|2", 
which he said she had been shown by the FBI. Asked if its color ap- 
peared similar to the one she saw Oswald carrying, she replied, "Yes; 
it is a heavy type of wrapping paper." Apparently, she was really 
talking only about the material and the part of llj.2 that had not been 
discolored. Ball persists in going into the length of the package 
she saw. (p.21+9) She approximates and Ball says, "That is 28-1/2 
inches." she replied, "I measured 27 last time." He asks, "You 
measured 27 once before?" and she affirms it. 
Ball changes the subject to Oswald*s clothing. She confirms 
her brother's testimony about a gray jacket. She also recalled a 
brown or tan shirt. When shown a gray Jacket and asked to identify 
it, she replied, "Similar to that. I didn’t pay an awful lot of at- 
tention to it." She described it as having big sleeves. This was 
exhibit No. 163. Shown Exhibit 150, the shirt, she said, "I don't 
remember it being that shade of brown. It could have been, but I 
was looking through the screen and out the window but I don't remem- 
ber it being exactly that. I thought it was a solid color." Then 
Ball says, "Here is another jacket which is a gray Jacket, does this 
look anything like the jacket he had on?" and Mrs. Randle says, "No, 
sir; I remember its being gray." To this Ball replies, "Well, this 
one is gray but of these two the Jacket I last showed you is Commis- 
sion Exhibit N0. 162, and this blue gray is 163, now if^you^had to 
choose between these two?" and she replied, "i would choose the dark 
one." She repeated she didn't pay much attention to the Jacket and 
wasn't certain.and this blue gray is 163, now if^you^had to 
choose between these two?" and she replied, "i would choose the dark 
one." She repeated she didn't pay much attention to the Jacket and 
wasn't certain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---is 163, now if^you^had to 
choose between these two?" and she replied, "i would choose the dark 
one." She repeated she didn't pay much attention to the Jacket and 
wasn't certain.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12 
among 
At the beginning of the day's testimony, listed as anaxaf 
those present Here Charles Murray and Lewis E. Powell, Jr., ob- 
servers (p.210). I presume these were instead of Mr. Craig, the 
former head of the Bar Association, who had bean appointed by the 
Commission to look out for Oswald's interests. Although the question 
has not been asked at the end of Frazier's testimony, the Chairman 
asked, "Have you any questions, Mr. Powell?" to which Mr. Powell 
replied/in the negative. 
Some representation! (p.2f>0) 
The Commission's representation of the testimony of ^rs. Randle 
and her brother is a gross distortion of what I have above summarized. 
They have eliminated what they chose to eliminate, exaggerated what 
they chose to exaggerate, distorted what it suited their purposes to 
distort, ignored the graphic rfaaaoz descriptions of both witnesses 
as to the length of the package, completely misrepresented Frazier's 
demonstrations and descriptions of how Oswald carried the package, 
and at no point says, as Frazier had time after time after time, that 
one end of the package was in Oswald's airopit and the other was cupped 
in his hand. It also entirely misrepresents Oswald's going into the 
building ahead of Frazier, something Frazier had explained with care. 
The innuendo here is as false and deceptive as all the rest of the 
Commission's version of this testimony. 
In its report the Commission says, "One employee. Jack Dougherty, 
believed that he saw Oswald coming to work, but he does not remember 
that Oswald had anything in his hands as he entered the door. No 
other employee has been found who saw Oswald enter that morning." 
Mr. Dougherty's deposition was taken on April 8 by Mr. Ball and ap- 
pears in Vol. VI beginning on^p.373. I haven't yet read it, but Ither employee has been found who saw Oswald enter that morning." 
Mr. Dougherty's deposition was taken on April 8 by Mr. Ball and ap- 
pears in Vol. VI beginning on^p.373. I haven't yet read it, but I

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13 
did notice that on p.38l, when asked "Didpyou ever see Lee Oswald 
carry any sort of a large package?", he replied that he hadn*t but 
that "some of the fellows said that they did.” Asked who, he said, 
"Well, Bill Shelley, he told me that he thought he saw him carrying 
a fairly good size package." This allegedly happened the day follow- 
ing the assassination. Dougherty said he was positive, but apparently 
Mr. Shelley did not confirm this. 
This may be one way to get the weapon at the scene of the crime, 
but it certainly is hard to imagine more unsatisfactory way. By 
any fair appraisal, the Commission has proved that Oswald could not 
ppsslbly have carried the weapon into the building the morning of 
the assassination.7