Che Washington post
utlook
EDITORIALS
COLUMNISTS
SECTIONE
SUNDAY,N0VEMBER.20,1966}
PAGE E1
Dallas ‘Exposes'Deflated
An Eyewitness - and Marksman
Heard Just Three Shots and
Scoffs at Monstrous‘Plot

--- PAGE BREAK ---at the Warren Commission,almost as
if discrediting the investigation might.

somehow undo the tragedy of Dallas.

Many questions about the assassina-
tion and the'resultinginvestigation are,
according to U.S.News &World Re:
port,“nagging doubts raised by enter.

ByMerrimapSmith
hokum appears to have any basis of
prising authors which seem tofind an
Dean of the White House correspond.

provable fact,but that has not stopped
especially receptive audience abroad.

ents corps,Merriman Smith of United
the clamor.

MajorParisian newspapers assigned top
PressInternationalwon the.1964Pultizer
'men andmany columnsof space to the
Prize forhis eyewitnessreporting of the
AProfitMotive
subject.The Times of London has called.

Kennedy assassination three.years ago
OME CRITICS of the Commission,
for reopening of the Commission in
Tuesday.

its procedures and findings are
vestigation to examine recently raised
ANYAMERICANS,and apparently
quite serious scholarswhohave dredged
points of criticism.At least one Con.

even more foreigners,persist in
the voluminous evidence toassemble
gressman,Rep.Theodore R.

Kupper
the almostmystic belief that there is
minor flaws into what would appear
man (R-N.Y.),wants Congress to set up
much more to be told about the assas.

to be one or more larger errors.

ajointcommittee todeterminewhether
sination ofPresident JohnF.Kennedy.

Other self-appointed authorities on
a full-scale legislative investigation of
This belief hasbeen fedby a steadily
tue case seem to be outright entre-
the Commission is warranted.There is
increasing list of books, magazine ar.

preneursbenton making a profit from
doubt that this will be done.

ticles,statements and lectures which
a sad situation.And there seems to be
challenge proceedingsof the Warren
The General Indictment
profit of a sort for just about every.

Commission set up by President John.ticles,statements and lectures which
a sad situation.And there seems to be
challenge proceedingsof the Warren
The General Indictment
profit of a sort for just about every.

Commission set up by President John.

RITICS OF theWarren Commission,
son'to investigate the slaying that took
body who tackles the subject between
book covers or from the lecture plat.

inclinegenerally to the theory that
place in Dallas Nov.22,1963.

it erred seriously in concluding that
form.

From this torrent of words spread
Part of this profitable public accept-
Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy;
tributariesof rumor: that President
that there was insufficient study of the
ance comes from the fact that Mr.Ken-
Kennedy really.ls alive.and the man
possibility that others were involved
shot in Dallas was a double; that Leej
nedy continues to be a fascinating sub.

ject to millions ofAmericans andmany
in a conspiracy; that even in.the brief;
Harvey Oswald had conspirators,even.

period between the Kennedy slaying
more overseas.

Some publishers esti-
and Oswald's own death,Oswald was
.mate that more than 20,000 Americans
same time he did;that Oswald was an
deprived of proper counsel;that reports
FBI-man, a CIA man,a Russan spy,
will buy any book relating to the late
by doctors who performed the autopsy:
aCastro.agent; that Jack Ruby was a
President.

on Mr.Kennedy were changedand pre
triggerman who，with thebumbling
Continuing deep interest in and grief
liminary notes,in one case,destroyedf
helpof the:Dallas police, silenceu
for the fallenyoung leader and shock
thatFBI reports were altered.

Oswald,and soon,into evenwilder
over the manner of his death have
(Editor's note:Questioning of the of
lights of speculation.

combined to create a climate ideal for
ficial autopsy findings was renewed
None of thismixture of theory and
rumor-breeding,anatmosphere of sup-
this month when 65photographsand
port for challenging questions aimed
X-rays of the autopsy were turned ofer.Oswald,and soon,into evenwilder
over the manner of his death have
(Editor's note:Questioning of the of
lights of speculation.

combined to create a climate ideal for
ficial autopsy findings was renewed
None of thismixture of theory and
rumor-breeding,anatmosphere of sup-
this month when 65photographsand
port for challenging questions aimed
X-rays of the autopsy were turned ofer.

alone.”Furthermore,despite rumors to
the contrary，it couldfind noevidence
OswaldPinpointed.

ofalinkbetween Oswald and hiskiller,
HE COMMSSION,setup underMr.

JackRuby.

to the National Archives by the Ken-
Johnson's Executive Order Nov.29,
Had:Oswaldlived.insteadof.being
nedy family.Critics objected to the con.

103,under Chief.Justice Warren, was
gunneddownby an unstable tenderloin
ditions attached，which were that the
intended to.avoid overlappinginquiries
character who slipped intothepolice
photos and X-rayrecords could bemade
by state and local authorities while ar.

tation during an excited,disorganized.

availablefor thefirstfive years only to
rivfng at the truth about the murder
eriod,mostof the current books prob.

Federal agencies and then only to quali.

ofa President.Composed of men of
blycouldnotorwouldnothave
fied pathologists...

unassailableintegrity and withthe
xisted.

（In his news conference.Nov.4,Presi
Government's entire investigative re-
dent Johnson said he knew of no“new
woMain Targets
evidence”in this material or elsewhere
sources at its.command,the Commis-
NA VARIETYof books and articles,
to challenge the Warren Commission
sion on Sept.27,1964,submitted a 900-
page.report backedup.by six million
authors have concentrated chiefly
findings.He thought it was.right that
wordsof supporting testimony and ex.

niwhat theyregardedastwomajor
thematerial turned over to theNational
hibits contained in 26volumes.（In his news conference.Nov.4,Presi
Government's entire investigative re-
dent Johnson said he knew of no“new
woMain Targets
evidence”in this material or elsewhere
sources at its.command,the Commis-
NA VARIETYof books and articles,
to challenge the Warren Commission
sion on Sept.27,1964,submitted a 900-
page.report backedup.by six million
authors have concentrated chiefly
findings.He thought it was.right that
wordsof supporting testimony and ex.

niwhat theyregardedastwomajor
thematerial turned over to theNational
hibits contained in 26volumes.

areasofdoubt:
Archives should not be displayed in
The Commission came to the conclu
o.Credibility of the Commission's
“every sewing circle”by people with
sion that Mr.Kennedy was killed by
conductof the investigation and the
no serious purpose.

validity of its findings.

（Prior to the President's comment,
shotsfiredbyOswald from theTexas
School Book Depository building in
Commission failure to disprove the
the Justice Department had announced
Dallas-and bythese shots alone.

possibility of one or more confederates
that the pictures and X-rays.were ex-
Inten months of work,and after
having-been associated with.Oswald,
amined by the twoNavy doctorswho
taking voluminous'evidence from the
even to thepoint of firing some of the
participated in the autopsy and these
FBI, the Secret Service, the CIA and
shots credited by ballistics experts to
physicians said they.corroborated.thelr
other investigative personnel of varying
Oswald's 6.5 Mannlicher.Carcano rifle
testimony to theWarren Commission.)
jurisdictlons,the Commission could find
purchased under an assumed name
no`evidence of any conspiracy “foreign
from a Chicago mail order house.

Woven around and through these
or:domestic."
After reviewing theevidence, the
main branches ofcriticism are.peri
Commission said thatOswald acted
pheral questions and allegations based
to great extent on doubts that Oswald,
a former Marine witharifle rating of
sharpshooter,could have beeh as ac.--- PAGE BREAK ---

possibility of one or more confederates
that the pictures and X-rays.were ex-
Inten months of work,and after
having-been associated with.Oswald,
amined by the twoNavy doctorswho
taking voluminous'evidence from the
even to thepoint of firing some of the
participated in the autopsy and these
FBI, the Secret Service, the CIA and
shots credited by ballistics experts to
physicians said they.corroborated.thelr
other investigative personnel of varying
Oswald's 6.5 Mannlicher.Carcano rifle
testimony to theWarren Commission.)
jurisdictlons,the Commission could find
purchased under an assumed name
no`evidence of any conspiracy “foreign
from a Chicago mail order house. Woven around and through these
or:domestic."
After reviewing theevidence, the
main branches ofcriticism are.peri
Commission said thatOswald acted
pheral questions and allegations based
to great extent on doubts that Oswald,
a former Marine witharifle rating of
sharpshooter,could have beeh as ac. curate as he was with an inexpensive
mail order rifle anda telescopic sight
described variously by the critics as
having been either defective or dis. torted at the time of the assassination. Author has followed author in citing
certain testsmadeduringthe
mmis-

--- PAGE BREAK ---concerned far more with Commission
fact-finding procedures than with its
conclusions.

“Inquest” is scholarly， but some.

times querulous.The.book carries an
introduction by magazine.writer Rich-
TE EARREICO
ard H.Rovere,a frequently.perceptive
REPORTON
essayist and critic.He jumps on.Harri.

ASSASS2I
son Salisbury of the New York Times.

for having written that in the Com
mission report,“no material question
remains unsolved."Then Rovere points
out that Epstein says that“at least one
large question of incontestable mate-.

riality-thenumber of rifle shots fired
at the presidential party-wasnever re.

solved,not even，astonishingly，to the
See KENNEDY,Page E5,Column 1
MOTHERIKHISTERY
satisfaction of the commissioners them-
CHICAGO
:elves."
Thuswe have a case within a case:
Salisbury vs.Rovere and Epstein vs.

he Commission.While some witnesses
eported as many as six shots,the Com-
nission's best judgment was that Os
aldfiredonly three timesand one
bullet apparently went wide of the
target.

A Marksman Himself
MUSTatthis point inject a personal
note.In addition to being a pro-
fessionalreporter assigned tothe
White House for more than 25years,
Ihavebeenahunter and targetmarks-
Unlted Press Internatlonal
man for many years.Iam not the
world's greatest shot by any means,
sion investigation to“prove” that the
point-blankrange for many competent
shooters armedwith a 6.5rifle and a
but there are some professional experts
four-power telescopic sighton Oswald's
rifle was badly out of line.

telescopic sight.Small boysat summer
whoregardme asbeing.competently
To a serious amateur target shooter,
camps can do equally.well on their
familiarwithmanyweapons andtheir
many of the questions raised about the
target ranges using.22 rifles(much less
behavior.

ease or difficulty of making the shots
powerful thana 6.5)and no telescopic
Iwas onlya fewhundred feet.from
attributed to Oswaldare ignorant,even
sights whatever.

John F.Kennedy whenhewas shot in
silly.Even.sillier to thousands of seri.ease or difficulty of making the shots
powerful thana 6.5)and no telescopic
Iwas onlya fewhundred feet.from
attributed to Oswaldare ignorant,even
sights whatever.

John F.Kennedy whenhewas shot in
silly.Even.sillier to thousands of seri.

Therefore,much of the literary furor
ous shootersls-thematterof the sight
Dallas.Iwould swear that there were
being defective.It would have been an
three shots and only three shotsfired at
optical miracle if the sight had been
his motorcade.

truly accurate at the time itwas tested
overwhether Oswald could havemade
The car in which I rode as a press
—many days after the assassination.

the shots andwhether hisweapon had
associationreporterwasnotfarfrom
As it was, Government testers had to
the capability is,to put it charitably，
thepresideytialvehicleandinclear
repair the sight.

uninformed.

viewofit.Wewereatthepointof
Sighted It In·
A FantasticLinkage
HILE THE SIGHT to begin with
OBELIEVE some of the theories
comingoutof anunderpasswhen.the
wasnotof thebest quality，there
put forth in the current wave.of
firstshotwasfired.The sound was not
is evidence that Oswald sighted it in
anti-Commission.writings would be.to
entirely crisp anditseemedfora split
before the killing.This means that he
believe that somehow the ChiefJustice.

second like a firecracker,a big one,As,
went out on a practice range and
of the United States,the FBI, the Se
we cleared the underpass,there came
checked the variabilities of the sight
under actual firing'conditions.

cret Service,leading members of Con
thesecondand third shote.

After the assassination,the weapon
gress and President Johnson himself.

Theshotswerefiredsmoothly_and
presumably.was thrown to the floor of
entered intoamonstrous plot tokeep
evenly.There was not the slightest
the BookDepository and Oswald fled.

the truthfrom thepublic-or that their.--- PAGE BREAK ---

Theshotswerefiredsmoothly_and
presumably.was thrown to the floor of
entered intoamonstrous plot tokeep
evenly.There was not the slightest
the BookDepository and Oswald fled. the truthfrom thepublic-or that their. doubtonthefrontseatofourcarthat
In subsequent investigation, the rifle
collective efforts toinvestigate.the as
the shotscame from a rifle to ourrear
bounced around in automobjles of po-
sassination amounted to:so much.stu-
liceinvestigators and was handed
pidity and lack ofconcern..:
and theBookDepository atthispoint
around by dozens of men on the case. It isn't possible to deal with every
wasdirectly to ourrear).Weremarked
Fewhigh-quality.sights could have sur. thing that has been said and written
aboutriflefirebeforeweknewwhat
vived this ireatmentandmaintained
about the Kennedy assassination and
hadhappened toMr.Kennedy.although
their pinpoint accuracy. the investigations of it,but some spe
wehadseenhimslidefromviewin
Oswaldwas an'experiencedrifleman
cifics can be commented on. the rear of the openWhiteHouse car. from his daysin.the Marine.Corps.The:
“Inquest”by Edward Jay Epstein,a
distance of the shots-from the sixth
31-year-old.New Yorker now working
Even before Mr.Kennedy's body
floor.windowof.the buildingto the
on his doctorate in American govern.. reached thehospital in a chilling,high-
Kennedytouringcar-would bealimost
ment at Harvard，is one of the more
temperate books of.the current crop,

--- PAGE BREAK ---speed dash,Ireported from the car by
radiotelephone totheUPI Dallas
Second Oswald”starts with along
bureau that three shots had been fired
introductionbya cheer-leader for the
at the Kennedy procession.

author,this time,New York journal
“IWas'There’
ist Murray Kempton.Kempton says
thatthe Commission'sinvestigativeand
NOT UNTIL we pulled up at the
reporting processes have been so dis.

ParklandHospitalemergencyen-
credited that itsfindings are“much
trance in a screaming skid and Iran
less plausible than Popkin's theory”
tothe sideoftheKennedy cardidI
which is to say，“Two Oswalds were
knowfor certain thathewasbadly
together attheTexasBookDepository
hurt.

and that eachplayedhispartin the
When I saw Mr.Kennedy pitched
assassination."
over on therearseat andblooddarken-
ForPopkin thephilosopher to chal-
ing his coat,and Gov.John Connally
lenge the Commission report as adocu-
of Texas slumpedfaceuponthefloor
mentis one thing.For him to surmise
with.brownishredfoamseepingfrom
certain things contrary to Commission
his chest wound,not one hospital
conclusionsalsowouldseemfair
orderly，doctoror nurse had reached
enough.But the Professor insistson
thevehicle.Severalcarelessauthors
becoming a ballistics authority:“He
wouldhave their readersbelievethat
(Oswald)had tofireacheapriflewith
medical attendantswere onthe scene
a distorted sight andold ammunition,
at this point.They were not.I was
ata moving target in minimal time,
there.

andshootingwithextraordinaryac
Clint Hill,the/Secret Service agent
curacy."
whoraced fromthefollow-upcar to
This simply is，not fact, but the
thepresidentialvehicletoshield the
opinion of a college professor.Fact:
fallen leader and his shockedwife
A:weapon's price does notnecessarily
Jacqueline,heard only three shots.

indicate its accuracy.Fact:There is no
Malcolm Kilduff of the White House
evidenrewhateer that thesightwas
press staff,who was seated beside me
“distorted”when Oswald fired at Mr.andshootingwithextraordinaryac
Clint Hill,the/Secret Service agent
curacy."
whoraced fromthefollow-upcar to
This simply is，not fact, but the
thepresidentialvehicletoshield the
opinion of a college professor.Fact:
fallen leader and his shockedwife
A:weapon's price does notnecessarily
Jacqueline,heard only three shots.

indicate its accuracy.Fact:There is no
Malcolm Kilduff of the White House
evidenrewhateer that thesightwas
press staff,who was seated beside me
“distorted”when Oswald fired at Mr.

in the front seat of the pool car,heard
Kennedy.Fact:'As to “old ammuni-
only three shots.Iheard only three
tion,the age cf a rifle·load does not
shots.Now,whoknows more about it-
Therifle that.killedJFK.

necessarily control its accuracy or
Edward Jay Epstein and Richard H.

power.

Rovere or the trained,professional ob-
serverswho were there?

Not Quite as Shrill
Todisprove thatmorethan three
NOTHERHEAVILYexploitedand
shots were firedwouldbe.impossible.

Godaloneknowsnowmanyshotswere
fired byhowmanypeoplefrom how
apparentlywidelyreadbook is
Nor would itbepossible toprove more
manyweapons andfrom howmany di-
“Rush to Judgment”by Mark Lane,
than three,beyond a shadow of doubt.

rections.But one thing is now beyond
who,with the encouragement of Os-
Therefore the Commission had to set-
question: there wasnota singleas-
wald's mother,set himself up as “de-
tleforwhattheburdenofevidence
fense counsel"for the accused assassin
showed-three shots.Yet here is a
sassin..."
Without depreciating from his pur-
during the Commission proceedings.

pointregardedbyEpsteinand Rovere
Bertrand Russell and Arnold Toyn-
as unresolved.It is a classic example
pose and fierce determination,Weis-
berg seems tobemoreof azealous
beeread themanuscript andmadesug-
ofthe’almost Puckishimpossibilities
pamphleteer thana meticulous analyst.

gestions,according to the author.Hugh
on which some of the current assassina-
It is amazingthat hisbookhas received
Trever-Roper,a professorwhose causes
tionbooks arebuilt.pointregardedbyEpsteinand Rovere
Bertrand Russell and Arnold Toyn-
as unresolved.It is a classic example
pose and fierce determination,Weis-
berg seems tobemoreof azealous
beeread themanuscript andmadesug-
ofthe’almost Puckishimpossibilities
pamphleteer thana meticulous analyst.

gestions,according to the author.Hugh
on which some of the current assassina-
It is amazingthat hisbookhas received
Trever-Roper,a professorwhose causes
tionbooks arebuilt.

There are many other current vol-
serious consideration by other authors.

umes attacking the Commission,its
On.the first page,he is wrong about
theweather on the day of the assassina-
are-many in his native England,wrote
tionandwrongabout themakeupof
the introduction,in which he maintains
theKennedymotorcade inDallas.With
that the Commission case against Os-
procedures and findings.One of the
this for openers,it becomes difficult
waldwas wronglyone-sidedandthat
more widely mentioned is“whitewash
to accept some ofWeisberg's otherma-
Lane,a lawyer and lecturer,was to be
—The Report on the Warren Report."
terial as gospel.

commended for pressing，in the book,
The author is Harold Weisberg,who
Philosopher's Surmise
hisbelief thatOswald's sideof the
byhis own description is a Hyattstown,
matter should also be heard thorough-
NOTHERWIDELYdistributed au-
Md.,“intelligence and political analyst”
thorwhobelieves that:therewere
lyandfairly.

When both sides have been heard,
aswell as“an expert on waterfowl."
at least two assassins is Dr.Richard H.

and not before,posterity may judge,”
For Weisberg tobe taken seriously
Popkin,chairman of the.department
says Trever-Roper.--- PAGE BREAK ---

When both sides have been heard,
aswell as“an expert on waterfowl."
at least two assassins is Dr.Richard H. and not before,posterity may judge,”
For Weisberg tobe taken seriously
Popkin,chairman of the.department
says Trever-Roper. byotherwritersistodemonstratetheir
ofphilosophy at the Uniyersity of Cali-
The Lane book is better than most
quickwillingness to seizeupon almost
fornia branch in San Diego.His book
in thatitis not quite as shrill as some
any line of reasoning as long as it sup-
is called “The Second Oswald."
of the others,but again,his technique
ports the idea of Commission error,
As most of these books do，“The
is to take tiny'variations in evidence
omission or cover-up.A sampleWeis-
before the Commission andbuilda
berg conclusion:
.the President was shot from
mountain of doubt.Lanebelieves that
while the Commission suppressed “a
both front.and back.Nothingelse
makes sense.Nothing else is possible

--- PAGE BREAK ---conclusion:
.the President was shot from
mountain of doubt.Lanebelieves that
while the Commission suppressed “a
both front.and back.Nothingelse
makes sense.Nothing else is possible

--- PAGE BREAK ---

vastamountofmaterialofparamount
importance,there was enough in the
published evidence“to question,if not
overthrow,the Commission's conclu-
sions."
SatisfyingForeigners
NE OFTHElatePresident'sclose
friends spoke of the currentround
f books recently,asking that.he not
be identified.He did not want to,be-
comeembroiledinsome oftheten-
sions.within theKennedyfamily con-
cerning stillanother bookabout the
assassination,aso-called “authorized”
versionbyWilliamManchester.In any
case,this close friend of JFK said:
"Why continue twisting this dagger
in the guts of America to satisfy large
ly the sensationalists of other coun-
tries？ThePresidentwas killed byLee
Harvey Oswald.This is.the opinion of
the best police experts we have.It
would havebeeninterestinghistorically
tohavehad Oswald ona witness stand,
buttherereallyisnoevidence ofwhic
Iamaware thatwouldhave changed
the basicfactsof’the matter."
HERTZ
PENT ADAOLIEE
United Press Internatlonal Photos
Thewhitearrow showswhere theshotthatkilled
thatmoment.Theblackarrow indicates thejailto
PresidentKennedywas firedfrom.The asteriskin
whichLeeHarveyOswaldwas being taken whenhe
theroadmarks theposition of thePresident'scar at
was shot by JackRuby.

--- PAGE BREAK ---AtDallas
8o6soqi10.

KENNEDY;From Page E1
coming out of an underpass when the
satisfaction.of the.commissioners them.

first shot was fired.The sound was not
selve
oentirely crispanditseemedfora split
second like afirecracker,a big one:As
570
Salisburyvs.Rovere and Epsteinvsts.the secondand third shots.

the Commission,While some witnesses
Theshotwerefredsmoothlyand
reported as many as six shots,the Com
evenly.Thergwaotthe slightest
mission's best judgment was.that Os
doubththefrontseatofour car that
the shofcame from a rifle toourrear
wald fired only three timesandonef.

(and the BookDepository,at this point
bulletapparentlywent:wideof the:
was directly to our.rear).Weremarked i
target."..

about rifle fire before.we knew what
had happened toMr.Kennedy,althoughs
TMUSTat this point inject a personal
we had seen him slide'fromviewirdn'
note.In addition to being a pro
therear of the openWhite-House car.

fessional reporter assigned tothe.

Even before Mr.Kennedy's body
White House for more than、25 years,
reached the hospital in a chilling，high
Khave been a hunter and target marks.

speed dash,I reportedfrom the car by
man.for many years.I am not the
radiotelephone to the UPI Dallas
world's greatest shot by any means,
bureau that three shots had been fired
but there are some professional experts
at the Kennedy procession.

whoregardme as being competently
“IWasThere”
procedures and findings.

One of the
familiarwith many weapons and their
NOT UNTIL we pulled up at the
more widely mentionedis."whitewash
behavior.

ParklandHospitalemergencyen·
The Report on the Warren Report"
Iwas onlya.fewhundred feet from
John F.Kennedy when he was shot in
trance in a screaming skid andIran
The author is Harold Weisberg,who
Dallas.Iwould swear that there were'
to the side of the'Kennedy car didI
by his own description is a Hyattstown,
three shots andonly three shotsfired at
know for certain that he was badly
Md.,“intelligence and political analyst"
his motorcade.

hurt..ParklandHospitalemergencyen·
The Report on the Warren Report"
Iwas onlya.fewhundred feet from
John F.Kennedy when he was shot in
trance in a screaming skid andIran
The author is Harold Weisberg,who
Dallas.Iwould swear that there were'
to the side of the'Kennedy car didI
by his own description is a Hyattstown,
three shots andonly three shotsfired at
know for certain that he was badly
Md.,“intelligence and political analyst"
his motorcade.

hurt..

as well as "an expert on waterfowl."
The car in which I rode as a press
When I saw Mr.Kennedypitched
For Weisberg to be taken seriously
associationreporter wasnotfar from
over on therear seat andblood darken-
by otherwriters isto demonstrate their
the presidential vehicle and in clear
ing his coat,and’Gov.John Connally
quickwillingness to seizeupon almost
view of it.We were at the point of
ofTexas slumpedface uponthe floor
any line ofreasoning as long as it sup-
withbrownishredfoam seepingfrom
ports the idea of Commission error,
his chest wound,not one hospital
omission or cover-up.A sample Weis
orderly, doctor or nurse had reached
berg conclusion:
the'vehicle.Several careless authors
":the President was shot from
would have their readers believe that
both front and·back.

Nothing else
medical attendants were on the scene
makes sense.

Nothing else is possible.

at this point.

They were not.I was
God aloneknowshow many shots were
there..

firedbyhowmanypeoplefromhow
Clint Hill, the Secret Service agent
manyweapons and from how many di
whoracedfrom thefollow-upcarto
rections.But one thing is nowbeyond
the presidential vehicle to shield the
question: there was not a single as
fallen leader and his shocked wife
sassin:."
Jacqueline, heard only three shots.

Without depreciating from his pur-
Malcolm Kilduff of the White House
pose and fierce determination,Weis-
press staff,who was seated besideme
berg seems to be more of a zealous
in the front seat of the pool car,heard
pamphleteer than ameticulous analyst.--- PAGE BREAK ---

firedbyhowmanypeoplefromhow
Clint Hill, the Secret Service agent
manyweapons and from how many di
whoracedfrom thefollow-upcarto
rections.But one thing is nowbeyond
the presidential vehicle to shield the
question: there was not a single as
fallen leader and his shocked wife
sassin:."
Jacqueline, heard only three shots. Without depreciating from his pur-
Malcolm Kilduff of the White House
pose and fierce determination,Weis-
press staff,who was seated besideme
berg seems to be more of a zealous
in the front seat of the pool car,heard
pamphleteer than ameticulous analyst. only three shots.I heard only three
Itis amazing that hisbook hasreceived
shots.Now，who knows more about it
serious consideration by other authors. Edward Jay Epstein and Richard H. On the first page,he is wrong about
Rovere or the trained,professional ob. the weather on the day of the assassina-
servers whowere there? tionand wrong about the makeupof
To disprove that more than three
theKennedy motorcade in Dallas.With
shots were fired would be impossible. this for openers,it becomes difficult
Norwoulditbepossible toprovemore
toaccept some ofWeisberg's other ma-
than three,beyond a shadow of doubt. terial as gospel. Therefore the Commission had to set
Philosopher's Surmise
tle for what the burden of.evidence
showed-three shots.Yet here is a
NOTHER WIDELYdistributedau-
point regarded by Epstein and Rovere
Athorwhobelievesthattherewere
as unresolved.It is a classic example
at least two assassins is Dr.Richard H
of the almost Puckish impossibilities
Popkin,chairman of the department
on which some of the current assassina
ofphilosophy at the University of Cali. tion books are built. fornia branch in San Diego.His book
There are many other current vol. is called “The Second Oswald. TheriflethatkilledJFK. umes attacking the Commission;
its
As mostof these books do,The

--- PAGE BREAK ---lldln
siratrn"
Lomvi
United Press Intarnntlonal Photos.

thatmoment.Theblack arrowindicatesthejail.to
PresidentKennedywasfired from.The asterisk in
whichLeeHarvey Oswald was being takenwhen he
theroadmarks theposition of thePresident'scar at
was shotbyJackRuby.

Second Oswald" starts with a long
are many in his native England,wrote
introduction bya cheer-leader for the
the introduction,in which he maintains
author, this time,New York journal-
ist Murray Kempton.Kempton says
that the Commission case against Os-
that the Commission'sinvestigativeand
wald was wronglyone-sidedand that
reporting processes have been so dis.

Lane,a lawyer and lecturer,was to be
credited that’its findings are “much
commendedfor pressing，in the.book,
less plausible than Popkin's theory,"
his belief that Oswald’sside of the
which is tosay，“Two Oswalds were
matter should also be heard thorough
together at the TexasBookDepository
ly and fairly.

and thateach played hispart in the
"When both sides have been heard,
assassination."
and not before,posterity may judge,”
ForPopkin the philosopher to chal.

says Trever-Roper.and thateach played hispart in the
"When both sides have been heard,
assassination."
and not before,posterity may judge,”
ForPopkin the philosopher to chal.

says Trever-Roper.

The Lane book is better than most
lenge the Commission report as a docu-
in that it is notquite as shrili as some
ment is one thing.For him to surmise
of the others,but again，his technique
certain things contrary to Commission
is to take tiny variations in evidence
conclusions also would seem fair
before the Commission and builda
enough.But the Professor insists on
becoming a ballistics authority:“He
mountain of doubt.Lanebelleves that
while the Commission suppressed "a
(Oswald) had to fire.a cheap rifle with
a distorted sight andold ammunition,
vastamountofmaterialofparamoumt
ata moving target in minimal time,
importance, there was enough in the
published evidence“to question,if not
andshooting withextraordinaryac
overthrow，the Commission's conclu-
curacy."
sions."
This simply is not fact, but the
opinion of·a college professor.Fact:
Satisfying Foreigners
A weapon's price does not necessarily
NE OF THE late President's close
indicate its accuracy.Fact:There is no
friends spokeof the current round
evidence whatever thatthe sight was
of books recently，.asking that he not
"distorted”when Oswald fired at Mr.

be identified.He did not want to be
Kennedy.Fact: As to “old ammuni-
comeembroiledin someofthe ten-
tion,”the age of a rifle load does not
necessarily contol its accuracy or
sions within the Kennedy family con-
cerning still another book about the
power.

assassination, a so-called “authorized"
Not Quite asShrill
version by William Manchester.In any.

case,thisclose friend of JFK said:
NOTHERHEAVILYexploited and
"Why continue twisting this dagger
apparentlywidelyreadbookis
in the guts of America to satisfy large
ly the sensationalists of other coun-
who,with the encouragement of Os
tries?

The President was killed by Lee
wald's mother, set himself up as “de.--- PAGE BREAK ---

case,thisclose friend of JFK said:
NOTHERHEAVILYexploited and
"Why continue twisting this dagger
apparentlywidelyreadbookis
in the guts of America to satisfy large
ly the sensationalists of other coun-
who,with the encouragement of Os
tries? The President was killed by Lee
wald's mother, set himself up as “de. Harvey Oswald.This is the opinion of
fense counsel"for the accused assassin
the best police experts we have.It
during the Commission proceedings:
would havebeen interesting historically
Bertrand Russell and Arnold Toyn. tohave hadOswald ona witness stand,
bee read the manuscript and made'sug. but there really isno evidence ofwhich
gestions,according to the author.Hugh
I am aware that would have changed
Trever-Roper,a professor,whose causes
the basic.facts of the matter. A
I\