Tongsun Park and the Korean CIA
ByMaxine Cheshire
C
documentation of the scope ofconnectionstothe
TheAmericanCentralInteligenceAgencyhadKorean government and its CLA.
This contrastswith the South Korean gdvernment‘'s
reasonto know as far back as the early 1960s that
TongsunPark,a central figure in investigationsofconsistent claim that Park hasnever had an official
tieswith theKorean CIA.
thathisactivitiesintheUnited Stateswhichin-
AnAmerican CIA station.chiefin Seoulwho met
cludedentertainingandmakingcampaigncon
him frequently said he regarded Park asanimpor-
tributions”to membersof Congress,were done solely
tant“agent ofinfluence”
as a private businessinan.
Taking them chronologically,The Post findings
In addition toPark's officialKorean role,hehad
showthat:
atleastcircumstantial tieswith theAmerican CIA
through his prominentmembershipin'two student.
Koreangovernment-sanctionedstudentgroupin
groups.
Seoul that received a grant from the Asia Founda-
JusticeDepartmentandcongressionalinvestiga-
tion,atthe time-amoney-conduitof theAnerican
tors, as part of their inquires into the Korean lob-
byingeffort,have been trying todeterminewhat
CIA..
Tongsun Park,in 1962,helpedwith prepara-
the American CIA knewabout the campaign and
tionsandparticipated inthe visitto.theUnited
TONGSUNPARK
whatit toldlawenforcement authoritiesaboutit.
See PARK,A14,Col.1
icalled"agentofinfluence"
AWashington Post investigation,based onprivate

--- PAGE BREAK ---rteiaf connecuion,ut a working re-
PARK,FromA1
ahonship*
who identified Park as an“agent of
urner didnot say.precisely when
States by the founder and first.di
influence."
eCIAhadpassed alonginformation
rector of the Korean CIA.The visit
"That‘s our jargon for something
Parkor to whom.An aide,asked to
was coordinated bythe American CIA.

ck the records,reported the next
the British started in World WarII,”
Tongsun Park,in 1964,became an
ev thatthere is no real definite
Richardson said ina'telephone call
incorporator,director and_president
when informationwas passed，be
from his retirement home in Mexico.

"We had a feeling he was not just an
ofaninternationalanti-Communist
se it was being passed continu-
youth organization based in Washing-
ROK[Republic of Korea] CIA agent,
ywheneverwebecameawareof
ton,which had circumstantiallinks to
but reported higher to someonein the
the American CIA.

s s
government."
Tongsun Park,from at least 1969
Theidentity of the person to whom
to1973,was in contact with the Amer-
Park reported“remained a mystery”
ican CIA station chief in Seoul,with
Hedeclined to say whether the
tohim,Richardson said.

whiom he maintainedahighly visible
ipassing alongofinformationonPark
Copies of cablesin the possession of
party-going social friendship thatwas.

wassomethingthatcommencedyears
The:Washington Post indicate that
regarded as enhancingPark's prestige
Tongsun Park,at least during one pe
withhis own goyernment.

This rela-
riod in 1969,was getting some operat-
fionship,by some accounts,survived a
wedid,I don'tknow if we would tell
inginstructions froin Dr.Dong Shik
direct order by the U.S.Ambassador,
xyou."
Shin, senior economic secretary to
Philip C.Habib,to.his staff to termi-
PresidentPark Chung Heeinthe
mate all-contactwithPark.

ast,CIA officialsat the Langley，Va.

Blue House,the presidential resi-
Tongsun Park, in 1969,was receiv.ast,CIA officialsat the Langley，Va.

Blue House,the presidential resi-
Tongsun Park, in 1969,was receiv.

iheadquarters haveproducedonly
ngcabled instructions from a senior
A source close to Tongsun Park
official on President Park Chung
whenqueriedbyother government
used the，word “debriefing” tode
Hee's staff-instructionswhich,at
iagencies.

In 1975, when the Justice
Department first began its inquiry
seribe the regular session Park had
leastonce,were coordinated with the
eachtimehevisitedSeoul duringthat
head of the KCIA,Lee Hu Rak.

rinto Park's activities,an FBT agent
time.Richardson said he preferred to
It isnot clear what the formal.or
“say just that I had a friendly conver-
legalresponsibilities are for the intel-
mighthave onParkwas'given little
sationwithhim frequently from.time
ligence agencies to share such infor-
imore thanafolderofoldnewspaper
clippings from society page coverage
to time."
mation with other segments of gov
ofhis parties.

Richardson said thathe entertained
ernment, executive and legislative.

Earlier, in 1971, the State Depart
Park at parties in his home and went,
Many highly placed persons in both
ment's Korea desk officer,Don Ra-
inturn,to partiesPark gave for visit-
branches whoacceptedPark'slavish
mard,asked for a CIA briefing on
ing American dignitaries,
hospitality and/or campaign contribu-
tions,have told federal investigators-
Rark and all thatwas known about
One party Richardsonrecalled at-
thatnooneever alerted them to the
himRanardmade the request be-
tending wasgiven by Park for then-
fact that Park.was anything other
cause FBI agents had come to him in
than a gregarious,ambitious rice mer-
their investigations of Park's friend,
other was in honor of Rep.Gallagher.

chant withPerle Mesta aspirations.

ormer Rep.

Cornelius Gallagher (D-
Both men are now prime targets m
Some accepted contributions that
N.ormer Rep.

Cornelius Gallagher (D-
Both men are now prime targets m
Some accepted contributions that
N.

would havebeenlegal.comingfrom a
The CIA didn't seem to have much
House Standards of Official Conduct
resident alien businessman but.would
on him,”Ranard recalled,where he
Committee.investigations.

beillegal comingfrom the agentof a
went to school,the fact that he had
Richardson conceded that his pres-
foreign government.

oncebeen arrestedon somekindof
ence at these affairs was obviously
In an interview with The Washing-
minor thing-a traffic accident or
helpful to Parkin impressingKorean
ton Post last week,the:new director
isomething."
officials.

fthe American CIA,Adm.Stansfield
.It was John (Jocko) Richardson, the
Askedwhat he gotoutof therela-
Turner,declined either to confirm or
iAmerican CIA station chief in Seoul,
tionship or howthe CIA benefited，
todeny that “anybody in the CIA
Richardson replied:“That‘s.a good
KhewPark to be an agent of influ-
nce."The only comment he would
question."
make,he said,was that “I have been
Park has a close American friend in
assured that all of the relevant infor-
Washington who served both asan
mation the CIA had onPark or KCIA
agent of the FBI and later as a CIA
“agentof influence”in Latin Amer-
activities was passedto appropriate
uthorities in the executivebranch of
-ica.His cover, like Park's,was that of
:our government."
aninternational businessman.

“I had tea with Tongsun in London
Washington Post last week.“He is be-
mation,Turner said,although some
wildered by what has happened.He
data might have been withheld at var.

said tome:‘WhatdidIever do except
ious times because “people's lives
tryto help my countryexactly the
not to disclose sources,”he said.--- PAGE BREAK ---

“I had tea with Tongsun in London
Washington Post last week.“He is be-
mation,Turner said,although some
wildered by what has happened.He
data might have been withheld at var. said tome:‘WhatdidIever do except
ious times because “people's lives
tryto help my countryexactly the
not to disclose sources,”he said. same way you helped your country
whenyouworkedfor theCIA？I
Turner said he did not know if the
couldunderstandif theAmerican
CIA had any legal or formal responsi-
public suddenly found out I was spy-
bilities to pass along information on
ingfor the Russians,why they would
Park, but added:“I would think it‘s
be upset.But Korea is an ally. common sense."
Asrecently as Juiy,1975,Park was
Turner didnot deny thatAmerican
usingaKoreangovernment diplo-
lial basis.”But,he had beenas-
matic tax exemption number,accord-
ingtoaWaldorfAstoriahotelbill
mectionbetweenTongsun Park and
CIAof the United States.no

--- PAGE BREAK ---

PROCRAM FCR DIRECTCR JONGPILKIM
FCR CTOBER 28,1962
TIME
ACTIVITIES
REMARKS
-1200
1200-1230
Gaffee vi th Mr.Jack Evans(Executive Secryl of American Indg-
1230-130
Luncheon with Senator Towers, Mr.Issac Levine(Life
Magazine StaffWriter),Dr.Strauz-Hupd（Professor),
and tuo other guests at residence. Host: Dir.Kim.
Dir.Kim， Anb。Chung, Min. Kim, Mr.SI Kim,Nr。
Tong Sun Park
shls.
Depart for Smithonian Institute
Dir.Kim, Amb. Chung, Min.Kim,Mr.Yoon, Chun,
SI Kim,Conselor Yoon.
1500-1600
Visit Smithonian Instituto
1600
Dopart the Intitute for Hount Vernon
1640
Arrivu fiount lornon
1640-1730
Vislt-Mount:Vernon.
Depart for Residonce
1730
Arriye Residonce
-1900,
Open
Depart for General Magruder.shone
Dir.KinAnb.&rs。Chung
1900
(SIKin)
1930-2200
Dinnor by Cen Magruder in honor
of
Dir.Kim
2200
Depart for Residence
2230
rrive Residence
Page of Kim Jong Pilrs'62 itinerary shows Tongsun Park at exclusive luncheon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---n)
1930-2200
Dinnor by Cen Magruder in honor
of
Dir.Kim
2200
Depart for Residence
2230
rrive Residence
Page of Kim Jong Pilrs'62 itinerary shows Tongsun Park at exclusive luncheon.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

In 1974 Kim Sang In, or “Steve”Kim, left, then KCIA
station chief in Mexico,flew to Washington for a birth.
Thomson,then a secretary in now-retired House Speaker
day party for Thomas P.(Tip) O'Neill Jr.(D.Mass.)hosted
Carl Albert's.office, and Rep. Lester L.Wolff (D.N.Y.).

--- PAGE BREAK ---made out to “Tongsun Park,Korean
Tongsun Park,..helped make all ar-
Consulate General."
rangements for anti-Communist lead
-Tongsun Park's presenceat the 1962
ers in this country to meet director
luncheon was given in either the Eng-
An official for the hotel credit of-
Kim."
lish'or theKoreanitineraries.Accord-
fice said thatParkwouldhave had to
Kim JongPil's 1962visit was coordi-
ing to the agehe gave in his school
produce avaliddiplomaticidentifica-
tion-we are very strict."
nated by American CIA operatives,
records andelsewhere,Park was26
A former employee who paidPark's
accordingtotwoitineraries-oneih
English and the other in Korean
At least one American CIA official
bills、said use of the tax exemption
whichhavebeen made available to
familiarwith theKimJongPil visit is
number stopped suddenly that sum-
The Washington Post.

skeptical that his colleagues back in
mer, shortly after news accounts of
American CIA agents areidentified
Washingtonwould have allowed Tong.

Park's lobbying activities appeared.

in,several places as escort officers.In
sunParktoparticipatewith such high
"We were told to.stop,that he wasn't
Florida,the KCIA director was enter-
visibility withoutknowing all about
the Korean Consulate General any-
tained at one of the CIA“safehouses"
him im advance.

more,the former aide said.

Published storics about Park have
which had been setupall over the
erwise,”said Peer De Silva,who was
left the impression that he was a stu-
state because of the Cuban crisis.

The English copy of Kim JongPil's
the U.S.station chief for the CIA in
dent playboy at Georgetown Univer-
itinerary,according to a penciled·no-
Seoul in 1961 when Park Chung Hee
sity in the late 1950s and early1960s,
tation at the top.of thepage,belonged
tookpower.

taking sevenyears to graduate 137th
toa"Mr.Campen."
According toDe Silva,his superiors
in a class of.138.

Campen has been identified by for-
In reality,Park was not even living
ing about park Chung Hee and Kim.taking sevenyears to graduate 137th
toa"Mr.Campen."
According toDe Silva,his superiors
in a class of.138.

Campen has been identified by for-
In reality,Park was not even living
ing about park Chung Hee and Kim.

mer State Departmentand CIA asso-
Jong Piland the other‘Young Colo.

in the United States during two cru-
ciates as Kenneth Campen,who was
nels'involved in the.coup.

cial years.of that period.Suspended
the No.2 CIA.agent in the U.S.em-
"They came down-out.of the trees,
from Georgetown for“academic defi
bassy in Seoul at the time.He eventu-
as far as Washington was concerned,”
ciencies,”he retunned toSeoul in
ally left that job,friends said,togo to
he recalled,“stinking of kimchee and
1960.

workfor theKCIA.

Although'he was working on gov
Campen,according to the Kim Jong
eating with their fingers.Washington
Pil itinerary which was printed in Ko.

thought they were allCommunists,
ernment-sanctionedstudent/projects
duringthetimeofthehistoric
rean,was part of his traveling entou-
"Student Revolution”which ousted
rage in this country.

President Syngman Rhee,there isa
Both itineraries mention Tongsun
particularly Park ChungHee.He was
dispute as towhether Park played.a
Park.In addition to the buffet.which
the ambassador credited Park with
one of fivebrothers,one ofwhom was
role in it.

a North Korean Communist general.

He remained in Korea until after
sive luncheon on Oct.30,with Kim
I spent months trying to prove to
May,1961,when the"Young Colonels
Tong Pil and 1l persons atthe Ko-
Washington's satisfaction that Park
Park Chung Hee into power
rean embassy,according to Campen's
Chung Hee was not thebrother who
copy of the itinerary.a North Korean Communist general.

He remained in Korea until after
sive luncheon on Oct.30,with Kim
I spent months trying to prove to
May,1961,when the"Young Colonels
Tong Pil and 1l persons atthe Ko-
Washington's satisfaction that Park
Park Chung Hee into power
rean embassy,according to Campen's
Chung Hee was not thebrother who
copy of the itinerary.

was the North Korean Communist
Bythe timeParkreturnedto
general,”De Silva said.“They kept
Georgetown in the fail of-1061 to re-
asking us:Do you know any of these
sume his studies atthe Edmund
Sen.John G.Tower (R-Tex.)was
colonels,have you ever played golf
Walsh School of Foreign Service,he
with them,tennis with them,had
had,according to a knowledgeable
listed as the ranking American.The
lunch with them,played bridge with
American source,apparently made
them?"
some powerful friends among themen
Amb.

Chung, Minister Kim, Mr.S.

I.

closest to the newlyproclaimedPresi-
Kim and Mr.

Tong Sun Park.”
De Silva,who leit.Seoul in July,
S.I.

Kim was Kim Sang In,or
1962,said that those in charge at the
dent,Park Chung Hee.

"Steve” Kim,who was Kim Jong Pil's
CIA inWashington werewatching
These included:
●Kim Jong Pil,whose credentials
translator.Steve Kim,according to
U.S.diplomaticand
intelligence
October “with great interest.”Kim
include the factthatheismarried to
President Park's niece,that he was
sources,served for many years as the
Jong Pil was at that time,De Silva
oneof the smallgroupof colonels.

chief liaisonofficer between the
said,pressuring the American CLA for
whobacked Parkin therevolution
KCIA and the American CIA.

assistance in funding and organizing
and that hefounded theKorean Cen-
In recent years,Steve Kim served
thenewlyformedKorean CIA.

tral Intelligence Agency and became
De Silva does notrecall knowing
as KCIA station chief in Mexico City
its first director in1961.assistance in funding and organizing
and that hefounded theKorean Cen-
In recent years,Steve Kim served
thenewlyformedKorean CIA.

tral Intelligence Agency and became
De Silva does notrecall knowing
as KCIA station chief in Mexico City
its first director in1961.

Tongsun Park in Seoul,“although I
andwas frequently in Washington to
·Kim DongHwan,a military
must have, in view of what I have
attend parties TongsunPark gave for
school classmate.of President Park's
VIPs in 1974 and 1975.

since learned abouthishanging
and another one of the colonels,who
around theembassy and goingto em-
Kim's brother-in-law,B.Y.Lee,be-
became the firstKCIA station chief in
bassy parties."
came Park's.principal Korean aide
“In retrospect,De Silva said,
Washington in 1961.

here in Pacific Development Corp.,
Chung II Kwon, who became Ko-
"Tongsun Park would appear to have
rea's ambassador to Washington in
had many assets that would have at-
Park used for his U.S.business deal-
1961 and remains Tongsun Park's
ings.

Lee isnow undergoing extensive
tracted theattention of thenewgov-
close friendandmentorin diplomatic
ernment after the1961 coup.

and business dealings.

both.the Justice Department and the
"Few of the young colonels could
Before a year had passed,Tongsun
speak English,including Park Chung
source said，but he isn't telling us
Hee,De Silva said.

mu,
Pil's firstvisit.to Washington as head
much."
how touse
of theKCIA in October,1962.

knives and forks,they were very un-
Kim,who was summoned home to
A telegraphedinvitation sent out by
comfortable in social situations..

Seoul after he was identified lastyear
Ambassador Chung on that occasion
they were.reluctant to go to parties,
by The Washington Post,is viewed in
to a“limited few”Washington'VIPs
intelligence circles as“an intermedi-
evenat the American.ambassador's
for a“buffet dinner and discussion”
ary...a message carrier”between
residence."
on Oct.24.with Kim Jong Pil in-
Park and theKCIA and Seoul.--- PAGE BREAK ---

knives and forks,they were very un-
Kim,who was summoned home to
A telegraphedinvitation sent out by
comfortable in social situations.. Seoul after he was identified lastyear
Ambassador Chung on that occasion
they were.reluctant to go to parties,
by The Washington Post,is viewed in
to a“limited few”Washington'VIPs
intelligence circles as“an intermedi-
evenat the American.ambassador's
for a“buffet dinner and discussion”
ary...a message carrier”between
residence."
on Oct.24.with Kim Jong Pil in-
Park and theKCIA and Seoul. He added:
formed invitees that“my good friend
“Along comes Tongsun Park,.fluent
Noidentification or explanation for
in English, graceful in all the Emily

--- PAGE BREAK ---

ISIAN
UFAYA
The cover of 1965 leaflet shows.Tongsun Park, seated at left,in South Korea during signing of declaration of common cause with a Seoul-sponsored group.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

2D635
RBB007/WX525
(RB）NLPDWASHINGTONDC18
ROLAND.RIDDELL
EXECUTIVE SECRETARY INTERNATIONAL YOUTH FEDERATION FOR FREEDOM
3125CHAIN BRIDGE RD.NWWASHDC
IHAVE THE HONOR TO INVITE YOU TO COCKTAIL RECEPTION FOR DIRECTOR
OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY OF KOREA HONORASLE JONG PIL
KIM AT MY RESIDENCE 2838 MCGILL TERRACE NORTHWEST'WEDNESDAY
AND MY GOOD FRIEND MR TONGSUN PARK HAVE MADE ALL ARRANGEMENTS
KIMIEARNESTEY HOPE YOU WILLBE ABLETO ATFEND.RSVP SOCIAL
SECRETARY KOREAN EMBASSY WASHINGTON DC
AMBASSADORCHUNG
An invitation sent in 1962 by Ambassador Chung for Kim Jong Pil reception.
2251

--- PAGE BREAK ---Post skills,moving with ease through
James statement,put describing his
diplomatic receptions and formalaf-
own understanding,said the applica-
fairs, boasting of all the important
tionitselfshouldhavebeen enoughto
people heknows back in Washington.

bring Park under the scrutiny of the
He would havebeen invaluable.

CIA.

TongsunPark also had one other as-
William Eilers,a.Washingtonian
setthatwouldbebadlyneededby the
who represented the AsiaFoundation
Park ChungHee government during
in·Seoul from1960 to 1963,talking
could help him,at home and in the
that period, De Silva said.Through
about how the foundation operated,
United States.

campus activities for conservative
said that.“there is.no:way we didn't
"Hewas awheeler-dealer,even
causes in the United States, and
check Parkout.we'd doa name
then,Henderson said.

through socialcontacts with right-
check,background,everything：to
Henderson,who served on a civic
wing Republicans in Washington,
make surewewerenot dealingwitha
committee thathelpedPark get the
Tongsun Park was well-known in anti-
red-hotCommie.".

Asia Foundation.

grant,also helped
Communist circles in the United
Tongsun Park,according to an auto
him stage a charity concert for stu-
States.

biographypreparedforGeorgetown
dents thatParklater boastedinalet-
It was “very important,” De Silva
University,Iwas borninNorthKorea
A U.S.

military chaplain whobe
($2,000)”which.was“forwarded to the
friendedhim during the Korean War
Korean embassy in Washington."
Back,in theUnited States two years
said,for Park Chung Hee and those
ative in either the North Korean gov-
laterPark got busywith another pro-
whobrought him to power”toestab
ernmentor themilitary-itwaseither
jectwhich former associates of his
lish themselves in U.S.minds.as be
his own brotherorhis mother's
say attracted the attention of the CIA
ing anti-Communist since there were
brother-Ican't remember which."
or should have.biographypreparedforGeorgetown
dents thatParklater boastedinalet-
It was “very important,” De Silva
University,Iwas borninNorthKorea
A U.S.

military chaplain whobe
($2,000)”which.was“forwarded to the
friendedhim during the Korean War
Korean embassy in Washington."
Back,in theUnited States two years
said,for Park Chung Hee and those
ative in either the North Korean gov-
laterPark got busywith another pro-
whobrought him to power”toestab
ernmentor themilitary-itwaseither
jectwhich former associates of his
lish themselves in U.S.minds.as be
his own brotherorhis mother's
say attracted the attention of the CIA
ing anti-Communist since there were
brother-Ican't remember which."
or should have.

people in Washington who were still
On Oct.12,1964,Tongsun Park be-
Students,in 1960,were the focus of
not-100 per centconvinced
came an incorporator,a director and
much attention within theCIA.The
the'president of anon-profit anti-Com-
In1960,Parkwas the chairman ofa
AsiaFoundationwas funnelingupto
munist group that calleditself theIn
Koreanstudentemploymentplace-
$8million of CIA money a.year into
ternationalYouthFederation、for
mentprojectin Seoul whichreceived
anti-Communistacademic.programs
Freedom.The group's stated purpose,
agrantfrom the CIA-supported Asia
throughout the Far East.

in'papersfiled in the District of Co-
Foundation.

One·of Tongsun Park'stwoolder
lumbia,was to“promote freedom,lib-
At the time he applied to the Asia
brothers,Ken Park,nad been an aide
erty and democraticprinciplesamong
Foundation,Parkwasalso the head of
to Syngman Rhee's prime minister,
theyouthof thefreeworld and'todo
the Korean Students Federation in
Dr.John M.Chang.When the stu
all things necessary to achieve these
the United States,,whose letterhead
dents overthrew Rhee,he was suc-
purposes."
listed its national headquarters in
ceeded by Chang,who was thrown
Althoughothersconnectedwith
Washington at2322 Massachusetts
into jail by his successor,Park Chung
IYFF during the two.in'papersfiled in the District of Co-
Foundation.

One·of Tongsun Park'stwoolder
lumbia,was to“promote freedom,lib-
At the time he applied to the Asia
brothers,Ken Park,nad been an aide
erty and democraticprinciplesamong
Foundation,Parkwasalso the head of
to Syngman Rhee's prime minister,
theyouthof thefreeworld and'todo
the Korean Students Federation in
Dr.John M.Chang.When the stu
all things necessary to achieve these
the United States,,whose letterhead
dents overthrew Rhee,he was suc-
purposes."
listed its national headquarters in
ceeded by Chang,who was thrown
Althoughothersconnectedwith
Washington at2322 Massachusetts
into jail by his successor,Park Chung
IYFF during the two.

years it was
Ave.NW,at the time the-address of
Hee.

functioning denied that the American
theKorean'embassy.

Insteadof falling into disfavor
CIA contributed anything in financial
The grent was intended to heln Ko-
themselveswhen their family friend
oroperationalassistance,twoof
rean students educated in the United.

Park's former associates atIYFF-have
brothersquicklymade friends with
States findjobswhen theyreturned
confirmed to The Washington Post in
the new.militaryregime.

home.

separate interviews'that“someone
Gregory Henderson,a professor at
from the CIA”visited the IYFF of-
When firstqueriedby TheWashing-
theFletcherSchool ofLawandDiplo-
fices occasionally to check on its ac
ton Post,spokesmen for theAsia
macy at Tufts University who was cul-
tivities.

Foundation could find“no records"of
turalandlaterpolitical counselor at:
Among Park's fellow incorpqrators.

any grants toeither TongsunPark-or
the U.S.embassy in Seoulin the early:
and officers of IYFF was M.Douglas
the Korean Students Federation:Af-
1960s,knew Tongsun Park well then.

Caddy,a classmate ofPark at George
ter several unsuccessful attempts to
Henderson,one of the most vocal
town University.Caddy was later to
get information,areporterread aloud
critics of thePark ChungHee govern-
figure in the Watergate affair.any grants toeither TongsunPark-or
the U.S.embassy in Seoulin the early:
and officers of IYFF was M.Douglas
the Korean Students Federation:Af-
1960s,knew Tongsun Park well then.

Caddy,a classmate ofPark at George
ter several unsuccessful attempts to
Henderson,one of the most vocal
town University.Caddy was later to
get information,areporterread aloud
critics of thePark ChungHee govern-
figure in the Watergate affair.

fromTongsunPark'sletter of applica-
ment,said that his unsympathetic atti
Caddy，now a Washington lawyer,
tionandanother piece of personal
tudetoward themilitary regime was
wasa friend of E.Howard Hunt.

correspondence inwhich Park con-
"apparently a factor” in his being re-
Caddywas cited forcontemptofcourt
fided that theapplication had been
moved abruptly fromhispostinSeoul
and jailed briefly in July,1972,for
approved.

and brought home.

refusingtoanswer questions abouthis
Following that, the foundation lo-
As the head of the Korean Students-
relationship with Hunt.

cated a“small” grant of $1,019 fora
See PARK, A15, Col.

1 
Caddywas telephoned by Hunt
group ofKorean studentsof whom.

rightafter the arrest of theWatergate
Tongsun Park was listed as "chair-
burglars andhe appearedin court the
man."
morningfollowing the break-in.All of
TheAsiaFoundationrepresentative
PARK,FromA14
the burglars hadhad·ties with the
inSeoultowhomTongsunParkmade
CIA.

his application, John E.(Jack) James,
Federation in the United States,Park
Caddy and Hunt had shared an of-
later told The Washington Postthat
called frequently on Henderson at the
fice in1970 in.the public.relations
embassy.

firm of RobertR.Mullen &Co.,later
“He was no student activist, storm-
identified as.a CIA frontin the Far.

Park.James-unlike some AsiaFoun-
dation personnel at the timesaid
ing the streets.with his professors,
East."
Caddy.s
admitted.--- PAGE BREAK ---

firm of RobertR.Mullen &Co.,later
“He was no student activist, storm-
identified as.a CIA frontin the Far. Park.James-unlike some AsiaFoun-
dation personnel at the timesaid
ing the streets.with his professors,
East."
Caddy.s
admitted. having
thathe was aware that itwas CIA
getting shot at by the'police and sol-
diers，”Henderson recalled.He scoffed
“intimations”about Mullen's.CIA ac-
money he was dispensing.But-he de
niedthathe wouldhavebeen under
ata letter Parkhad written toan
tivitiesbuthas deniedthathe himself
has ever worked for the agency. any obligationtoCIAheadquarters to
American educator at thetime that
familiarizehimself with Park's back. makesit seem as if he were apartici-
ground orreport to Washington about
pantin the Student Revolution. the recipients of.the grant. Instead,Henderson said,Park used
His successor,not speaking to the
the prestige of his studentworkto.get
toknowkey governmentfigures who

--- PAGE BREAK ---nt Revolution. the recipients of.the grant. Instead,Henderson said,Park used
His successor,not speaking to the
the prestige of his studentworkto.get
toknowkey governmentfigures who

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Then-Rep. Otto E.Passman (D.La.), left, during a 1972
Habib, then U.S.ambassador to South Korea. The Pass.
visit to Seoul,with Kim Jong Pil,center,founder of the
Korean CIA and then-prime minister,and Philip C.
room.but out of camera range when photo was taken.
Caddy and Tongsun Park had been
Riddellis theson ofaformerOsS
atthat time remodeling intowhat
friendsatGeorgetown from their
officerwholater worked,theyounger
wouldbecomeTheGeorgeTown
freshman year in 1956,whenParkwas
Riddell said,“on'assignment”for the
Club.
elected classpresident.He and Caddy
CIA.One of Riddell's sisters was
served together on the student coun-
Although Riddell was treasurer of
workingin the Overt Section of the
cil.
IYFF,he said that he knew very little
agency.when IYFF got.under way.
about the source of the organization's
WhenParkbecame presidentof the
Riddell said ina recent interview
income“except that it was all sup-
Korean Students Federation in the
that he was“unaware”if the CIA had
posed to be raised in.direct mailing
U.S.in 1958,the organization began
distributinga glossynewspaper na-
campaigns."
"Wewere about $40.000 in debt
tionwideandCaddywaslistedon the
while."
when I got out,”he said.“Tongsun
masthead as a consultant.
IYFF was actually started earlier
Caddy was already well-known on
must have come up with the money
than its 1964 incorporation data,Rid-
somewhere.because Iwas downon
college campuses around the country
dell recalled. He and Park each con-
notes with him for furniture'and of-
duringthat periodas one ofthe
tributeda“totalof.about $3,00o”of
founders of the conservative Young
fice equipmentand stuff and no one
their own.money to begin,he.said.
AmericansforFreedom.
evertold me they didn'tgetpaidand
Riddell'sfather allowed them theuse
IYFF never filed for bankruptcy."
Caddy was,a law school student at
ofabuilding.heowned on18th Street.
New York University in Manhattan
The executivedirector ofIYFFwas
Eventually，IYFF moved into office
whenIYFFwasfounded.
another former YAFer,James Fred
Hewas
space at 1534.Wisconsin Ave.NW,
papers.The other officers included
Coldren.He, too,“vaguely”remem-
nextdoortoabuildingthatParkwas
listed assecretary on the corporation
berssomeonefrom theCIAwhocame
Roland M,Riddell, a former YAFer
from Boston University who now is a
mortgage banker in Washington,and
Joseph W.Harrison,an Army buddy
of Caddy's who wasemployedat the
time bytheRepublicanNational Com-
mittee.Riddell, a former YAFer
from Boston University who now is a
mortgage banker in Washington,and
Joseph W.Harrison,an Army buddy
of Caddy's who wasemployedat the
time bytheRepublicanNational Com-
mittee.

--- PAGE BREAK ---by “to talk”from time to time.But
Sen.Tower,who said in a recent in-
Coldren insisted thathebelieved the
terview that he only“vaguely remem-
CIA's intenest tobenothing but
bers”ever.having heard of IYFF,gave
“curiosity about what we were up to.”
the organizationhisendorsementina
Coldren'sduties at IYFF.were
letter written onhis official Senate
taken over by Norman Larsen,a one-
stationery on Feb.4,1965.

time stock company actor who had
In additionto Hoover's“Communist
been workingpreviously here for H.

Party Line，the IYFF promised sub-
L.Hunt's right-wing educational “Life
Line Foundation."
tledTheParty Line”inwhich
"IYFF'shighlyqualified research
Sometime after Larsen took over,
theIYFFofficewas.moved next door
staff reveals eachday translations
from Soviet and Chinese Communist
to The George TownClub,where Lar-
news organs,as well as dailyreviews
sen became,manager.According~to
ofmonitored transcriptionsof foreign
Wes McCune,director of Group.Re
radiobroadcasts,plusexcerpts from
search,Inc.,aliberal organization
all major Marxist-Socialist literature
that keeps track of right-wing activi
According toa story onIYFF inHu
ties,IYFF continued to operate fora
period out of The George Town Club.

man Events on Aug.2l,1965,the
groupwas alsooffering a Free World
Anyone dialing theIYFFoffice in
BookService toplaceanti-Communist
late1966,McCune'srecords show,
books into junior high school,high
would.bereferred by the telephone
school,college and university libraries
company.toanumberlistedinthe di-
in.the United States and other coun
rectory for The George Town Coub.

tries.But the“majorinternational
Inquiriesabout IYFFwere referred to
project” in preparation was to have
the manager, Norm.Larsen,who as-
been a FreeWorld Youth Conference
suredone callerfrom GroupResearch
in the fallof1966.

thatIYFF was still operating andsell-
ttn
No one connected with IYFF canre
ingits-reference service.tries.But the“majorinternational
Inquiriesabout IYFFwere referred to
project” in preparation was to have
the manager, Norm.Larsen,who as-
been a FreeWorld Youth Conference
suredone callerfrom GroupResearch
in the fallof1966.

thatIYFF was still operating andsell-
ttn
No one connected with IYFF canre
ingits-reference service.

member if such aconference took
Norm.Larsenatfirst told The
:place,although Tongsun Park was
Washington Post that.he:had never
traveling all over the world in1965
heard of IYFF，but wheninformed
and1966,according to.travel records
that the paper had two files of his cor-
and canceled airline tickets-in the pos
respondence as the organization's ex-
ecutive director,Larsen said:
During 1965 and 1966,Park maderat
"Iwas given the titleofexecutive
least three trips to Seoul,Honolulu,
direetor,butIneverhad any connec
Hong Kong,Kuala Lumpur,Osaka
tion to the organization,it was juston.

and Tokyo.In addition,he visited Sai-
paper.WhenIwas calledin theIYFF
gon,London,Cairo,Cologne Rome,
was in shambles and there wasn't.any
Tehran,Athens and Alaska.

money.Irecommended thatit.be dis-
Inside the United States,he was
banded and it was."
traveling between Washington,San
A
representativeofMcCune's
Francisco,Seattle,Chicago and Lo
GroupResearchpaid theIYFFoffices
Angeles.

avisit in June,1965,and judged them
One former IYFFofficial remem
tobe “extremely well-heeled for a
bered some meetings withforeign stu-
youth group.”One office,maintained
dents in Washington,including one
“forshow”wasreported tobe
whichincluded African and Oriental
“outfitted for a$50,000 executive”
groupsinvited toPark'shome.

with plush pile carpeting,shantung
On Feb.5,1965,Park was in·Seoul
draperies and an impressivedesk.--- PAGE BREAK ---

avisit in June,1965,and judged them
One former IYFFofficial remem
tobe “extremely well-heeled for a
bered some meetings withforeign stu-
youth group.”One office,maintained
dents in Washington,including one
“forshow”wasreported tobe
whichincluded African and Oriental
“outfitted for a$50,000 executive”
groupsinvited toPark'shome. with plush pile carpeting,shantung
On Feb.5,1965,Park was in·Seoul
draperies and an impressivedesk. to sign、a.“Declarationof Common
Oneroom.was being turned by.car-
Purpose”with a government-endorsed
penters intoalibrary for“a staff of
Free Asia Youth Alliance.A paleblue
researchers.”Another containeda
leaflet proclaiming the signing,with
floor model Xerox machine,multi-
picture of'Park and his FAYA count-
ple-line telephoneseverywhere and
erparts,announces their intention
“champion aworld-wide anti-Commu
hures in expensive,two-and three
nist campaign ...to （involve)all
color graphics. youth and youth organizations...to
The GroupResearch visitorwas
eradicate Communism on earth. told thatIYFF atthat time had al-
xno
According to one studentrevolution
ready sent out twofund-solicitation
leader who is now.aprofessor in the
mailings of 500,000each.Appeals car-
United States,the pact between IYFF
riedendorsements andphotographs of
andFAYA could nothave been signed
suchwell-known anti-Communists as
without the full backingof thePafk
-Sen.Tower,J.Edgar Hoover,Herbert
Chung Hee government.“Most demo-
A.Philbrick and Anna Chennault. cratic-minded students werein jail
Hoover's picture adorned one pam-
then,”he said.“Including me."
phlet which.promised would-be sub-
scribers thata 12-month $20 subscrip-
WashingtonPoststaff writer.Charles
tion wouldbringthem,amongother
R..BabcockandresearchersRobin
things,a copy of the FBr Director's
GroomandAmyNathanassistedin
"Communist Party Line."
thepreparation of this article..