Turtles
" he calls it sport; when the tiger wants to murder him he calls it ferocity."
Many naturalists consider man history's worst predator.I admit it.We
kill to eat. We destroy 8nimals when they 8re unprofitable. Civiiization, if our
way of life may sobe ac urately described,has reduced the natural feeds and
protections of almost all wild species;it has poisoned them with itsw8stes
and ba s needlessly and brutally eliminated others, such as the pessenger pigeon,
ofrever, beyond man's capacity to correct. We have, in fact, even practised
birth control 8mong pigs and hae devised srecial contraptions to prevent,
alMio
the fertilization of cattle, 8 development that mey successfully aplled to women.
But mankind, especially husbandne n, hate other predators. The poultrymen
abominate weasels, foxes, mink and cehr varmints, as I do. Catibe and shepheraers
setest wolves andcoyotes and thefew remaining wild cats.They hurt us in the
pocketbook, the most sensitive part of our anatomies.
My spe cial detestation is t e snapp ing turtle.
He is a silent snd sneaky, strong, vicious, durable,effective and most
unhealthfulkiller.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the most sensitive part of our anatomies.
My spe cial detestation is t e snapp ing turtle.
He is a silent snd sneaky, strong, vicious, durable,effective and most
unhealthfulkiller.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

turtles-2
And is he smart-at least in competition with me!
Turtles weredecimating our waterfowl for probablytwo ye8rsbefore I
learned what was happening. Until by accident I sawone bite off moee than he
could chew,I hadn't the remtest notion what caused our beautiful little ducklings
with 8 full-grow duck or goose, he is very small.
With our chickens I had learned to. id entify the work of foxes, skunks,
weasels, possums, cocns, wild dogs and mink. I could, eventually, cope with all
except the mink. If I have a favorite among predators, it is the mink, for he is
the sbstemious killer.Unlike the weasel, for example, who with an abandomed
feroeity will,8ttack and slaughter 50 or more full-grown chickens in a single
night, Mr. Mink will take·only enough to satisfy his imediate requi rements,
usually but 8 single chicken.a night.
One yesr I had more pullets that I could immediately place in the hen house.
I kspt the w 65 who were temporary surplus in e range shelter, a structure with
wire sides 8nd floor that is easily moved to clean pasture 8s required.Nightly
the chickens entered it, instinctiw ly, for they dislike the darkmess unless

--- PAGE BREAK ---helter, a structure with
wire sides 8nd floor that is easily moved to clean pasture 8s required.Nightly
the chickens entered it, instinctiw ly, for they dislike the darkmess unless

--- PAGE BREAK ---

3
steel
sided with chicken-netting with a two inch me sh, the first and last I built that
way.About two weeks8fter theother pullets hadbeen quartered inthehen house
I was absolutely astounded one morning shortly after tay the sky had begun to show
the first streaksxafxdigat traces of thecoming day.I hed unlocked andopened the
door and the happy birds,hungry and thirsty from the night's fast, has noisily
poured out.One only remained behind.This never hapoened,unless the bird was
ill.I crawledin xa andgrabbed her by the tail,thepert that was closest tome.
run away, as they usual do. I backed out wi th her, my hands and wwx knees
fouled by the night's depesits. When I was out from the 8daed darkmess
imposed by the roof, I saw she was headless! Nor was there a trace of any part
of her head-even her hard beaks,8m I searched everywhere,including in the
manure!
identifiedthekilleras8mink.
I tried every way I coula to thwart him, always unsuccessfully.I raised
the shelter on cinder blocks, placed sheets of steel atop the bloc ksta and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ure!
identifiedthekilleras8mink.
I tried every way I coula to thwart him, always unsuccessfully.I raised
the shelter on cinder blocks, placed sheets of steel atop the bloc ksta and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

turtles-4
projecting well over their edges, thinking therey to prevent his climbing. He
he procured and enjoyed his meal. I tried poison, traps, everything I was told
to try. Nothing worked. Each morning I found the s8me frustration and loss.
The re was 8 single pullet squatting on both feetm braced b8ckwayd, with the
stub of a headless neck eated down to the netting.
Fearing perhaps he found an odor on my traps, I me de a finel effort to
outwit him. I placed fresh straw around the shelter for several nights, letting
him get used to the addition to the environment. Each night I lost another pullet.
new traps,
scredriver to leave no fresh man scent.I washe them in gasolene,air-dried them,
8n additional day and nigbit. When I placed and set them, I used brand new gloves
hid
which had also been sunned andaired.I kad a trap at each corner and one in the
middle of each of the four sides, and covered them carefully with the straw, which I
arranged with 8 pitchfork. I was confident he'd blunder into one of them.
The next morning there was but one difference in the scene that faced me.
Each of the eight traps hed been carefully uncove red and tripped. The customsry
headless pullet was also there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---xt morning there was but one difference in the scene that faced me.
Each of the eight traps hed been carefully uncove red and tripped. The customsry
headless pullet was also there.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Turtles-5
Before noon, all the remeining pullets had been sold. I freely admit I
am not as smart as 8 mink. Am I respect him, for he kills only to satisfy his
imrediateneeds.
The re is no reason to believe the turtle is any different, but i hate him,
even though I have achieved a high degree of success egainstbhim.I cannot explain
it, unless it is because he kills my most prized birds orbeacuse he consumes so
much of my time. Perhaps, also, it is because he fooled me for so long.
Oneafternocnintheearlyspringofthesecondyearofthemysterious
waterfowl disappearance, I hesrd 8 duck quacking in p8nic.Hastening to the pond,
I saw her flapping her wings and desparately trying to reach the nearby shore.
This is 8 reversal of normal waterfowl behavior.They usually seek safety in the
water. Mysteriously, she didn't move despite her most valiant efforts. There was
nothing visibly， so it could be only a sna per.With a rake that I dipped into the
water behind her I pulled her to the shore.Sure enough,firmly ettached to her
leg was a snapper whose shell was almost 9 foot long.
From that instant on . have foundall his kind ugly 8nd loathsome.
Poking a pitchfork at him I provoked him into snapping at one of the tines.
The duek thus freed propelled herself to safety with her wings and I kept prodding

--- PAGE BREAK ---

turtles-6
him. He mede the metal ring, but always pulled his head back, ready to snsp
again.Itried&deadbranchofatreeeboutasthickasmythumbamhebit
hedn't
them understand. The pitchfork handle was took thick, but 8 broomstick W8s just Mhe
right size-he could latch one and couldn't go through it.Carefully I lifted the
broom, and he held on. Thus I got him in a met8l pail.
The fairy tale about ehthe race with the rabbit accurately reflectight size-he could latch one and couldn't go through it.Carefully I lifted the
broom, and he held on. Thus I got him in a met8l pail.
The fairy tale about ehthe race with the rabbit accurately reflect

for the lightning-like speed wi th which that head and neck move. It's quich as
8 striking snake, 8nd 8t least a s accurate.
Little by little I learned about turtles.Moving silently underwater
they lesve not 8 ripple. The seize their prey by a leg or fcot, pull them
under water untol they drewm, bury them in the mud and relish them most after
decay has begun. With ba by ducklings, they dont get much to eat, so they keep
coming until there are none left,unless there is a big flock.The first time
I noticed any disappearing, I lost 17 in three days. They had been hatched out
by the mother, who hed stolen & nest on me, hiding it where I dian't find it.
When I finally - and entirely by accident - saw where she had carefully camoflsged

--- PAGE BREAK ---

tuttles~7
herself,she was already setting.I counted her babies the day she first left
With her to the water.But by the midile ofthe third day，they were all gone.
wtth 8 rifle.Infrequently I'd spot one as it stealthily eased its ugly,wrinkled
black snout out ofthe water for a look around.Once In a while I'd hit thst small
traget. When I wise up and shot below it my score improved.
How many turtles infested that small pond I'll never know.One year I
got 8 dozen in 8 week. The large st I even got wouldn't fit into even a five-gellon
and before thisexperience)in a bushel basket.
Somehow, the turtles always made their initial 8ppearance when I was
saw three heads in the pond at one time. The next four hours, until after dark,
I ke pt that rifle to my right shoulder, without ever seeing 8 single turtle.
to the surface. Possibly it me de me feel better, but it killed not turtles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---hours, until after dark,
I ke pt that rifle to my right shoulder, without ever seeing 8 single turtle.
to the surface. Possibly it me de me feel better, but it killed not turtles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

turtles-8
showed their ugly faces. That time, besides wasting my won time, I had to pey
both men for standing around and watching,one armed with 9 pistol,in itself
8 piece of 8rrsnt optimism.Each informed me it was the easiest five hours'
pey he had ever received.Again,I got no turtles.
My only ally,besides my rifle,has been the barn swallow.
Thesewonderfulbirdsregardanythingameverythingthatmovesasa
hazard to the nest and the young. As the m8llard mother and other birds put on
8 broken-wing act to decoy predators, including hunters,away from their offspring,
real or fancied. They certainly succeed in diverting attention from their babies!
OurbeautifulChineseganderwhowasthefirstreallypublicizedenrolaee
in Sargent Shriver's Pesce Corps almost ran rung his neck off aunually when he
took his family to swim or drink in the pond. He was as devotea to and as fearful
head. He's almost wind up from his head 8s he tried to follow their flight, for
heimagined they were 8 threat tohisfamily.
Once we were out of the chicken business and had found permanent homes for
8ll of our breeder geese and ducks except the honkers, the swallows become our

--- PAGE BREAK ---were 8 threat tohisfamily.
Once we were out of the chicken business and had found permanent homes for
8ll of our breeder geese and ducks except the honkers, the swallows become our

--- PAGE BREAK ---

turtles-9
nests and while in flight.When they spotted a turtle they swopped over and 8round
him.They dive on him like a kamikaze pilot,gzaxt skimming the surface and sometimes
rippling it to keep him oc cupied. These divebombers, for which my wife or I were
alweys on the 8lert, sent me hastening to the pond with my rifle. But then some
of them would bestow the same at tention on me, hardly conducive to good marksmanship.
When it finally downed on me to get 9 rifle with a telescopic sight my
turtle problem was closest to solved, for I coula sit behind the house, some distq
distance from and above the pond,ane fire wway undisturbed.Touch wood and cross
That's really saying something, for once these fuzzy little imps get
their parents. They do what they please, regardless of the instructions or
importunings of their wiser mothers and fathers snd uncles and aunts and cousins.
When they want to swim, they swim, warnings or no warnings. Waterfowl, naturally,
delight in the pond.The little ones 8re more sedate than the sdults, who love
to five, roll 8nd flap their wings wildly as they Bathe.Vhile they are unfeathered
So they just swim and swim, with an effortles: grace, moving without any

--- PAGE BREAK ---

turtles-1o
see it, 8nd even though I haven't seen a turtle for some time, I always worry
when theyclearlyignorethe efforts ofthelargerones todirect them outof
the water.I still guard them drom 8far with the loaded rifle ready when I see this.