Media Reasoning


BERSERKER


BOOKS


Contents


Acknowledgments


Introduction


1 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


Ts
. The Old Dialectic of the Greeks

. The Opposition between Rhetoric and Dialectic
. Topics and Fallacies

. Persuasion, Social Influence, and Democracy

. Argumentation Schemes

. Basic Practical Reasoning

. Value-Based Practical Reasoning

9.


Io.


CoN AY AR W bd


The Viewpoint of Informal Logic


The Star Trek Example
The Aims of Dialectical and Rhetorical Argumentation


2 The Speech Act of Persuasion


E.


SS ON AW AW bd


NON
NN


The Belief-Desire-Intention Approach and the Commitment
Approach


. Basic Components of Persuasion

. Chaining of Argumentation

. Types of Dialogue

. Deliberation

. Closing of the Deliberation Dialogue

. Acts of Persuasion, Inducement, and Making a Threat
. Negotiation Dialogue and Persuasion

. Relevance and Argument Diagramming

. The Cognitive Component of Persuasion

. The New Definition of the Speech Act of Persuasion


page xi
1


i


7
8


vii


vill


3 Propaganda


. Negative Connotations

. Public Discourse and Reason

. Appeal to the People Revisited

. The Dialectical Viewpoint on Propaganda

. Persuasion and Propaganda

. Characteristics of Propaganda

. Is Propaganda Necessarily Dishonest or Irrational?
. Openness to Contrary Evidence

. Deceptiveness and Relevance in Propaganda

10.


Evaluating Argumentation in Propaganda


4 Appeals to Fear and Pity


~y
SOS ON AYA WwW DH


. Appeals to Fear and Pity in Mass Media
. Appeals to Fear

. Appeals to Pity

. The Respondent-to-Dialogue Problem

. Simulative Reasoning


The Dual Process Model of Persuasion


. The Structure of Appeals to Fear

. The Structure of Appeals to Pity

. Multi-agent Structure of Both Types of Argument
. When Are Appeals to Fear and Pity Fallacious?


5 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


ay
SS ON AWK WNW


. Classifying the Types of AA Hominem Argument

. The Circumstantial and Other Types

. Argument from Commitment

. The Gore Case

. The Battalino Case

. Classifying the Argument in the Battalino Case

. Evaluating the Argument in the Battalino Case

. Implicature and Innuendo

. Evaluating the Argument in the Gore Case

. Evaluating the Arguments Rhetorically and Dialectically


6 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


I.


ON AWA WwW


Influencing the Mass Audience


. Appeal to Popular Opinion as an Argument
. Cases in Point

. The Form of the Argument

. Fallacious Appeals to Popular Opinion

. Endoxa in Greek Dialectic

. Public Opinion as Informed Deliberation

. A More Careful Basis for Evaluating Cases


Contents


Contents


9.
Io.


Viewing the Public as an Agent
Evaluating Appeal to Popular Opinion


7 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


Li


SS ON AWA YW DD


N


Definitions and Sampling Surveys


. Question Wording and Emotive Bias in Polls

. The Structure of the Question

. Forcing an Answer

. Use of Polls by Advocacy Groups

. The Advent of Deliberative Polling

. Argumentation Schemes and Critical Questions

. Using Formal Dialectical Models of Argumentation
. Combining Dialectical and Empirical Methods

. Conclusion and Summary of Fallacies


8 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


. Stevenson’s Theory of Persuasive Definitions

. Cases of Public Redefinitions

. Wider Implications of These Cases

. Definitions in the New Dialectic

. Proof of Legitimacy of Persuasive Definitions

. Argumentation Schemes Relating to Definitions

. The Speech Act of Defining

. Evaluating Persuasive Definitions

. What Should the Rules for Persuasive Definitions Be?
10.


Conclusions


9 The Structure of Media Argumentation


I


SS ON AWA Wb


N


. Rhetoric and Dialectic Reconfigured

. The Respondent-to-Dialogue Problem Revisited

. Direct and Indirect Media Argumentation

. Star Trek: The Rhetorical Dimension

. Argumentation Strategies

. Plan Recognition

. The Solution to the RTD Problem

. Fifteen Basic Components of Media Argumentation
. The Persuasion System

. Computational Dialectics for Rhetorical Invention


Bibliography


Index


Color plate section follows page 34.


ix


co


nN NN NN


OVO CDoONnNn Wood
oO NI 09


NNN NN WN


“IN Or MOt


Acknowledgments


Some of the material in this book is based on material in journal articles
previously published by the author. The previously published materials
have been modified to fit as revised material in parts of chapters.

Chapter 3, is based on “What Is Propaganda and Exactly What Is Wrong
with It?” Public Affairs Quarterly 11 (1997): 383-413. The work in chap-
ter 3 was supported by a Fellowship from the Netherlands Institute for
Advanced Study in the Humanities and Social Sciences (NIAS) and a
Research Grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Coun-
cil of Canada during the academic year of 1990-1991. Thanks are due to
Erik Krabbe for discussions and to the members of the NIAS Research
Group on “Fallacies as Violations of Rules of Argumentative Discourse,”
Frans van Eemeren, Rob Grootendorst, Sally Jackson, Scott Jacobs, Agnes
van Rees, Agnes Verbiest, Charles Willard, and John Woods.

Material from two previously published papers is included in chapter
5: “Use of Ad Hominem Argument in Political Discourse: The Battalino
Case from the Impeachment Trial of President Clinton,” Argumentation
and Advocacy 36 (2000): 179-195, and “Case Study of the Use of Circum-
stantial Ad Hominem in Political Argumentation,” Philosophy and Rhetoric
33, (2000): 101-115. The former paper was written while I was on study
leave in Perth, Australia, and Eugene, Oregon, in 1997. I would like
to thank the Department of Philosophy of the University of Western
Australia for providing facilities for research, and the Oregon Human-
ities Center (University of Oregon) for supporting my research on this
paper. I would also like to acknowledge some comments made by Henry
W. Johnstone, Jr. The latter paper arose out of the graduate semi-
nar on argumentation I gave as a visiting professor at Northwestern


x


xii Acknowledgments


University in the Department of Communication Studies in 1999 and
a public lecture given at Northwestern in April 1999. My visit was
also supported by a Fulbright Senior Research Fellowship. Among the
many individuals who contributed to the paper by raising questions and
making comments, I would especially like to thank Mike Leff, Jean Good-
win, Steve Wildman, David Zarefsky, Robert McKown, Lynn Clarke, Adri-
enne Brovero, Michael Geiser, Horoko Okuda, Susan Sattell, and Michael
Pfau. For support of the research in this paper, I would like to thank the
Canada-U.S. Fulbright Foundation, the Department of Communication
Studies of Northwestern University, and the Social Sciences and Human-
ities Research Council of Canada. During a later phase of the work in
2004, discussions with Mark Aakhus and David Zarefsky turned out to be
extremely helpful.

Chapter 6 is partly based on “Evaluating Appeals to Popular Opinion,”
Inquiry: Critical Thinking Across the Disciplines 20 (2000): 33-45. The mate-
rial in the paper has been considerably revised, and much new material
has been added.

Chapter 8 is based on “Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Argu-
ments,” Argumentation and Advocacy: The Journal of the American Forensic
Association 37 (2001): 117-132. Much of the paper has been revised, and
considerable new material has been added.

I gained some valuable insights into argumentation and computing
at the Symposium on Argument and Computation at Bonskeid House
in Perthshire, Scotland, in June and July 2000. I would especially like
to thank Tim Norman and Chris Reed for organizing the conference.
I would also like to thank the following conference participants for
lectures and discussions that have influenced my thinking on models
of argumentation and deliberation: Trevor Bench-Capon, Daniela Car-
bogim, Jim Crosswhite, Aspassia Daskalopulu, John Fox, Jim Freeman,
Janne Maaike Gerlofs, Michael Gilbert, Rod Girle, Floriana Grasso, Leo
Groarke, Corin Gurr, David Hitchcock, Hanns Hohmann, Erik Krabbe,
Peter McBurney, Henry Prakken, Theodore Scaltsas, Simone Stumpf,
and Bart Verheij. In the second term of 2001, during my time as visit-
ing professor in the Department of Communication at the University of
Arizona, I began to appreciate how the study of some phenomena central
in rhetorical persuasion could benefit from new tools developed in com-
puting and argumentation. For helpful discussions during this period,
I would like to thank Joe Bonito, Michael Dues, Hans Hansen, Scott
Jacobs, Sally Jackson, Raymie McKerrow, Robin Nabi, Chris Segrin, Kyle
Tusing, David Williams, and Ron Wright. Support during this period was


Acknowledgments xiii


provided by a half-year study leave granted by the University of Winnipeg
and a research grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada.

Finally I would like to thank Tom Gordon, Henry Prakken, Chris Reed,
and Bart Verheij for many discussions over the period of 2002-2006 that
helped to sharpen my grasp of new developments in artificial intelli-
gence that are turning out to be essential to recent advances in argu-
mentation technology. I would like to thank Christian Kock for allowing
me to preview his paper for the 2006 ISSA Conference. And I would
like to acknowledge the support for my continuing research through my
Research Grant on Dialogue Systems for Legal Argumentation given by
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada in 2005.
For help during this latter period leading up the publication of the book,
I would like to thank David Godden and Fabrizio Macagno. Rita Campbell
prepared the index, and Ruth Lowe helped with proofreading.


Introduction


What initially led me to start work on this project was the observation
that the examples of fallacies and questionable argument tactics studied
in textbooks of informal logic often featured examples of advertisements
and political arguments of the kind that have to do with elections or
with public policies. Many of them are media arguments from sources
such as political speeches, commercial ads, or Internet blogs. Such argu-
ments are especially interesting when it is evident that they were used —
for example, in ads — as rhetorically effective techniques to persuade a
mass audience. Formerly (and often still), such arguments tended to be
classified in logic as fallacious. But more and more they are now seen
as fallible (but slippery) heuristics useful to reach a tentative conclusion
under conditions of uncertainty, but subject to critical questioning. The
theory put forward in this book strikes a judicious balance between ana-
lyzing them as fallible but basically reasonable arguments in some cases,
and criticizing them as fallacious arguments used as tactics to unfairly get
the best of an opponent or deceive a mass audience in other cases.
More specifically, the kinds of arguments considered throughout the
book are ones often used in various communication media, including
written texts, television, and the Internet, to attempt to persuade an
audience to do something or accept something as true. A broad variety
of such arguments are analyzed, but they prominently include political
arguments and appeals, especially as used in electoral campaigns, encom-
passing persuasion attempts in which politicians, corporations, or advo-
cacy groups put forward arguments using mass media and the Internet.
They also include staged public debates in legislatures and parliaments
and arguments found in commercial ads, in news reports or editorials


1


2 Media Argumentation


in newspapers and magazines, and in written transcripts of television
broadcasts and other media programs. They include any specimens of
argumentation that have appeared in the various mass media and can be
taken to try to influence a mass audience in some way. The aim of such
an argument is typically to get action or to change public opinion on an
issue, although other goals can be involved as well. The problem is to
unlock the mystery of how persuasion works in such arguments using a
dialogue model.

Despite a large body of experimental work in the social sciences that
has studied the persuasive effectiveness of messages, for example, we
still have very little precise understanding of exactly what persuasion is
and how it works in mass media. As O’Keefe (2001, p. 575) put it, “Per-
suasion has been one of the great continuing mysteries of rhetoric and
related disciplines.” This book dissipates some of the mystery by build-
ing on recent work in argumentation theory and multi-agent systems in
artificial intelligence (AI). These fields have developed new tools that
have been applied to argumentation, leading to the development of new
argumentation technologies, but one of the problems has been to extend
them to argumentation of a kind that has traditionally been studied in
rhetoric and speech communication.

The contemporary field of argumentation derives from three differ-
ent disciplinary roots: logic, dialectic, and rhetoric. Logic is the science
of reasoning. Dialectic is the study of two parties reasoning together with
each other by argument and objection. Rhetoric is the use of argument
to persuade.’ Each has been somewhat suspicious of the claims advanced
by the others, reflecting a tension going back to the ancient origins of
all three fields. Rhetoric especially has been suspect, seen by philoso-
phers as a sham and a deception, trading on the biases of audiences and
not advancing claims that demand to be taken seriously. Philosophy has
long been at war with rhetoric, since the time of Plato. Plato said that
rhetoric is used by Sophists, is based only on appearances, and is used to
persuade audiences by arguments that are fallacious. According to Plato,
the Sophist has no regard for the truth of the matter, and can make the
worse argument look better, or the better argument look worse, by tricky
arguments. Philosophy, in contrast, on the Platonic theory, can take us to
the fixed and unchanging truth of a matter being discussed by means of
a method he called dialectic. Rhetoric produces only belief, which is


' These are superficial initial definitions for the beginner, subject to considerable refine-
ment as the book proceeds. They are controversial and very much at issue.


Introduction 3


constantly changing, while philosophy yields knowledge. The word
“dialectic” (in this special sense) derives from the ancient Greek term
for conversation, dzalectikos, evoking the Platonic dialogues. Both Plato
and Aristotle saw dialectic as a highly important method of rational dis-
cussion.” Plato couldn’t really make up his mind what dialectic was, but
by showing his paradigm exponent of it, Socrates, practicing it in his dia-
logues, gave examples of it at work. Later, Aristotle tried to redress Plato’s
antagonistic view of the relationship between rhetoric and dialectic by
inventing formal logic, trying to reconcile rhetoric with a field he called
dialectic. He defined dialectic as a way of criticizing popularly accepted
opinions by finding contradictions and logical weaknesses in them and
by considering arguments on both sides of a contested issue. But dialectic
died out after some attempts to revive it in the Middle Ages.* The out-
come, which has persisted for over two millennia, is that philosophy and
rhetoric are still at war.

Recent developments demand a new look into this conflict. Because
of the need to devise systems for electronic communication on the Inter-
net, computing is moving more and more to a model of argumentation
as a dialogue between rational agents. Current technologies of artificial
intelligence are now widely based on the possibility of communications
among entities that can act, reason, ask questions, and exchange informa-
tion. For example, you might have an agent that filters out your E-mail
messages, deletes some, and marks others with a high priority. Or you
might have an agent that searches around the Net, collects certain kinds
of information, and then processes it in a format you can use for some
purpose. To collect this information, the agent will have to ask ques-
tions of other agents. Goal-directed communication between agents, or
among groups of agents engaged in projects that require teamwork, is
more and more important for many applications in electronic commerce
and information retrieval. These developments provide an argumenta-
tion technology that offers new insight into mass media argumentation
through an interlocking of dialectic and rhetoric.

In this book it is argued that rhetorical and dialectical argumentation
need to be fitted together as complementary fields integrating two main
tasks, the invention of arguments and their critical evaluation. The main


° But the term, in its Greek meaning, is likely to be unfamiliar to the majority of present-
day readers, who are most likely to associate it with (quite different) Marxist-Hegelian
notions.

3 In modern times, Marxist-Hegelian theorists took over the term, signaling its death.


4 Media Argumentation


rhetorical task is to devise new arguments that can be used to persuade
an audience to come to accept a viewpoint it has doubts about, based on
what are taken to be its commitments and values. The main dialectical
task is to judge which arguments are stronger and which are weaker (or
even fallacious) by appealing to structures based on forms of argument
and procedural rules that specify conditions for appropriate uses of an
argument. It is argued in this book that even though these two goals are
inherently different in theory, in practice they are closely connected. The
reason is that audiences generally tend to be persuaded by arguments that
are fallible (defeasible, to use the current term), and can sometimes be
highly deceptive and even fallacious, but if used rightly, are inherently
reasonable. Such defeasible arguments are very common, for example,
in politics, where situations are highly complex, and a decision has to be
made under conditions of uncertainty and lack of knowledge. In show-
ing us how to use and judge such arguments, rhetoric and dialectic can
combine to be a powerful force in the new argumentation technology
that is emerging, especially in a democracy.

Whereas rhetorical and dialectical arguments are usually seen as very
different, this book shows how they are both built on the same underlying
structures of argumentation. Both are built on argumentation schemes,
or stereotypical forms of argument. Both are built on the cognitive struc-
ture of the speech act of rational persuasion, requiring a dialogue format
in which a message sender (called the “proponent” in this book) uses
an argument to try to overcome the doubt expressed by another agent
(called the “respondent”) she is communicating with. To do this success-
fully, the proponent has to understand “where the respondent is coming
from.” She has to make some estimate of what premises he accepts or can
be persuaded to accept as the dialogue proceeds.

The book shows that the tool of simulative reasoning is the means
needed for this purpose, in both dialectic and rhetoric. It explains what
arguers do in rhetorical situations: they imagine a dialogue to establish
the initial position of the audience, and they then work within that frame-
work to persuade the audience through dialectically secured claims. This
works just like a dialogue except that the audience can’t respond to the
arguer’s questions, so he or she must anticipate and account for what the
audience would say. However, modifying the notion of dialogue so that
it can accommodate simulative reasoning of this sort requires a complex
and careful process of adaptation. The treatment of arguments based on
definitions or on a variety of other different kinds of evidence — studied
in the middle chapters of the book — identifies some of the ways in which


Introduction 5


this is done. The book shows how simulative reasoning can be captured
in a dialogue model of argumentation that integrates reasoning used
in dialectical and rhetorical argumentation, explaining how each com-
ponent is needed to understand what is really going on in mass media
argumentation.

The dialogue model has recently been adopted in multi-agent comput-
ing, and one can see why, because automated agents are used in commu-
nication on the Internet for purposes such as electronic commerce. The
way argumentation is presented on the Internet fits the dialogue format
in a way that is evident to all of us as users. The dissemination of news and
information is becoming less centralized, and with this fragmentation we
are continually returning to a “conversational” model of communication
and information exchange. For example, it is not just that news networks
such as CNN report the results of daily, Internet-based, opinion polls
from their viewers. They now include blogs as a regular segment of their
newscasts in recognition that an increasing portion of the population is
seeking their information from this type of source. Yet the medium of a
blog is inherently interactive. It is a kind of “online diary,” usually of a
single individual, which allows comments and feedback from the readers
of the blog. Just as readers can immediately engage with the material on
the blog as they read it, the author of the blog, through her continued
updates, is able to respond to her interlocutors as individuals. The cen-
tral task undertaken in this book is to apply this conversational model to
media argumentation by integrating rhetorical and dialectical factors in
the model.

Media argumentation is a powerful force in our lives. From political
speeches to TV commercials to war propaganda, it can appeal to emotions
that mobilize political action, influence public opinion, market products,
and even enable a dictator to stay in power. If we could study this kind of
argumentation using precise models of a kind that are clear enough to
build into implemented computing systems, we might be in a much better
position to deal with it in an intelligent and balanced way. But there are
certain central mechanisms of media argumentation that are still not well
enough understood. This book presents a new theory that displays its key
structural components and shows how they fit together. The evidence in
the case studies and analyses lead to the formulation of a new system to
model the structure of rhetorical argumentation, which I call the Per-
suasion System. This system, along with the other tools and structural
components deployed and refined through the case studies, reveal that
media arguments have precisely definable characteristics of their own


6 Media Argumentation


that make them a distinctive use of argumentation with a dialectical struc-
ture and rhetorical trajectory fitted together in a dialogue framework. By
seeing how they work in typical and in problematic cases of mass media
persuasion, fresh light is thrown on important and influential techniques
of argumentation in the communication media. Each chapter presents
solutions to problems central to understanding, analyzing, and criticizing
media argumentation.


Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


The three fields of logic, rhetoric, and dialectic are all about arguments, as
Aristotle showed, but each takes a different viewpoint on them.’ Logic is
the science of reasoning that studies formal inferential links between sets
of propositions designated as premises and conclusion of an argument.
Dialectic, usually taken to be a branch of logic, analyzes arguments given
in a text of discourse, including fallacious arguments, evaluating them
as weak or strong by examining criticisms of them (Kapp 1942; Walton
1998b; Finocchiaro 2005, ch. 13). Rhetoric studies persuasive arguments
based on the beliefs, commitments, or values of the target audience to
be persuaded (Kennedy 1963; Tindale 1999, 2004; Jacobs 2000). How-
ever, the long history of the relationship between logic and rhetoric has
been an antagonistic one, characterized by strife and sniping on both
sides, beginning with Plato’s attack on the Sophists on the basis that
they took fees to teach argumentation skills.* This attack on rhetoric
is visible in many places in Plato’s dialogues (Krabbe 2000, p. 206).5
Aristotle took a balanced view of what he saw as a close relationship
between rhetoric and dialectic, but an opposition between the two sub-
jects remained (Hohmann 2000, p. 223). Aristotle thought of dialectic


’ The first sentence of the Rhetoric (135441) is: “Rhetoric is the counterpart of dialectic.”
Aristotle saw both arts as about persuasion (Rhetoric, 1354a13-1354a14). See Kennedy
1991, 1994).

° The ancient history of dialectic as a branch of logic is well described by Kapp (1942),
while that of rhetoric as a subject designed for persuasion is equally well described by
Kennedy (1963).

3 In the Georgias (463a—463d) , Socrates denounced rhetoric as nothing more than “flattery”
(kolakeia).


8 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


as “a rather pure and theoretically sound method aimed at a coopera-
tive search for cognitive truth” (Hohmann 2000, p. 223),4 and hence by
comparison, rhetoric still had negative implications that are still present.

The aim of rhetorical argumentation seems to make it subjective,
because it needs to persuade by picking premises that represent the val-
ues of the specific audience (Johnstone 1981; Tindale 2004), values that
can vary from one group to another. To do this successfully, the propo-
nent has to understand “where the audience is coming from.” Using a
fictional example from Star Trek, featuring Klingons, Ferengi, and Vul-
cans, this chapter shows how dialectic also needs to base arguments on
premises that represent the values of the specific audience or respon-
dent to whom the argument is addressed. Another goal of this chapter
is to introduce the reader to some new tools of argumentation theory,
such as argument diagramming and argumentation schemes, forms of
argument representing stereotypical types of reasoning used in everyday
conversational interactions. Thus this chapter will show how dialectical
argumentation, especially as it is being refashioned by recent develop-
ments of argumentation technology in AI, has become a much better
developed branch of logic, which has moved more into a rapproche-
ment with rhetoric. This chapter will take the first steps toward achieving
the ultimate goal of displaying the key structural components of rhetor-
ical argumentation, and will show how they fit together with logical and
dialectical approaches to argumentation. What used to be called dialec-
tic, and is coming to be so called again, has often been called informal
logic in recent years. Informal logic has a special viewpoint, setting it
apart from the much better developed field of formal logic.


1. The Viewpoint of Informal Logic


When it comes to studying arguments, there are two points of view, or ways
of analyzing and evaluating an argument, that need to be distinguished.
First, you can study the argument empirically to try to judge what effect
it had, or will be likely to have, on an audience. This viewpoint would
seem to be one that would fit the kind of approach and methods of the
social sciences. The other point of view is logical. You can classify the


4 Aristotle portrayed rhetoric as “a seriously tainted and practically compromised knack
serving a competitive quest for persuasive success” by contrasting it with the purely intel-
lectual subject of dialectic (Hohmann 2000, p. 223), which studies reasoning supporting
or criticizing an argument.


The Viewpoint of Informal Logic 9


argument as being of a particular type. By means of such a classification,
you show the given argument to be an instance of some abstract form
of argument. Then you can analyze it by finding missing assumptions it
is based on. Then you can determine whether the argument is correct
or incorrect (valid or invalid, reasonable or fallacious). In other words,
you can evaluate it according to the normative standards of correctness
that this type of argument is supposed to meet. It has been thought,
since the end of the nineteenth century, that these two tasks were entirely
independent from each other and that they should be carefully separated
and never mixed in together. But recently, the feeling has been that this
separation is not as clean as was once thought (Johnson 2000).

The following thumbnail sketch of the history of logic will amplify this
point. Aristotle’s syllogistic, along with the Stoic logic of propositions,
developed into the science of deductive logic, which, in the twentieth
century, became mathematical logic. On the other hand, Aristotle’s prac-
tical logic - which comprised the study of “sophistical refutations” or
fallacies, which comes under the heading of “dialectical reasoning,” in
which two parties reason with each other — fell into obscurity and neglect.
Something approximating a resurrection of it was attempted in the nine-
teenth century, most notably, when idealist philosophers wrote about
so-called laws of thought. With the ascendancy of formal (mathematical)
logic, however, the whole idealist vision of laws of thought was repu-
diated, and called psychologism — a pejorative term, as then used in
logic. A sharp separation was made between how people actually think
(psychologically) and how they ought to think (logically) if they are to be
rational.

Now to return from this thumbnail sketch, it can be seen why in logic
there is thought to be a sharp separation between the empirical and nor-
mative viewpoints. Recent developments, however, have started to indi-
cate that this separation is not as clean or sharp as it was thought to be.
One recent development is the return to the quest, originating in Aris-
totle’s older logic of the Topics and On Sophistical Refutations, of studying
informal fallacies. It has been found that to study the fallacies with any
hope of success, attention must be paid to realistic cases in which argu-
ments are used for various conversational purposes in different contexts.
Such an approach requires getting beyond simplistic one-liner examples
of fallacies and looking at individual cases in some detail on their mer-
its. Needless to say, such a pragmatic case-oriented approach to realistic
argumentation introduces something of an empirical component. While
the abstract form of the argument (the so-called argumentation scheme)


10 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


is still very important, one also has to look seriously at how an argument
has been used for some conversational purpose (supposedly, from what
can be judged from the given text of discourse). The pragmatic study of
arguments used in a given case is no longer purely formal and abstract. It
has become contextual. Much depends on how you interpret a given text
of discourse as expressing an argument or some other speech act. This
pragmatic approach seems to make the traditional separation of abstract
form and contextual content much more difficult to maintain.

This pragmatic approach to taking actual cases seriously is character-
istic of the schools of thought now called informal logic and argumen-
tation theory. The general theoretical approach can be described briefly
as follows. The goals are the identification, analysis, and evaluation of
argumentation. The field of argumentation is centrally concerned with
arguments, but must also take account of related things, such as explana-
tions and the asking of questions, that are not themselves arguments but
nevertheless occur in an important way in sequences of argumentation.
The ultimate goal is to evaluate arguments — that is, to judge in a given
instance ofits use how strong or weak an argumentis and to judge whether
the premises support the conclusions as good reasons for accepting them
(Johnson 2000; Finochiarro 2005; Vorobej 2006).

The typical kind of case dealt with is one in which an argument of
some sort has supposedly been put forward in a text of discourse in a
given case. In this typical kind of case, the proponent is not around to
defend her argument. The argument is expressed in some fairly short
text of discourse presented in the logic classroom. The source of the text
is known. It may be a magazine or newspaper article, a book, a transcript
of a political speech, a transcript of a legal case, or any sort of text of
discourse that appears to contain an interesting argument of some sort.
The critics, usually a professor and a group of students, then undertake
the task of identifying, analyzing, and evaluating the argument. Usually,
an argument is selected because it fits the format of one of the famous
informal fallacies. However, such arguments can be quite reasonable in
many instances and are by no means necessarily fallacious. The game
is to try to judge, in a given case, how the given argument, as far as it
can be analyzed and pinned down, should be evaluated — is it fallacious,
or just weak in certain respects and not so badly off that it should be
called fallacious? Or is it reasonable — that is, should it be judged to
be basically correct from a structural point of view, even though it may
have parts that are missing or that are not very well backed up, as far as
can be judged from what is known from the given text of discourse and


The Old Dialectic of the Greeks ll


its presumed context? In many cases, there simply isn’t enough context
given to support a definitive evaluation. Even in such cases, however,
what is called a conditional evaluation can be very informative and even
enlightening.

The viewpoint of informal logic is typically from a backward perspec-
tive. That is, you are typically confronted with a “dead specimen” —- an
argument that has already been put forward and is now embedded in
some text of discourse that is being examined. The argument, presum-
ably, is already over, and you are looking it at retrospectively. For example,
the case you are studying may be from a political debate in a parliament
or legislative assembly. The debate has already been concluded, perhaps
long ago. So you are looking at it with all the benefit of 20/20 hindsight.

This normative viewpoint characteristic of modern argumentation the-
ory and informal logic has ancient roots. It goes back to the ancient
but much neglected and misunderstood field called “dialectic” by the
Greeks. To begin to grasp the nature of the interdisciplinary tensions
between logic and rhetoric, it is necessary to go back to the roots of both
subjects.


2. The Old Dialectic of the Greeks


In the ancient world, dialectic was an art of questioning and replying in
which two speech partners took turns. The questioner begins by asking
a question that requires the respondent to make a choice on an issue.
Once the respondent has chosen a position, the questioner can pursue
the discussion further by drawing inferences based on the respondent’s
answers (Kapp 1942, p. 12). The exact purpose of dialectic is not known.
But the best-known examples of it are the dialogues written by Plato in
which Socrates plays the role of questioner. Plato called dialectic “the art
concerning discussions” (Robinson 1953, p. 69). As we see Socrates using
dialectic in the Platonic dialogues, it appears to be a critical art. Socrates
uses a series of questions to probe into a respondent’s position on some
issue or problem, and he tends to finds weaknesses and contradictions
in the position. In the early dialogues, dialectic seems like a critical art
that has a negative aspect. But Plato had a very high opinion of dialectic
as a method of finding the truth of a matter. His view of what dialectic is
changed in his writings, but the term was always used to describe “the ideal
method, whatever that might be” (Robinson 1953, p. 70). The best we can
say is that in Plato’s view, dialectic was a method of question and answer,
of the kind used by Socrates in the dialogues to cast philosophical light


12 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


on a question by examining in a critical way answers that seem plausible
to some.

Aristotle defined “dialectic” in a more practical and more exact way.
Like Plato, he saw it as a way of critically examining opinions that seem
plausible. But he tied plausibility to the notion of the endoxon, or gen-
erally accepted opinion. In On Sophistical Refutations (165b10), Aristotle
defined dialectical arguments as “those which, starting from generally
accepted opinions [endoxa], reason to establish a contradiction.” This
definition makes dialectic similar to the way Plato saw it, but it is more
precise, because it is tied to the notion of a generally accepted opinion.
According to the Topics (100a25), generally accepted opinions are “those
which commend themselves to all or to the majority or to the wise — that
is, to all of the wise or to the majority or to the most famous and distin-
guished of them.” For Aristotle, then, dialectic was the use of reasoning to
draw logical consequences, and especially contradictions, from premises
that are generally accepted opinions. Aside from its uses in philosophy,
dialectic of the kind defined by Aristotle could be used to teach skills
of arguing and debate. It could have everyday uses in casual conversa-
tions, and Aristotle also claimed that it is useful for critically questioning
and discussing scientific axioms (Topics, 101b4). It is clear that for Plato
and Aristotle, and for the Greek philosophers generally, dialectic was
an important method. It was their attempt to reply to the criticism that
argumentation skills could be used in sophistry to deceptively make the
weaker argument appear stronger.

Aristotle saw dialectic and rhetoric as closely connected. The first sen-
tence of the Rhetoric (135441) is: “Rhetoric is the counterpart of dialectic.”
He saw both arts as having to do with persuasion. Regarding rhetoric, he
wrote, “The modes of persuasion are the only true constituents of the
art: everything else is merely accessory” (Rhetoric, 1354a13-1354a14).
He criticized the writers of the manuals on rhetoric for saying noth-
ing about enthymemes, for they are “the substance of rhetorical per-
suasion.” What did he mean by “enthymeme”? The conventional opin-
ion throughout the history of logic since Aristotle has been that an
enthymeme is an argument with an implicit premise that needs to be
made explicit so that the argument becomes deductively valid. The tra-
ditional example, with the implicit premise in parentheses, is the argu-
ment “All men are mortal (Socrates is a man), therefore Socrates is mor-
tal.” In the Prior Analytics (70a10) Aristotle wrote: “An enthymeme is an
incomplete argument [ syllogismos] from plausibility or sign.” This passage
has long been taken as evidence for the conventional opinion that an


The Old Dialectic of the Greeks 13


Aristotelian enthymeme is an argument with a missing premise. The
word “incomplete” (aieles) shifts attention away from Aristotle’s primary
concern with arguments from plausibility and sign (Hitchcock 1995).
However, a minority of Aristotle scholars, notably including Burnyeat,
have felt that the traditional view of the enthymeme as an incomplete
syllogism is an error. Burnyeat (1994, p. 6) argued on the basis of tex-
tual evidence that the key word “incomplete” (ateles) may have been
inserted in the eleventh century. The sentence without the term ateles
is repeated three times in the Rhetoric: “An ethymeme is syllogismos from
plausibility or sign” (Tindale i999, p. 10). Burnyeat argued that Aristo-
tle meant by “enthymeme” an argument from plausibility that does not
have to be incomplete. What Aristotle really referred to, according to his
view, is a kind of argument that rests on a premise that is only true “for
the most part.” In terms of modern argumentation theory, it would be
called a defeasible argument of the kind represented by an argumenta-
tion scheme. As a warrant, instead of a universal generalization of the
syllogistic type, it would have a defeasible generalization that is subject to
exceptions. Tindale (1999, p. 11) characterizes them as forms of proba-
ble argument that can “take on a number of different strategies or lines
of argument.” He identified these types of argument with the Aristotelian
topics. Topics represent defeasible forms of argumentation or strategies
of argumentation, such as argument from consequences.

As Tindale (1999, p. 12) has explained, the enthymeme was seen by
Aristotle as connected to a special kind of audience that is interested
in non-scientific arguments that are less rationally compelling than sci-
entific arguments tend to be. Thus the enthymeme is the vehicle for
mass media rhetorical arguments in which the audience is active and
autonomous. If Burnyeat’s view is right, both Aristotelian rhetoric and
Aristotelian dialectic need to be viewed in a new light. Both subjects need
to be rethought and seen as based on what Aristotle called their “true con-
stituents,” namely, enthymemes or argumentation schemes representing
plausible arguments. Be that as it may, the history of the two subjects
is that they grew apart. Rhetoric survived, but not in the form Aristotle
would have liked, and dialectic faded into obscurity.

Dialectic failed to survive in the mainstream as a significant skill or
method after the fall of the ancient civilizations of Greece and Rome.
Especially after the Enlightenment, science came to represent the only
reliable model of rational argument and evidence. In the new model
of scientific reasoning, theorems were to be rigorously deduced from
self-evident axioms by deductive logic. The idea of dialectical critical


14 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


argumentation commanding rational assent outside science, or question-
ing scientific knowledge, had no important place in modern thinking
after the rise of science. But Kant and Hegel attempted to find a place
for it. Kant saw it as a negative art that inevitably leads to contradictions
because it tries to resolve problems that are beyond the reach of empiri-
cal data and human understanding. According to Kant, we can know the
world of appearances only as structured by our own understanding of
it. We cannot know the world of “things in themselves,” even though we
have a strong urge to think we can. For Kant, dialectic represents the lim-
its of human understanding. Basing his philosophy on the empiricism of
David Hume, Kant saw empirical science and mathematics (represented
by Euclidean geometry) as representing the kind of knowledge that is
possible for humans. Although we naturally try to go beyond these limits
of our understanding to abstract metaphysics, Kant argued that this quest
is futile. And it was dialectic, or his version of it, that was used by Kant as
the tool to show that we cannot go beyond these limits. In this respect,
Kant was a modern thinker who took scientific knowledge as the model
of rationality and saw dialectic only as a lesser art. Dialectic, on Kant’s
view of it, could be used only in a negative or critical way to show the
futility of trying to go beyond the limits of mathematical reasoning and
scientific observation.

Hegel, unimpressed by Kant’s warning, saw dialectic as the way of
going beyond mere appearances and investigating “things in themselves.”
Karl Marx built his philosophy of communism on Hegelian foundations.
Hegel and Marx did not see dialectic as a purely verbal art of conver-
sation, in the Greek way. They saw dialectic as studying contradictions
between events in the real world. For example, Marx wrote about the
contradictions in capitalism. In modern language, the term “dialectic”
has come to be equated with Hegelian-Marxist notions. Thus it has been
discredited as a serious scientific or philosophical notion. One takes some
risks now by even using the term. But given the heritage of the term as
representing such an important and central notion in Greek philosophy,
it is better not to give up on it. Thus the new dialectic needs to be seen
as having Greek roots. What is needed is a Greek revival.

By linking dialectic to the endoxon, Aristotle had done something highly
significant. Dialectic was no longer confined to abstract philosophical dis-
cussions on arcane and technical philosophical problems. It now became
linked to public opinion and widely held views that could be on any sub-
ject. The premises of a dialectical argument were taken by Aristotle to
be the received views held to be plausible by both the public and the


The Opposition between Rhetoric and Dialectic 15


experts at any given time. Note that such views can change over time
and can be different in different cultures or countries. Dialectic, on this
view of it, is flexible. Of course, on the modern view of rational argu-
mentation, this flexibility is precisely the defect that makes dialectic unfit
to command rational assent. For in the modern view, as emphasized by
Descartes, knowledge can come only from true and self-evident axioms
that are fixed as true and never change. This static view of rationality was
also that so highly promoted by Plato. In contrast, on the Aristotelian
view of dialectical argument, it is based on premises that are not fixed
and that change over time. Thus it is easy to see why dialectic has not
been highly valued for so long and has been seen as an ancient notion of
no use to represent a kind of argument or evidence of serious worth to
command rational assent. At the same time, it is becoming increasingly
apparent, as we overcome our modernistic preconceptions, that some-
thing like dialectic of the Aristotelian sort can be extremely useful as a
method. Of course, where it can be most useful is in the evaluation of
argumentation, especially the kinds of arguments used in law and public
affairs. Indeed, the notion of democracy, as well as our Anglo-American
system of law, would seem to rest on our capability of understanding and
judging arguments on matters of public opinion.


3. The Opposition between Rhetoric and Dialectic


The Sophists were itinerant teachers who taught rhetorical techniques
of argumentation, especially of the kind that could be used in the courts
or in political speeches. Greek philosophy was strongly influenced by
the Sophists, and it was through them that both rhetoric and dialectic
emerged as significant philosophical subjects, taking the shape they did.
However, as philosophy grew, it came to be seen as an abstract and gen-
eral subject motivated by finding the truth of a matter. Philosophy took
on a critical and skeptical tone; rhetoric, as developed by Sophists, had
always been seen as a practical subject. The aim of rhetoric was that of
persuasion or advocacy. This aim often requires examining both sides of
an argument, but the aim, in the end, is to advocate the one side. Philos-
ophy came to regard itself as a discipline that needed to consider both
sides of an argument, looking at strengths and weaknesses in arguments
on both sides in a balanced way. Given this perceived divergence of aim,
it was natural that an opposition grew between rhetoric and dialectic.
The criticism of rhetoric, and even suspicion and hostility toward it,
is perhaps most pronounced and sharply formulated in the philosophy


16 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


of Plato. Plato often compared dialectic and rhetoric and consistently
portrayed rhetoric as inferior and even untrustworthy. His method of
attack was to use the bias ad hominem argument against the Sophists.
Plato argued from the premise that the Sophists took fees for their
lectures, whereas Socrates talked to anyone without charging any fee.
He argued that because the Sophists were motivated by financial gain,
it can be concluded that they have no regard for the truth of a mat-
ter. In other words, Plato charged the Sophists with being biased. He
used this argument against them to discredit rhetoric as a discipline,
or at least to compare rhetoric unfavorably with dialectic. This attack on
rhetoric emerged in many places in the Platonic dialogues. Krabbe (2000,
p- 206) has cited a few of the leading passages. For example, in the Georgias
(463a-463d), Socrates denounced rhetoric as nothing more than “flat-
tery” (kolakeia). Plato used the word “semblance” (eidolon) in describing
the role of rhetoric in politics, and for Plato appearances are misleading
and are not a good guide to the truth.

After Plato portrayed rhetoric as inferior to dialectic and emphasized
its capability for deception, the ad hominem argument he used against
it seemed to stick. For over two thousand years, the term “rhetoric” has
taken on negative connotations. Although Aristotle took a more balanced
view of the two subjects, and saw rhetoric in a more positive light than
Plato, an opposition was still evident in his treatment of them. Hohmann
wrote that Aristotle thought of dialectic as “a rather pure and theoret-
ically sound method aimed at a cooperative search for cognitive truth”
(2000, p. 223). By contrast to such a pure method, rhetoric is seen as com-
promised and even as untrustworthy. As Hohmann phrased it, rhetoric
is portrayed as “a seriously tainted and practically compromised knack
serving a competitive quest for persuasive success.”

Even in Aristotle, then, because of the contrast with dialectic, rhetoric
still comes across as a subject with negative implications. While in the
present day, it is not hard to find suspicion and mistrust about rhetoric,
there is not much respect for philosophy as a subject, either. By the close
of the twentieth century, philosophy had become a highly abstract subject
for the most part, seen by the public as removed from reality and use-
less. By the second half of the nineteenth century, neither rhetoric nor
logic were subjects held in high esteem in public opinion. As Whatley
wrote (Elements of Rhetoric, 1863, preface, p. 1): “The subject [rhetoric]
stands perhaps but a few degrees above Logic in popular estimation; the
one being generally regarded by the vulgar as the Art of bewildering the
learned by frivolous subtleties; the other, that of deluding the multitude


The Opposition between Rhetoric and Dialectic 17


by specious falsehood.” At the beginning of the twentieth century, mathe-
matical logic soared to new heights in both philosophy and mathematics.
But the promise of formal symbolic logic to provide a dialectical method
for the evaluation of philosophical or practical argumentation was never
fulfilled. The parts of logic relating to argumentation in natural language,
like the subject of informal fallacies, remained undeveloped.

Even now, the rift between dialectic and rhetoric remains, and it seems
very hard to break down the barriers between the traditional disciplines
of logic and rhetoric. It is perhaps for this very reason that neither field
seems to be capable of growing and fulfilling its potential for usefulness as
a scientific discipline. This problem is more than a mere matter of histor-
ical accident. There are fundamental differences between the two fields
in what they do and how they do it. Even if we consider dialectic, which
could also be called informal logic or applied logic, there is one very
great difference between it and rhetoric. In dialectical argumentation,
two participants take turns. First, the proponent makes a move and then
the respondent makes a move responding to that prior move. Dialectic
always takes as its framework of argumentation a connected sequence of
moves in which the parties take turns. Rhetoric does not appear to fit this
model. In traditional rhetorical argumentation, a speaker is seen as mak-
ing a presentation to an audience, typically a mass audience. They listen
to and/or watch the performance. The speaker is active. He is an arguer
who makes claims and supports them with arguments. But the audience is
relatively passive with respect to advancing argumentation. The audience
may respond through eye contact, by shouting “hurrah” or “boo,” or by
responding to a public opinion poll after the speech. But they don’t seem
to be active respondents of the kind that one would expect in dialecti-
cal argumentation. Many examples of mass media argumentation, while
they appear to fit the rhetorical format obviously enough, do not seem to
fit the dialectical format at all, or at best only indirectly. This contrast of
structure is perhaps the deepest and most impressive difference between
rhetoric and dialectic.

Leff (2000, p. 247) recognized this difference and expressed it con-
cisely by writing that dialectic proceeds by question and answer, whereas
rhetoric proceeds through uninterrupted discourse. He also cited three
other differences between rhetoric and dialectic, which he called “differ-
ences of degree”: (1) Dialectic deals with abstract issues, whereas rhetoric
deals with specific issues. (2) Dialectic deals with propositions and infer-
ences, whereas rhetoric deals with how propositions relate to social norms
and circumstances. (3) Dialectic uses technical language, while rhetoric


18 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


accommodates and embellishes ordinary language. Leff argued (p. 247)
that despite their very different orientation and emphasis, the differences
between rhetoric and dialectic are not as sharp or irreconcilable as tradi-
tion has long held. Dialectic, if it is to be a practical subject that is useful
to analyze and evaluate actual arguments in given texts of discourse in
natural language, does have an empirical aspect. If applied to cases of
fallacies of the kind that deceive or trip up arguers, dialectic will have an
empirical and even psychological or sociological aspect. If it is applied
to real cases, it can scarcely be denied that it has some sort of empirical
component. Thus the contrast between rhetoric as having an empirical
method and dialectic as having a normative method may not be as sharp
or absolute as it is often taken to be.

Another difference between rhetoric and dialectic is that their meth-
ods appear to contrast. Rhetoric aims at directing argumentation to a
specific target audience, and the role of a normative or cognitive compo-
nent may not necessarily support this aim, depending on how the rational
the audience is (Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca 1969). According to a
conventional view, rhetoric has to do with the effectiveness of argumen-
tation to persuade or influence a target audience (Tindale 2004). The
presumption of this view is that this influence is one of changing the
beliefs or behavior of the audience. Such a change, it might seem to fol-
low, is purely a matter of the psychology of the audience. For example, in
the case ofa commercial ad used in the mass media, the persuasive impact
of the ad can be judged, it may be assumed, by the subsequent increase
or decrease in sales, measured in numbers of transactions or in dollars.
In the case of a political message, the persuasive impact can be measured
in public opinion polls or in votes. On this view, rhetoric is a branch of
psychology, and the element of persuasion can be measured by empirical
indicators. So conceived, it seems that rhetoric has nothing to do with the
dialectical structure of the argument used to make the persuasive appeal.
It seems to have nothing to do with whether the argument is structurally
correct by some standard, such as that of deductive logic. The reason
presumably is that an argument could be structurally correct, but an audi-
ence could fail to find it quite persuasive. Or on the other hand, it could
fail to be structurally correct as an argument, but an audience could find
it quite persuasive anyway. Thus, for example, in public relations, adver-
tising, or mass marketing, the concern seems to be exclusively with the
effectiveness of the argument. The concept of persuasion effectiveness is
seen as purely instrumental and psychological, so that rationality has no
part in it.


Topics and Fallacies 19


Those working in the fields of rhetorical persuasion often operate on
the assumption that effectiveness is the exclusive technical aim of their
craft. The corollary of this assumption is that matters of the rationality
of the arguments they use, or their structure as correct arguments, are
of no concern or utility. But more recently, there has appeared a certain
ambivalence about this view, as observed by Schiappa (1995) and Jacobs
(2000). Schiappa commented that despite the occasional impulses of
rhetorical theorists to take the rationality of argumentation into account,
how they actually treat argumentation in practice often seems to reduce
to the issue of effectiveness. Jacobs (2000, p. 273) made the similar com-
ment that while rhetorical analysts don’t explicitly accept the criterion of
effectiveness as their exclusive aim in theory, they “tend to accept it in
practice.” Its methodology is to measure how successful argumentation
is to persuade an audience or secure compliance to an action or policy.
This goal appears to be psychological in nature, and therefore rhetor-
ical argumentation, it would appear, needs to be evaluated empirically
by the methods of the social sciences. The usual method is to run a poll
to judge how successful argumentation was in a given case. In cases of
argumentation techniques used in mass media ads, collection of numer-
ical data measures empirically how many more units of a product were
sold. The methods of dialectic are visibly different, and do not appear
to fit with social science methodology. The question to be determined
is whether a given move in argumentation serves to contribute to some
type of dialogue of which it is a part. This contrast also seems fairly deep
and dramatic. Dialectic is a normative subject, whereas rhetoric is con-
ventionally seen as an empirical subject that fits in fairly well with the
usual social science model for collecting data by empirical observation
and testing. However, Leff (2000, p. 245) has argued convincingly that
the issue should not be seen as one of “a contrast between a normative
art of dialectic and a merely empirical art of rhetoric.” He noted (p. 244)
that Aristotle defined rhetoric not in terms of persuasive effect but as a
faculty for observing in a given case the available means of persuasion.
Following this viewpoint, the sharp division between dialectic as purely
normative and rhetoric as purely empirical is not sustainable.


4. Topics and Fallacies


The term “topics,” from the Greek word for “having to do with com-
monplaces,” refers to classical and medieval sets of generally accepted
arguments that can be used in a speech or composition (Bloomer 2001,


20 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


p- 779). Topics have long been recognized as rhetorical devices repre-
senting common forms of argument that can be used for inventions of
arguments in a speech. However, they have never proved to be very useful
for this purpose, despite the attempts to make them so, especially by
Aristotle and Cicero (Bloomer 2001, p. 781). The topics appear to be
very similar to what are now called argumentation schemes. However, it
is uncertain what the function of the topics is supposed to be. Because
they didn’t prove to be useful for assisting argument invention, later
writers, especially in medieval logic, tried to recast them in a dialectical
role as devices that might be used to judge the worth of arguments already
given. Perhaps the topics were not stated clearly enough or perhaps they
were not fitted well enough into any general system of argument inven-
tion to be useful for rhetorical argumentation.

Any system of argument invention will have to be built on several basic
components, so that arguments needed to prove a claim or to persuade
can be constructed out of them. Basically, there will have to be a target
proposition that is supposed to be proved or refuted, a given base of
premises, and a tool for constructing chains of arguments that move
forward from the premises toward proving this target proposition. Such
systems have been attempted, but not in a formalized way, from ancient
times onward. In modern times, formal systems have been constructed,
called theorem-proving machines. However, these systems work only for
deductive logic, and systems designed to use defeasible argumentation
schemes have notyet been attempted. But itis the defeasible schemes that
would prove most useful for inventing arguments in everyday reasoning,
for example, in forensic debating and in legal argumentation.

One important function especially applicable to rhetorical argumenta-
tion is that of argument construction, providing means for the invention
of new arguments. According to Kienpointner (1997), such topic-based
systems of argument invention in antiquity, medieval, and early modern
times had the following three characteristics.


1, The aim of the system is to search for arguments that could be used
to support or attack some claim that is open to dispute (p. 225).

2. The search process looks not for all conceivable arguments but for
ones that the audience either accepts or can be gotten to accept the
premises, as well as the form of argument leading to the disputed
claim from these premises.

3. The system can have stronger or weaker standards on what counts
as a form of argument by means of which a conclusion can be
shown to follow from a set of premises.


Topics and Fallacies 21


An invention device of this sort could be used to cast around among a set
of facts, or a set of premises accepted by an audience, and find arguments
(argumentations schemes, or forms of argument) that could be used to
prove some claim to the audience that it does not presently accept.

On the other hand, the topics were sometimes represented by the
medievals as having a logical or dialectical function, in contrast to their
invention function. Fallacies are forms of argument that represent weak
inferences, or even deceptive argumentation tactics used to unfairly get
the best of a speech partner. Fallacies are not just arguments that are log-
ically incorrect. They are logically incorrect arguments that appear to be
correct. Fallacies tend to be either erroneous arguments of kinds that look
persuasive, or deceptive arguments that appear to be rationally persua-
sive. In the latter case, they are sophistical tactics that can be used to try to
get the best of a speech partner unfairly, because they look reasonable to
that partner. Thus the concept of fallacy does have a rhetorical element,
meaning that fallacies are kinds of arguments that generally appear to be
reasonable as attempts to persuade a speech partner or a target audience.
In fallacies of mass media argumentation, the fallacious argument is one
that appears reasonable and is persuasive to a mass audience.

Jacobs (2000, p. 273) observed that fallacies are argumentative moves
that seem good when they are not. He also commented that just because
an argument seems reasonable or seems unreasonable, it does not follow
that “it is what it seems” (p. 273). Of course, if an argument looks rea-
sonable to a mass audience, they might be persuaded by it more easily
than by an argument that looks fallacious or unconvincing to them. Or
would they? The P. T. Barnum approach is to assume that the audience
is emotional rather than logical, and can be persuaded even by the most
fallacious argument. Barnum said that you can never go broke underes-
timating the intelligence of an audience. Le Bon is noted for a similar
skepticism. He felt that crowds are moved by emotion, not reason, and
that it is pointless to try to use reason to persuade them. There is some-
thing in these admonitions, for appeals to emotion really are the key
to persuasion of a mass audience. But the Barnum/Le Bon approach
restricts the role of logic (if we can include dialectic and informal logic)
too narrowly. The reason is that even appeals to emotion have argumen-
tation schemes, and thus they have a “logic” or argumentation structure.
Even an audience that responds to an emotional appeal to fear or pity,
or a vicious personal attack, needs to be persuaded by orchestrating that
appeal through forms of argumentation the audience can follow and
respond to. They need to draw the conclusions suggested by the speaker,
following the inferences set up by the speaker in his argumentation. It is


22 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


for this reason that dialectic is connected to rhetoric so that the one sub-
ject is useful and even necessary for the other. Dialectic is about fallacies,
and explains how arguments that seem correct can be flawed underneath
because the argumentation is defective or used for a communicative pur-
pose in some deceptive way.

Rhetoric, when viewed through the framework laid out by Aristotle,
is based on topics or argumentation schemes, and thus has a methodol-
ogy with fundamental normative components. The importance of these
argumentation schemes can be appreciated if one looks at Aristotle’s
Rhetoric in a new light. Aristotle began the Rhetoric by drawing a distinc-
tion between deliberative and forensic oratory. But from the very begin-
ning (Rhetoric 1355a11), he emphasized that the method of constructing
argumentation in either type of oratory is concerned with proof. This
seems a peculiar word to use. It even seems inappropriate, because to us
the term suggests a conclusive type of type of proof that you might find,
for example, in Euclidean geometry. So what does he mean by the term
in this context? He went on to explain that proof is “a sort of demon-
stration,” suggesting that the Euclidean type of proof from axioms to
theorems is exactly what he has in mind. But then in the next sentence
he wrote, “We are most strongly convinced when we suppose anything
to have been demonstrated.” What did he mean by these remarks? To
the modern reader, they just seem wrong. They seem to say that argu-
mentation in rhetoric should be based on the same kind of deductive
form of argument called “proof” that is characteristic of argumentation
in science. This claim just seems wrong to us, because we think that argu-
mentation in rhetoric is generally inconclusive and is based only on per-
suasion. Later, in fact (Rhetoric 1355b2), Aristotle defined rhetoric as “the
faculty of discovering the possible means of persuasion in reference to
any subject whatever.” This definition appears to be at odds with the
hypothesis that rhetoric is all about scientific proof or “demonstration.”
So how can we resolve this puzzle? The answer seems to lie in how Aristo-
tle uses the term “enthymeme.” Evidently, he thinks of an enthymeme as
a kind of argument that is syllogistic in its form. It may not be the same
as a logical (deductively valid) syllogism. But for Aristotle, it appears to
be syllogism-like. He wrote (1355a11) that “the enthymeme is a kind of
syllogism.”

These remarks seem very puzzling because it is unclear what rhetoric
has to do, at its core, with logical syllogisms of the kind we are so famil-
iar with in deductive logic. But Aristotle’s remarks start to make a good
deal of sense as expressing a plausible hypothesis about rhetoric once


Persuasion, Social Influence, and Democracy 23,


we adopt Burnyeat’s view. This view is that the enthymeme represents a
presumptive form of argument that is like a syllogism but is based on a
generalization that is held to be true “only for the most part.” Supporting
this interpretation is the passage at 1355a12 where Aristotle wrote that in
forensic rhetoric, it is not easy to persuade an audience by even the most
accurate scientific knowledge, and therefore, “our proofs and arguments
must rest on generally accepted principles.” On this view, an enthymeme,
in the Aristotelian sense, is a presumptive argumentation scheme based
on a warrant that is claimed to hold generally, but is subject to exceptions.
Given this interpretation, Aristotle’s view of the relationship between
rhetoric and dialectic becomes much clearer and easier to appreciate.
For example, when he wrote (Rhetoric 1355a11) that rhetorical skills are
much more powerful when the speaker can detect bad arguments, we
can easily appreciate how rhetoric and dialectic are connected, and how
both are based on argumentation schemes and both relate to persua-
sion. He defines rhetoric (Rhetoric 1355a14) as “the faculty of discovering
the possible means of persuasion in reference to any subject whenever.”
So defined it might initially seem that rhetoric has very little to do with
dialectic. But a key term is “persuasion.” How is an audience influenced
by a means of persuasion? The answer is that it is persuaded by means of
arguments that are (at least typically) not syllogisms, but kinds of argu-
ments they are familiar with in everyday thinking and discourse. Once
this connection is made, it is not hard to appreciate the plausibility of
the assumption that an audience will be more effectively persuaded by
arguments that they think are reasonable.


5. Persuasion, Social Influence, and Democracy


Now that these various dialectical tools have been explained, they can
be applied to various problems, phenomena, and cases of mass media
argumentation. But of course, many of the readers of this book will still
not be convinced that these tools really can be applied in a useful way
to mass media arguments in the realities of the marketplace and pub-
lic discourse. What should really matter, according to the conventional
viewpoint, are arguments that have social influence in the marketplace
of a free economy and in the marketplace of social decision making in
a democratic political system. The conventional view is that such matters
should be studied by the empirical methods of the social sciences. To
set the direction for the investigations in the rest of the book, and try to
put such readers in a receptive frame of mind, two points are made in


24 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


the final section of this chapter. The first relates to some recent findings
on persuasion in social psychology. The second has to do with the wider
implications of rhetoric and dialectic in relation to argumentation in the
public sphere, especially in law and democratic politics.

Robert B. Cialdini, a social psychologist, has studied techniques of per-
suasion empirically. In his popular book (Cialdini 1993), he recognized
seven techniques that he saw as basic to social influence.

Contrast is a technique concerning the sequence in which a persuasive
message is presented. For example (Cialdini 1993, pp. 25-26), a sales-
person in a clothing store, in order to sell an expensive sweater, may show
the customer an even more expensive sweater first. Then by comparison,
the cost of the sweater presented second may not seem so exorbitant.

Reciprocity is a technique by which a proponent makes a respondent
more likely to consider or accept his argument by making the respondent
obliged to the proponent in advance of the argument. For example, in
an experiment by Regan (1971), raffle sales were increased when par-
ticipants were given a free soft drink before being asked to buy a raffle
ticket.

Consistency is the technique of using an arguer’s previous commit-
ments, or getting him to commit to propositions that will support the
conclusion you want to persuade him to accept. Cialdini (1993, pp. 76-
77) gave the example of how the Chinese interrogators during the Korean
war began the process of indoctrinating American prisoners of war by ask-
ing each prisoner to prepare a list of problems in the United States. This
seemed harmless at first, but later it turned out to be a powerful device
to assist persuasion.

Social proof presents evidence of what other people think as a reason for
accepting a proposition or going along with a recommended course of
action. A case cited by Cialdini was the mass suicide in Jonestown, Guyana,
in which 910 people voluntarily drank poison in an orderly way. Confor-
mity seemed to play a large role in the technique the charismatic leader,
Rev. Jim Jones, used to persuade the group to carry out this extraordinary
action.

Liking is the positive attitude that the person or group persuaded has
toward the persuader. The example given by Cialdini (1993, pp. 163-
166) is the hostess who invites all her friends to a Tupperware party. They
like the hostess, and this attitude makes the persuasive task of the hostess
that much easier.

Authority is the use of an expert opinion or accepted authority as a
technique of persuasion. Cialdini (1993, pp. 212-213) uses the example


Persuasion, Social Influence, and Democracy 25


of a physician who tells a patient that he should take a particular
medication.

Scarcity is the technique of telling a respondent that the item he is
thinking of buying is in short supply, possibly because there is competition
for it. Cialdini (1993, p. 197) used the example of a salesperson who told
a customer that the machine the customer is looking at has just been
bought by another person, but there might be one left.

Cialdini classified these seven techniques as cognitive short cuts, mean-
ing that they go straight to a conclusion when there is no time to engage
in a more lengthy analytical process of thinking. They are thinking tech-
niques we all use in situations where hard evidence is insufficient to
resolve a problem or make a decision by more thoughtful cognitive pro-
cessing, but where a quick decision can be made on the basis of a guess
or presumption. Thus when used by an arguer at the opportune moment
in a deliberation, they can be powerful techniques of persuasion.

In the following chapters, these seven techniques will be encountered
with some regularity. Some of them are associated with argumentation
schemes and also with traditional fallacies. For example, the technique
of authority is obviously related to the argumentation scheme for appeal
to expert opinion. Social proof is very closely related to the appeal to
popular opinion, a form of argument studied in chapter 2. Others of the
techniques are not forms of argument, but argumentation strategies of
various kinds. Contrast is an argumentation strategy that is not closely
associated with any particular form of argument, but can be devised in
advance by a persuader as a framework into which to fit a sequence of
argumentation. It is related to the argumentation strategy called dissocia-
tion by Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca (196g) as explained in chapter 8.
Consistency falls into both categories. It is associated with a form of argu-
mentation called argument from commitment in chapter 3, section 3.
Using this argumentation scheme, the proponent argues from the com-
mitments of the respondent. But commitment-based argumentation is
central to all the types of dialogue in the new dialectic, and is a strategy
used in all the various argumentation schemes.

At any rate, awareness of the seven powerful persuasion techniques
shown to be so important in social influence by Cialdini is extremely
useful for linking dialectic to empirical work on how people respond to
persuasion. We now proceed to the second point, as the closing consid-
eration of this chapter, thus pointing the way to the studies undertaken
in the next chapters. Many of the case studies of argumentation treated
in these chapters concern arguments that can’t just be viewed from a


26 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


simple rhetorical or dialectical framework of a persuading arguer and a
single respondent who is the target of the argument message. Many of
the arguments involve policies that are public in nature and may even
be cast in law as rules binding at the national level. Of course, if we look
back to the Greek origins of dialectic and rhetoric once again, these sub-
jects originally rose out of the need to contend with legal and political
argumentation in the democratic form of government of the Greek city-
states. As Wenzel (1990, p. 14) emphasized, Aristotle, Cicero, Isocrates,
and other ancient rhetorical theorists linked rhetoric to politics and law.
Wenzel (p. 13) argued that in fact rhetoric, dialectic, and logic all origi-
nated in ancient Greece “to meet certain practical needs of people who
were learning how to manage democratic government.” It is, of course,
fairly obvious how rhetoric applies to politics in democratic government.
What is less obvious is how dialectic might apply to the public sphere.
Wenzel (p. 14) showed very clearly how it does when he wrote: “Demo-
cratic government requires the exercise of human judgment to choose
among alternatives and that judgment requires skilled advocates to artic-
ulate the various options in public deliberation.” At the same time, this
remark hints at the interdependence of rhetoric and dialectic. Dialectic
has to examine and weigh all the relevant arguments on both sides of an
issue to be decided. But it requires a skilled advocate, a rhetorician, to
articulate the arguments in a persuasive way.


6. Argumentation Schemes


It wasn’t until the recent exploration of new methods of argumenta-
tion theory and the study of fallacies that prospects for either dialectic
or rhetoric began to improve. One especially important tool is the clas-
sification and analysis of so-called argumentation schemes, or common
forms of argumentation. Argumentation schemes are premise-conclusion
inference structures that represent common types of arguments used in
everyday discourse, as well as in special contexts, such as those of legal
or scientific argumentation. They include deductive and inductive forms
of argument, but also forms of argument that fall into a third category,
called defeasible, presumptive, or abductive. The study of schemes grad-
ually began to be developed, motivated partly by rhetoric, but also by
the need in logic to deal with informal fallacies and other problems
of informal logic. This work originated mainly in philosophy depart-
ments and in speech communication departments, but after a while
it became interdisciplinary, including researchers from fields such as


Argumentation Schemes 27


linguistics and computing. Joint projects developed; for example, the
recent Perthshire Conference on Argument and Computing had work-
ing groups combining expertise in the fields of law, computing, commu-
nication, and philosophy.

The new rhetoric of Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca (1969) began to
study various common forms of argument used not only in rhetorical
and philosophical argumentation but in law, science, and many other
contexts of discourse as well. Of course, many such forms of argument
are listed and treated quite extensively by Aristotle in his Topics. A table
drawing up comparisons among the list of twenty-eight topics found in
Arsitotle’s Rhetoric and the thirteen argumentation schemes in The New
Rhetoric (1969) of Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca has been constructed
by Warnick (2000). Throughout the long history of the study of so-called
topics (topoi), or common forms of argument, their role in dialectic and
rhetoric has been controversial. Were they aids to memory in debate,
were they rhetorical devices for arguing in a speech, or were they logical
forms of argument of some undetermined sort? They are often referred
to as “places” where you can find an argument. In rhetoric, they have
often been seen as useful for invention — that is, to help a speaker think
up a new argument to support advocacy of a claim.

As one looks over the comparative table of argumentation schemes
from Pereleman and Olbrechts-Tyteca and topics from Aristotle’s Rhetoric
listed in Warnick (2000, pp. 120-128), one finds some common and
familiar forms of argument represented. Other forms appear obscure
and are hard to relate to common argumentation. A familiar one is argu-
ment from example, a weak form of argument that is sometimes hard to
distinguish from explanation. Argument from analogy is another famil-
iar one found in both sources. The table shows that there are forms of
argument common to both the ancient and modern accounts. But it also
points up the difficulties with Aristotelian topics and the argumentation
schemes of Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca. The forms of argument are
not worked out clearly by formalizing them and using case studies or
realistic examples to show how the form applies to a common variety of
cases. To advance the subject a bit further, we have to turn to the more
systematic accounts of schemes given in Kienpointner (1992) and Wal-
ton (1996). The best introduction to this work is to give the example of
argument from expert opinion, developed at length in Walton (19974).

Presumptive argumentation schemes are modeled with the help of two
components. One is a representation of the form of the argument. The
other is a set of critical questions matching that form of argument. The


28 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


appeal to expert opinion, also called argument from expert opinion, is
an example of a common presumptive form of argument. For example,
in court, a ballistics expert may be called in as a witness to testify about
a bullet found at a crime scene. The first component of the argumenta-
tion scheme for argument from expert opinion is the following form of
argument (Walton 19972, p. 210).


Form of Argument from Expert Opinion

Major Premise: Source Fis an expert in subject domain S containing
proposition A.

Minor Premise: FE asserts that proposition A (in domain S) is true
(false).

Conclusion: A may plausibly be taken to be true (false).


Argument from expert opinion is typically a presumptive form of argu-
ment, meaning that it carries tentative probative weight in a dialogue. But
presumptive arguments of this kind are defeasible, meaning that they are
subject to defeat at some next point in the dialogue. As the logic text-
books tell us, appeal to expert opinion can even be fallacious in some
cases. The problem is that there is a natural tendency to defer to an
expert, and it is easy to give in to this tendency uncritically, without mak-
ing the effort to ask critical questions. Thus the second component of
the argumentation scheme for appeal to expert opinion is the following
list of six basic critical questions (Walton 1997a, p. 223).


Critical Questions for the Argument from Expert Opinion


1. Expertise Question: How credible is Eas an expert source?

2. Field Question: Is Ean expert in the field that A is in?

3. Opinion Question: What did FE assert that implies A?

4. Trustworthiness Question: Is E personally reliable as a source?

5. Consistency Question: Is A consistent with what other experts assert?
6. Backup Evidence Question: Is A’s assertion based on evidence?


The evaluation of argumentation based on appeal to expert opinion takes
the form of a dialogue. If a proponent puts forward an argument that
has the form of the argumentation scheme above, and the premises are
based on good evidence, then the argument carries probative weight.
This means that the respondent in the dialogue is obliged to provision-
ally accept the conclusion of the argument. But the respondent also has
the option of asking appropriate critical questions. If he asks such a crit-
ical question, the proponent has the burden of proof, meaning that he
must either answer the question or the argument is defeated. That is, the


Argumentation Schemes 29


proponent must answer the critical question adequately or he must give
up the appeal to expert opinion as an argument carrying presumptive
weight in the dialogue.

The technique of evaluating arguments defeasible through the use of
a set of special critical questions matching each argumentation schemes
is due to Arthur Hastings (1963). Hastings, in his innovative Ph.D. thesis
at Northwestern University, set out a list of many common schemes with a
set of critical questions accompanying each scheme. An argument fitting
a scheme is defeated if an appropriate critical question is asked but not
answered. As the field of argumentation studies developed, this approach
became widely adopted, for example, by Kienpointner (1992) and Gren-
nan (1997). Now argumentation schemes are being used in artificial
intelligence, logic programs, natural language text generation, argumen-
tation systems for legal reasoning, and multi-agent technology used on
the Internet.5 The most useful and widely used tool so far developed
in argumentation theory is the set of argumentation schemes, especially
those representing defeasible argumentation. A defeasible argument is
one in which the conclusion can be accepted tentatively in relation to the
evidence known at a given point of the investigation in a case, but may
need to be retracted as new evidence comes in.

A defeasible argument is typically not very strong by itself, but still
may be strong enough to provide evidence to warrant rational accep-
tance of its conclusion on a balance of considerations as an investiga-
tion moves forward. The investigation can then move ahead, even under
conditions of uncertainty and lack of knowledge, using the conclusion
tentatively accepted. The recognition of defeasible argumentation has
led to a paradigm shift in logic, artificial intelligence (AI), and cognitive
science concerning forms of argument, such as argument from expert
opinion, traditionally categorized as fallacious in logic textbooks. Among
the defeasible argumentation schemes that have been studied are argu-
ment from sign, argument from example, argument from commitment,
argument from position to know, argument from expert opinion, ad
hominem argument, argument from analogy, argument from precedent,
argument from gradualism, and several types of slippery slope argument.


5 Recent conferences and workshops dedicated to the theory of argumentation in arti-
tifical intelligence include the International Conference on Computational Models of
Argument (COMMA 2006), the Computational Models of Natural Argument (CMNA)
workshop series, and the Argumentation in Multi-Agent Systems (ArgMAS 04, 05, 06)
workshop series. In 2007, there has been a call for papers on a special issue of the IEEE
journal Intelligent Systems on the topic of argumentation technology.


30 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


Among others that might be mentioned are argument from popular
opinion, argument from verbal classification, practical reasoning, argu-
ment from sunk costs, argument from ignorance, argument from cause
to effect, argument from correlation to cause, argument from positive or
negative consequences, argument from threat, and fear appeal argument.
Such arguments are now admitted to be reasonable in many instances,
even if they are tricky and not always reliable because they are defeasible
and hence inherently subject to failure. Argument from expert opin-
ion, for example, had traditionally been treated in logic textbooks under
the category of the fallacy of appeal to authority. And we can get into a
lot of trouble, for example, concerning “junk science,” with such argu-
ments. However, currently it is admitted that we could not get by without
such arguments, for example, in the courts, where testimony by scientific
experts and much of the evidence, including ballistics and DNA evidence,
is based on appeal to expert opinion. Hence the importance of defeasible
argumentation schemes has become readily apparent in the recent body
of work on informal fallacies, leading to the new idea that such “fallacies”
should no longer be treated as fallacies. We will see in this book that
one of the most central argumentation schemes underlying many argu-
ments associated with the traditional informal fallacies is the scheme for
practical reasoning.


7. Basic Practical Reasoning


An important point made recently by Kock (2003, 2006) is that con-
temporary theories of argumentation have tended to define rhetorical
argumentation with reference to the arguer’s goal of effective persuasion.
For example, Johnson (2000) has made a contribution to argumentation
theory by emphasizing the dialectical aspect of rhetoric in which he sees
rhetorical argumentation as underpinned by an informal logic that has
the aim of rational persuasion as its goal. Van Eemeren and Houtlosser
(1g99b, 2000, 2001, 2002) advocate a view in which rhetoric is seen as
a persuasive effort at winning a discussion by resolving a difference of
opinion in one’s favor. Although acknowledging the importance of both
these views, Kock (2006) has also criticized them because they overlook
the view of Aristotle that rhetoric is rooted in deliberation, a form of
decision making that comes to a conclusion about which action to take
given choices among alternative courses of action. The problem pointed
out by Kock is that although these contemporary theories of argumen-
tation have taken steps toward reconciling rhetoric and dialectic, they
haven’t gone far enough. By emphasizing the view that argumentation is


Basic Practical Reasoning 31


exclusively about giving reasons to accept a proposition is true or false,
they have tended to overlook deliberative rhetoric. The purpose of a
deliberative discussion is not to prove that a designated proposition is
true or false but to select a prudent course of action by looking at the
reasons for and against this action compared with the alternative actions
available in a given situation. To follow up on Kock’s insight and pave
the way for our analysis of deliberation as contrasted with persuasion
dialogue in chapter 2, we now turn to the argumentation scheme most
characteristic of deliberative reasoning.

The form of reasoning used in appeals to fear and pity is the so-called
Aristotelian practical syllogism, or what is more often called practical
reasoning (Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca 1969; Walton 1990). To use
a simple example for illustration, consider the following inference.


My goal is to be in London before 4:30.
The 2:30 train from here arrives in London at 4:15.
So, I shall catch the 2:30 train.


There might be all kinds of complications. It might be cheaper or faster to
fly to London. Still, one can appreciate how this kind of reasoning works
in its simplest form. Aristotelian practical reasoning has now been much
studied, both in philosophy and in computer science (particularly in AT),
and its properties as a structure of logical inference are now becoming
better known and formalized. Practical reasoning is carried out by an
agent (or group of agents), an entity that has goals (intentions) and can
carry out actions. Practical reasoning is made up of a chain of practical
inferences. A practical inference has two premises. One states that an
agent has a certain goal, meaning something that she thinks ought to
be realized if possible. The other premise cites some form of action as
a means, or part of a means, of carrying out the goal. Goals are often
stated at a high level of abstraction. For example, an agent’s goal could
be to maximize her health. The question then is one of which specific
means would contribute to this general goal. Practical inference meshes
such abstract goals with the specifics of an agent’s given situation. So, for
example, some action that would contribute to my health might actually
be harmful to your health. Here, there is a conflict of goals at an abstract
level. However, in some cases, goals are highly specific. For example, my
goal might be to arrive at a specific destination at a specific time. Practical
reasoning is the form of argumentation underlying deliberative rhetoric.
In section g below, amore complex example that brings out the rhetorical
dimension will be offered.


32 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


Practical reasoning is a chaining together of practical inferences of
the following form, where the first-person pronoun represents an agent
(Walton 1990). An agent is an entity capable of carrying out actions, of
seeing the consequences of these actions, and of modifying its subsequent
actions on the basis of what it has seen (Wooldridge and Jennings 1995).
The structure of practical reasoning as an argumentation scheme is built
on the assumption that there can be a theory of action representing the
logical form of imperative reasoning that concludes in a directive for an
agent to carry out an action. According to one theory, an action may be
analyzed as the bringing about of an event or state of affairs, represented
as a proposition made true or false by what an agent does (Horty and
Belnap 1995). As shown in an overview of this type of formal action system
(Segerberg 1984), actions fit into sequences called routines (sometimes
called scripts in AI) that represent standard ways of doing things. A good
example described by Segerberg is a recipe for a culinary dish that lists
a series of actions as steps that need to be carried out in a certain order
in order to realize a goal, such as baking a chocolate cake, for example.
On this model, outcomes of actions are represented as propositions A, B,
C,...,8o that carrying out an action can be described as bringing about
a stated proposition by making it true.

Agents are seen as having the capability to bring about entities called
states of affairs (Walton 1990). States of affairs can obtain or not obtain
in a given case. They can be thought of as propositions that can be made
true or false by an agent. Using the primitive notions of agent and state
of affairs, the structure of the practical inference can be represented as
follows. The letters A, B, C,..., stand for states of affairs, or propositions
brought about (made true) by agents.


Instrumental Practical Reasoning

Bringing about A is my goal.

Bringing about Bis a necessary (or in some cases sufficient) condition
for bringing about A.

Therefore I should bring about B.


The first premise could be called the goal premise, and the second
premise the conditional premise, because it expresses a conditional rela-
tionship ofa practical sort. Bringing about one state is said to be necessary
or sufficient for bringing about another. The conclusion expresses a so-
called prudential, or practical, ought-statement.

In multi-agent practical reasoning, a group of agents communicate
with each other in order to collectively carry out some shared goals, or


Basic Practical Reasoning 33


at least to deliberate on how to proceed in a situation that requires some
sort of group action. The “should” in the conclusion is a practical “ought”
that expresses a kind of prudential imperative that binds these agents. It
means that if the agents are to be practically rational, they should become
committed to bringing about B, once they know that bringing about B is
necessary (or sufficient) for bringing about A, and they are committed
to bringing about A. In multi-agent reasoning (Wooldridge and Jennings
1995), one agent puts forward an argument in the form of a practical
inference, and another is designated as the respondent of the argument.
A typical context of use of such argumentation would be in planning,
where the two agents are jointly trying to bring about some shared goal.
Another context of use might be that of advice-giving dialogue, where
the one agent is asking the other (an expert) how to carry out some task
requiring technical expertise.

Practical reasoning is defeasible, meaning that it leads to a conclusion
that is only provisionally acceptable, subject to the asking of appropriate
critical questions. The key critical questions are the following.


(Q1) Are there alternative courses of action apart from B?

(Q2) Is B the best (or most acceptable) among the alternatives?

(Q3) Should goals other than A be considered?

(Q4) Is it really possible to bring about B, in the situation?

(Qs) What bad consequences of bringing about B should be taken
into account?


The practical inference, as used in the argumentation in a given case,
should be evaluated positively to the extent that it stands up to this kind
of critical questioning. As noted above, practical reasoning is defeasible
in nature. It holds tentatively, subject to rebuttal by critical questions. If
the critical questions are asked but not answered adequately, the practi-
cal inference fails. The asking of any one, or any group of such critical
questions, can lead to argumentation of kinds we are highly familiar with.
For example, if it appears that carrying out the action considered may
have bad consequences — that is, consequences that go against the goals
of the agent — a critic may argue that the action should not be carried out
because it is likely to have these bad consequences. This form of argu-
ment is called argumentation from negative consequences. In another
common type of case, an agent may have a conflict of goals. If it carries
out an action to realize its goal Gz, that same action may go against its
goal G2. Such conflicts often take the form of a dilemma, in which there
is a choice between two incompatible actions.


34 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


So far, we have taken into account only the simpler kind of practical
reasoning that is purely instrumental, in that it does not take values into
account. Values are sometimes in the background in practical reasoning,
and do not need to be considered. In such cases the basic instrumental
scheme can be used to analyze and evaluate practical reasoning. In other
cases, for example, those typical in political deliberation in electronic
democracy, values often need to be taken into account. In these cases,
for example, in ethical dilemmas, the more complex scheme for value-
based practical reasoning needs to be applied. Note that in Qs, the term
“bad” is used to denote negative value, and in Qg, the term “best” is used
to denote a comparative rating of values.


8. Value-Based Practical Reasoning


Atkinson, Bench-Capon, and McBurney (2004, p. 88) have studied exam-
ples from the development of AI tools to assist electronic democracy that
involve a more complex kind of practical reasoning based on values.
Their example can be adjoined to the simple train example of practical
reasoning stated above.


Friendship requires that I see John before he leaves London.
The 2:90 train arrives in London at 4:15.
So, I shall catch the 2:90 train.


Atkinson etal. (p. 88) showed how the action in the conclusion in this case
is justified by citing an underlying general social value, friendship. On
their account, there are three components of such value-based practical
reasoning: the action, the goal, and the reason why the goal is desired,
namely, an underlying value. They describe values as social interests that
support goals by explaining why goals are desirable.

Thus there are two notions of practical reasoning, a simpler instru-
mental one and a deeper one that takes values into account. In political
deliberations, such as those assisted by electronic democracy tools, an
arguer may be trying to persuade an audience to see a course of action as
practically reasonable for the group to adopt, based on their presumed
values. In such an instance it is important to take values into account,
even if they are implicit premises as opposed to clearly articulated goals. In
addition to the instrumental basic scheme for practical reasoning, a new
value-based scheme is also formulated below. The difference between
this new scheme and the instrumental one above is that an additional
premise, below, has been inserted to account for values.


Argument from
Values

Canada’s troops should
not be withdrawn from
Afghanistan.


Canada’s troops are in Human rights and free
Afghanistan to protect elections are Canadian
human rights and free values.

elections.


PLATE 1 Araucaria diagram of example of political value-based argumentation.


‘JuouInsie s,preoig ureidey Sunuasoidos weiserp eLeonely 3 ALVId


“e6peynouy |


MU 0} Pee} Pjnom


“eiqewyoud Ajawenxe
@q Pjnom suselg ey
woy Seu uUnepaP


sone, Woy yuowniy
sone, woy yuownbiy
senye, wo. yuownBiy


‘atdurexa aimyno s,uosuaAarg IOF WeISeIp JUsUMS IY 6 ALVId


“post
“uue} ou) jo Bulueew pourey e yew “snov “AyjeuiBuo pue
Aiea ayy 03 Arequos Yyoiym uogeoysiydos Awanisues eaqeuiBew!
‘@inyjno jo siseyyque pue Aepqns | | Asesey] pue pesuoysiy sure einynd
uj) ese UOQUeLU yeu; ul Guguem | |siy seo AjyGnos uayo “uojeonpe jeuuoy “sey *UU8} 84) JO BsuSS
| SonSUe}IeeYo BY St Bupjuiuy SIH 812 SBQUSIUSS Si} 9mm Ng pey sey OH @y senyenb esey lity pue ony uy Uj


“uoyeonpa
ul seBeyueape
souedns pey
@ney oym sn jo Aue
“@unyn> ul Bunj2e} ueuy eunjns sedeeap
Ajayuyep Ss! 9H 4ej JO UBLU S| OH
~ UONIYISSRID fequap UONeIYISSeID [eqaA
wo juawunBy wo. juawunBy


‘ypaeds s_pivoig ureidey ul UONUDAUT JUDUINSIe Jo amos poseq-aneA FV aALVId


(ZONAIGNY) suesinn (ZONZIGNY) ‘Susie 4


(JONSIGNY) suoburpy


(aniwA)
Aenoosip jemoe}|9}u|


(TwoO9) yeuejd
ejyolwel eB a10jdxy


(ey) eBpejmouy

MOU 0} PRE] Pjnom

yeuy ABojouyse} meu

Buisn yeuejd eyowes

eB a10jdxe pjnom

uolssilu pesodoid ey)
Duiuoseey jesijoeid
peseq-enleA


(anivA)
woud jeroueul4


(1vO9) suseig
eu) Woy SeUILU


wuniAMP uy Bupye |


(zy)

eiqewyoud Ajawuenxe
8q pjnom sueeig
Ou) Woy SeuILU


WuINiUIP e4y Bupye |
Duiuosesy jeooeld
peseq-ene,


seul WnIyyp


eyesedo suseig 84}
194M jouR|d syejosep
‘yoy B ‘euez0Q 0} 06
0} uoISsi pesodoid


(antwA)
eBeinos Arey


(vos)
SUde1g Oly JO A10}1/\


(tv)


yojdxe snoeBeinos

e si susaig

84) 4800 A10}91A

2 ul Bugeuiwjno

uolssiw snonpse

ue yons Buryepepun
HDuluoseey /eo}9eld
Ppeseq-enjeA


Value-Based Practical Reasoning 35


Scheme for Value-Based Practical Reasoning

Thave a goal G.

Gis supported by my set of values, V.

Bringing about A is necessary (or sufficient) for me to bring about G.
Therefore, I should (practically ought to) bring about A.


Both the instrumental scheme and the value-based one should be
regarded as representing defeasible forms of reasoning that can be rebut-
ted by asking any one of a set of critical questions in a dialogue, such
as: Which alternative actions to my bringing about A that would also
bring about Gshould be considered? In the case of value-based practical
reasoning, the following critical question is appropriate: How well is G
supported by (or at least consistent with) my values V? Another is this one:
Among bringing about A and these alternative actions, which is arguably
the best of the whole set, in light of my values V?

In a speech reported in a newspaper article (Ivison 2006), the front
runner in a liberal party leadership debate defended his support for
extending the Canadian mission in Afghanistan using argument from
positive values. He was quoted below as saying that the mission was based
on Canadian values.


He said there is fear that if the international effort fails, Afghanistan will fall
back into the hands of extremist Taliban forces, and argued Canada’s troops are
there to protect human rights and free elections, which he said are “Canadian
values.”


In this part of the speech, as reported above, two arguments are put for-
ward. The first one is based on the alleged fear that if the international
effort fails, Afghanistan will fall back into the hands of extremist Taliban
forces. It is presumed as an implicit premise that the outcome of falling
back into the hands of extremist Taliban forces would be a bad thing.
The evaluation of this outcome as negative is partly based on the use of
the negative term “extremist.” Hence this argument, although mainly an
argument from negative consequences, is also partly based on argument
from values and argument from verbal classification. For present pur-
poses, however, the second argument is more interesting as an example
for analysis. The speaker argued that Canada’s troops are there to protect
human rights and free elections, and he claimed these to be Canadian
values. The audience of his speech was composed, we may presume, of
Canadians who might or might not support his side in the party leadership
debate. We can assume that protecting human rights and free elections


36 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


would be taken as positive values by this audience of Canadians. And we
can assume that the speech was aimed at this audience. Hence the argu-
mentation in his speech can properly be fitted into the argumentation
scheme for argument from positive values.

Based on this analysis, the argumentation in the politician’s speech
can be represented diagrammatically as in Plate 1. The figure was con-
structed using Araucaria, a freeware system for automating argument dia-
gramming. In an Araucaria diagram, each premise or conclusion (propo-
sition) in an argument appears in a text box, while the inference between
a set of premises and a conclusion is drawn as an arrow (Reed and Rowe
2002). Araucaria can also be used to display the argumentation scheme
linking a set of premises to a conclusion (Reed and Walton 2003). As
shown in Plate 1, the two premises are in a linked configuration sup-
porting the conclusion. The argumentation scheme for argument from
values is displayed on the linked inference.

The argumentation scheme for argument from values has the follow-
ing structure.


Argument from Values


Variant: Argument from Positive Value
Premise 1: Value V is positive as judged by agent A (judgment
value).
Premise 2: The fact that value Vis positive affects the interpretation
and therefore the evaluation of goal G of agent A (if
value Vis good, it supports commitment to goal G).
Conclusion: Vis a reason for retaining commitment to goal G.


Variant 2: Argument from Negative Value


Premise 1: Value V is negative as judged by agent A (judgment
value).

Premise 2: The fact that value Vis negative affects the interpretation
and therefore the evaluation of goal G of agent A (if
value Vis bad, it goes against commitment to goal G).

Conclusion: Vis areason for retracting commitment to goal G.


Given this argumentation scheme, a set of premises can be identified
as supporting a conclusion in virtue of the scheme linking them to the
conclusion.


The Star Trek Example 37


Scheme for Value-Based
Practical Reasoning


Scheme for Instrumental Scheme for Argument from
Practical Reasoning Values


FIGURE 1.1 Ontology for practical reasoning schemes with values.


In value-based practical reasoning, argument from values is grafted
onto basic practical reasoning, forming the composite argumentation
scheme called value-based practical reasoning. To have a classification
system for this family of argumentation schemes, we propose the ontology
represented in Figure 1.1. This type of diagram is called an ontology in
computer science, because it classifies key concepts in a systematic way so
that operations concerning them can be automated in the semantic web.
An ontology can be seen as a way of partially defining a term by classifying
it in relation to other key terms in a subject or field.

Practical reasoning typically takes place in the context of a delibera-
tion in which two parties are trying to decide on a best course of action
for one or both of them in a situation of uncertainty. Public debates on
complex social issues, such as the question of gun control legislation,
take place in a context of deliberation in which the goal is to come to a
decision on a prudent course of action. But the issue and its ramifications
are so complex, with so many variables, that there can be no mechanical
procedure, as in mathematical decision theory, for example, that is of
much use in coming to a rational decision on what to do. Many factors
are involved, and not all of them are purely factual. Deliberation is often
based on goals and values, and the rhetorical speaker who wants to influ-
ence public deliberation must ground persuasive argumentation on what
are taken to be the goals and values of the groups who are taking part in
the deliberation and who will decide the outcome.


g. The Star Trek Example


A small story can be used to illustrate how values can vary in different
groups or cultures, and how the different values from each group can


38 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


support the same goal. In the television show Star Trek: The Next Genera-
tion, there were three types of beings from different planets, and each
had values that were very different from those of the other group. The
Klingons were warlike and have values of courage and honor. For them,
dying in battle, especially when outnumbered by a worthy enemy, is very
valuable. For them, being in any way perceived as cowardly, or avoiding
confrontation or battle, would be the worst thing, implying great dis-
honor. The Ferengi were commercially minded. They constantly think
about making deals that are in their best economic interest. Their values
were the accumulation of property, goods and money. They constantly
negotiate on everything, scheming and swindling people into bad deals.
For them, dying in battle would be impractical, unless it were merely a
risk to take that would somehow be financially profitable. The Vulcans
were very intellectual, noted for knowing a lot about science and com-
puters and for making decisions based on reason and logic. They valued
science and intellectual pursuits.

Now let’s consider the reasons each group might have for the goal
of attempting to reach new planets by space exploration. The Klingons
would see it as inviting possibilities of conquest and exploits in battle.
Their value is courage. The Ferengi would see it as a way of exploiting
resources that might be found on these other planets that could be sold
or otherwise used to make profits. The Vulcans would see it as a way of
finding new knowledge not only about distant planets, but also through
the development of technology by building new spaceships and better
computers. Their value is discovery. In this case, each group has the same
goal — that of attempting to reach new planets by space exploration — but
the values each has that support that goal are quite different.

The episode of Star Trek set out below is based on a real episode, but
details have been changed, and the plot has been simplified. On Dozaria,
a hot, desolate planet, the Breens operate dilithium mines. A Cardassian
prison transport has crash-landed on Dozaria after being attacked by
Breen warships. The survivors, Bajorans and Cardassians, are forced to
labor in the mines, and Starfleet Command is to mount a rescue mission.
Now let’s suppose that Captain Jean-Luc Picard is giving a speech to the
three groups who are expected to take part in the rescue mission, the
Klingons, the Ferengi, and the Vulcans. Such a mission would mean a
long, dangerous trip to Dozaria, and all three groups might be opposed
to such a hazardous undertaking. Picard is assigned the job of trying to
persuade the three groups to go ahead with the mission, and gives the
following speech:


The Star Trek Example 39


I admit that the rescue mission will be dangerous and costly. Still, I think that
we should go ahead with it as a group undertaking, for three reasons. First,
undertaking such an arduous mission culminating in victory over the Breens is a
courageous exploit. Second, taking the dilithium mines from the Breens would
be extremely profitable. Third, the proposed mission would explore a remote
planet using new technology that would lead to new knowledge.


Essentially, Picard presented three arguments in favor of undertaking the
mission.


A1: Undertaking such an arduous mission culminating in victory over
the Breens is a courageous exploit.

Ag: Taking the dilithium mines from the Breens would be extremely
profitable.

Ag: The proposed mission would explore a remote planet using new
technology that would lead to new knowledge.


Even judging from what we have been told in the condensed presentation
of Picard’s speech given above, it has many interesting aspects that could
be commented on from the point of view of argumentation. It was the
outcome of a deliberation process. It depends on practical reasoning, or
so-called means-end reasoning, concerning a decision of whether a pro-
posal for action should be undertaken. But most interesting, from our
point of view, is the aspect of persuasion. Captain Picard’s goal was to per-
suade his audience to undertake a dangerous mission; of the arguments
he used, each of them was directed to a specific value that he thought each
of the groups in the audience would have. This type of argumentation is
clearly connected somehow with practical reasoning. The goal-directed
reasoning combining means and ends is based not only on the practical-
ity and possibility of undertaking the proposed action, but also on the
values of the groups that are to take part in carrying out the action.

Here we have looked at the argument in a rhetorical light, by showing
how Picard’s speech was specifically targeted to the values of the groups
he needed to persuade to undertake the mission that Starfleet Command
had assigned. Once Picard made the speech, and put his argumentation
forward to the three groups, there is another way it can be studied. It can
be studied from a dialectical perspective by analyzing the arguments as
premises and conclusions, aiming at evaluating how strong each compo-
nent argument is, and how each of them fits together as supporting an
ultimate conclusion.

Picard explicitly put forward three arguments, A1, Ag, and Ag. More
precisely, each of these arguments can be seen as a claim or premise


40 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


that supports his conclusion that undertaking the mission by the three
groups would be a good idea. In addition to these three explicit premises,
Picard also appealed to the values of each of the groups in his audience.
In the argument diagram in Plate 2, each of these values is represented
as an implicit premise of one of the three subarguments leading to the
ultimate conclusion. Each of these subarguments is a linked argument,
meaning that each of the premises is required in order to provide an
argument that strongly supports the conclusion. In other words, the two
premises function together to support the conclusion, rather than being
independent lines of argument for that conclusion.

Picard’s argument is based on an argumentation scheme called argu-
ment from values. This form of argument uses values to support goals.
It is a presumption of the use of this argumentation scheme that the
participants in an argument have certain values that can be identified. It
is assumed that these values can play a role as premises in arguments in
which a proponent puts forward rational arguments that are supposed
to be based on the commitments and accepted premises of the respon-
dents to whom the argument is addressed. It was based on three explicit
arguments that appealed to implicit values of the audience that can be
viewed as additional assumptions. Araucaria can be used to insert implicit
premises (or conclusions) in a given argument, by using the argumenta-
tion scheme to link a given set of premises with an added premise that
was not given but is needed as part of the linked argument supporting
the conclusion. The combination of these tools represents a method for
analyzing arguments of the kind called enthymemes, where premises or
conclusions are implicit (Walton and Reed 2005). It can be seen with the
aid of Plate 2 not only what the explicit and implicit premises of Picard’s
argument are, but how they are all connected together in a structure
that can be displayed in an argument diagram. Plate 2 represents each of
the three implicit premises in a darkened box with a border made up of
dashes. Within each of the boxes representing these implicit premises,
the owner of the premise is indicated. For example, in the box repre-
senting the premise that profit is a value, the owner of that premise is
indicated as the Ferengi. Also, in each case, the argumentation scheme
that fits the structure of the linked argument is indicated. For exam-
ple, in the argument on the right, composed of the two premises A1
and the statement that courage is a value, the structure of the linked
inference leading from these two premises to the conclusion that the
three groups should go ahead with the mission is labeled as argument


Aims of Dialectical and Rhetorical Argumentation 41


from values. This labeling indicates that the argumentation scheme for
argument values is applied to these two premises to support the conclu-
sion that the three groups should go ahead with the mission. To sum
up, then, we see that the argumentation as a whole is built up from
three linked arguments, each of which is an instance of argument from
values.

One other part of the argument also needs commentary. The propo-
sition on the left in the darkened box joined by a double arrow to the
conclusion of the previous argument represents what is called a refuta-
tion. A refutation consists of a proposition that is opposed to a previous
claim. Such a refutation functions as a counter-argument or rebuttal that
attacks a prior argument. Thus the argument diagram in Plate 2 rep-
resents the argumentation content of Captain Picard’s speech, showing
not only all the positive arguments he used to support the conclusion
he advocates, but also the arguments against that conclusion that he
mentioned.


10. The Aims of Dialectical and Rhetorical Argumentation


The problem is that dialectical and rhetorical argumentation, while they
share many of the same argumentation schemes (topics), appear to be
different methods that have different aims and that use these schemes for
different purposes. Take the example of a commercial ad for a product.
Let’s say it is an ad to sell jeans, and the target audience is teenagers.
Let’s say the ad uses an appeal to popular opinion, arguing that this
brand is very popular and is widely seen as the best by teenagers. What
is the argumentation in this ad? Evidently, it contains an argument with
premises and a conclusion. But what is the purpose of the ad as a speech
act that is presumably goal-directed and aimed with specific purpose at an
audience? Popular opinion is basically in agreement with expert opinion
in the field of rhetoric that the speech act is essentially one of persua-
sion and in this case that the purpose of the ad is to persuade the target
audience to buy the jeans. Or perhaps it might be thought that the pur-
pose of the ad is to persuade the audience that the jeans are desirable or
that buying them would be a good idea. On the surface, this hypothesis
seems reasonable. The aim of the ad is persuasion, and so the speech
act is one of persuasion of some sort. There are two parties involved in
the speech act. One is the writer of the ad, the group who thought it up,
or the company that sponsored it. We can see this group as one entity, a


42 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


single agent who constructed the ad as its message. The other key party
is the target audience. Of course, this entity is not a single person, or
even a clearly designated group of persons. Various people will see the
ad and be influenced by it. But the second party to the communicative
act is really a construct. It is the presumed target audience. And so, if we
can see the ad as containing a communicated message with a sender and
receiver, the argumentation in it can be viewed as a dialogue. The one
participant in the dialogue is the sender of the ad to the mass media.
The other is the mass audience to whom the ad was sent. The type of
message communicated, as indicated above, would be widely taken to be
classifiable as one of persuasion, attempted persuasion, or an influence
attempt.

But there is a problem with the hypothesis that the purpose of this
message is one of persuasion. The problem is that interests are involved,
in the form of money. In some cases, the ad will say nothing explicit
about money. It may say very little. It may just picture the jeans and
say that teenagers find them so “cool” that inventory is running out, or
something of that sort. In other cases, the ad may tell you where the jeans
are being sold, or even tell you they are on sale and give a price. In the
second kind of case, an offer is being made. The ad is a form of so-called
commercial speech. The store can even be held to selling the jeans at the
offered price, because the ad offered to do that. The ad is seen as “making
a deal,” or an offer as part of a transaction. In this kind of case, interests
are clearly involved. The ad comes under the category of interest-based
bargaining as well as the category of persuasion. Even if nothing explicit
is said about prices or where you can buy the jeans, clearly commercial
interests are involved. The company who paid for the ad and the firm
who designed it are not just trying to persuade the audience about some
property of the jeans. They are trying to sell the jeans. They are trying to
get the audience to buy them. So even in this case, financial interests are
involved. The purpose of the ad is not purely one of abstract persuasion. It
is one of trying to get action, and action that has a measurable financial
outcome. The hypothesis that the purpose of the ad as a speech act is
simply that of persuasion is not quite right, or adequate to the reality of
the ad. It may be partly a goal of persuasion, but the ad is also about
promoting the proponent’s interests.

A comparable analysis can be made of political argumentation of the
kind commonly found in the media. For example, consider a political ad
used in Senator Smith’s election campaign. Once again, on the surface,


Aims of Dialectical and Rhetorical Argumentation 43


the purpose of the ad as a piece of mass media discourse seems to be one
of persuasion. An argument used in the ad, for example, may cite Senator
Smith’s past record of good deeds. Presumably, then, the argument has
premises and a conclusion. The conclusion is a proposition to the effect
that voting for Senator Smith is a good thing to do, or would be the
right action to take. Even though the conclusion is best expressed as
an action that is being recommended or advocated, still the speech act
seems to be one of persuasion essentially. But once again, as in the ad
case, interests are involved. In some cases, the ad may even appeal directly
to these interests, by promising tax breaks to corporations, for example,
or by making concessions to union interests. It may even appeal to certain
groups that favor policies of a certain sort identified in it. We all know
that politics is not pure persuasion dialogue in the same way an abstract
philosophical discussion might be. People in identifiable interest groups
vote for elected officials who they think will be most likely to support the
interests of the group — or what the group thinks or says are its interests.
The interests of one group may conflict with the interests of another
group, in a way that has definite financial implications. So we know that
it is naive to think of argumentation in a political mass media message as
having a purpose of pure persuasion.

To make the point in a more concrete way, consider the type of per-
suasion dialogue that goes on in a forensic debate. Let’s say the issue
being debated is that of euthanasia, and the question is whether a physi-
cian should be allowed to stop treatment that will prolong life (such as
removing a ventilator) if the patient voluntarily requests it. In a forensic
debate, each side has a thesis, and during the debate each side brings
forward its best arguments to support that thesis. At the end, a judge,
or perhaps an audience, makes a ruling on which side won the debate.
The debate is not a case of what might be called rational persuasion.
For the opinion of the judge or audience on which side won does not
necessarily coincide with the reality of which side had the stronger argu-
mentation. Judges and audiences can, after all, be deceived by fallacious
arguments that look strong when they are not. But even so, the purpose
of argumentation in a debate can rightly be seen, on both sides, as one
of persuasion. On the other hand, of course, interests may be involved.
There may be a monetary prize for winning the debate. A debater on one
side may be a health care professional who might see his interest com-
promised by certain kinds of rulings on policies of stopping treatment in
the hospitals. Interests can never be absolutely excluded in real cases of


44 Logic, Dialectic, and Rhetoric


argumentation. But the primary purpose of the argumentation used by
the debating team on one side or the other is not really to bargain, to win
financial gain, or to promote the interests of some specific group to whom
one of the debaters may belong. The purpose of the argumentation is
just to win the debate. And given the structure of the forensic debate as a
format for argumentation, this aim is accomplished by bringing forward
the strongest and most persuasive arguments to support the designated
thesis of your side.

In a forensic debate, then, it is appropriate to see the purpose of an
argument as a speech act of persuasion, even if that analysis is subject to
some qualifications. The purpose is not one of interest-based bargaining,
as it would be in a negotiation type of dialogue. Now contrast the forensic
debate type of case with those of the commercial ad and the election
campaign ad in politics. Here, too, persuasion is a central aim, but it is
mixed with interest-based bargaining in a different way. Here the central
purpose of the ad is to sell. Ifthe ad appeals to the interest of the audience
in an implicit or even in an explicit way, the argument could be perceived
as not inappropriate. In the debate, however, suppose an arguer for the
one team appeals to the interests of the opposing team by indicating they
will gain financially if they make some concessions in their arguments.
This kind of move is not appropriate. The users of this kind of argument
have gone outside the boundaries of the kind of argumentation that is
appropriate for the debate.

Of course, observations about any real examples of argumentation
will never be sufficient to resolve normative questions about whether
certain kinds of argumentation are appropriate or not for certain types
of communication frameworks. To answer such questions, it is neces-
sary to make hypotheses about the aims of rhetorical and dialectical
argumentation, and the methods used to achieve those aims, or help users
to achieve them, by studying how arguments can be used and evaluated in
different communicative frameworks. In argumentation theory and infor-
mal logic, the framework that defines such an idealized structure of goal-
directed communication is called a normative model of dialogue. Spe-
cific types of normative models of dialogue are introduced in chapter 2.
Abstract normative models are not meant to be instantiated in every
respect in any real example of argumentative discourse. But by bringing
in consideration of normative models, we can study how common and
familiar examples of argumentation are treated differently in dialectic
and rhetoric. We can ask what the purpose of the argument is supposed
to be, or what it should ideally be taken to be. Of course, in reality, the


Aims of Dialectical and Rhetorical Argumentation 45


designers or users of argumentation like that used in an ad may have all
sorts of purposes, and the ads themselves can vary tremendously in the
kinds of strategies they appear to employ. But to understand how these
strategies work, and to understand how the arguments in the ads work,
it will be argued in subsequent chapters that applying normative models
to them can help, beginning with a normative model of the speech act
of persuasion.


The Speech Act of Persuasion


The subject of this chapter is the meaning of the term “persuasion” as a
speech act in argumentation theory. Terms like “persuading” and “persua-
sion” are pervasive and central in recent work in argumentation, along
with closely related terms like “convince” and “convincing.” It is often
said that the purpose of an argument, for example, is to persuade or con-
vince someone to accept something as true.’ Wenzel (1999, p. 13) stated
that “the purpose of rhetoric is persuasion.” The problem is to define
exactly what is meant by the term “persuasion.” For as Wenzel pointed out
(p. 13), simply stating that the purpose of rhetoric is persuasion “evokes
all the negative connotations associated with both rhetoric and persua-
sion.” Both are then linked with deception and sophistical trickery. That
line of thought was, of course, Plato’s view of both rhetoric and the
Sophists, as shown in chapter 1. In this chapter it will be shown that per-
suasion is a legitimate function of argumentation. What does this remark
mean? It seems to imply that persuasion is a distinctive type of commu-
nicative act in dialogue, a speech act of some sort.* From the previous
chapters, many clues can be gathered about what persuasion is, within
a multi-agent framework. Obviously, it involves some sort of change of
opinion or acceptance of a belief, from an initial state to a new state


‘ Van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1984, 1992) seem to prefer “convince,” while Walton
and Krabbe (1995) tend to use the term “persuade.”

° A speech act is a verbal utterance of the kind that can change events in the world in the
same way as a physical action. The classic illustration is the minister’s speech act of saying,
in the wedding ceremony, “I now pronounce you husband and wife.” Requesting and
informing are common types of speech acts.


46


The BDI Approach and the Commitment Approach 47


that is the outcome of the act of persuasion. The transition from the one
state to the other takes place within an agent, and is brought about by
a second agent. The two agents, it is presumed, are engaged in a con-
versational interaction. Thus the speech act of persuasion is based on a
conversational or dialogue structure, and can best be understood within
such a structure. One party persuades another party normally through
some sort of verbal communication with the other. These clues are put
together here to work toward clarifying the notion of persuasion. This
chapter will also show, however, that even if the speech act of persuasion
can be formally defined, identifying its occurrence in specific cases, and
its role in different dialogues, is non-trivial. It will even be shown that
it is controversial to determine whether persuasion is the same thing as
argument or is something different. Thus the analysis of persuasion as a
speech act takes the form of an investigation.

In this investigation into dialectical theory, the hypothesis is put for-
ward that there is a distinctive and clearly definable speech act of persua-
sion that can be identified as central to persuasion dialogue. A distinction
is drawn between a persuasion attempt and a successful act of persuasion
in a dialogue. It is argued that while the speech act of persuasion can
be present in other types of dialogue, such as deliberation and negotia-
tion, it is not central to them in the same way. In particular, the act of
persuasion is contrasted with the act of putting forward inducements as
a form of argumentation that appeals to an arguer’s interests. Both these
speech acts are also compared with the speech act of making a threat.
The analysis on these points centers around the observation that threats
and inducements are a normal part of negotiation dialogue in many cases
(Donohue 1981), whereas they tend to be regarded as inappropriate or
irrelevant in persuasion dialogue. Indeed, it is hypothesized that interest-
based inducement attempts are central to negotiation dialogue in the
same way that persuasion attempts are central to persuasion dialogue.


1. The Belief-Desire-Intention Approach and
the Commitment Approach


According to O’Keefe (2001, p. 575), quantitative research on persua-
sion has centrally consisted of experimental work in the social sciences
studying the effects of persuasion under controlled conditions. But many
other fields are interested in persuasion and have studied it. Thus the
study of persuasion is not restricted to a single discipline, nor does


48 The Speech Act of Persuasion


it have a conceptual framework within any single discipline. O’Keefe’s
remarks surveying persuasion research are worth quoting.


Persuasion research is not unified within any single discipline or conceptual
framework. Research has been conducted in a number of academic fields, with few
efforts after integration or connection. Nearly all the social sciences (including
psychology, communication, sociology, political science, and anthropology) and
related applied endeavors in which social-scientific questions and methods appear
(such as advertising, marketing, and public health) contain relevant research.


(p. 575)


Of course, persuasion has always been regarded as central to rhetoric as
a discipline, as reflected in Aristotle’s view of rhetoric and the long tradi-
tion stemming from it. But somehow no attempt to analyze the cognitive
structure of persuasion in a precise or logical way has ever been under-
taken, or ever been successful at any rate. Persuasion has always seemed
too psychological for logic, and the social sciences have concentrated on
the experimental and empirical aspects of it. Perhaps they did not want
to venture into the study of abstract normative and logical structures or
were not familiar with new tools being developed in argumentation the-
ory and AI. Thus, as O’Keefe indicated, although persuasion is important
to many disciplines, research on it has not been unified within a single
discipline or conceptual framework.

In empirical psychology, persuasion is defined in a stimulus-response
framework. An act of persuasion is characterized as a stimulus that
changes, shapes, or reinforces a response (Simons, Morreale, and Gron-
beck, 2001, p. 29). The response is a change in the beliefs, values, and atti-
tudes of the subject of the act of persuasion. Such changes take the form
of “response shaping,” “response reinforcing,” and “response changing”
(p. 30). This approach defines the act of persuasion in terms of an
input that can be empirically observed and an output that represents
some change in the behavior of the individual or mass audience that has
received this input. But this purely empirical approach to persuasion by
itself can take us only so far in studying how interpersonal argumenta-
tion works as a device of persuasion. For interpersonal argumentation
depends on a cognitive component. Persuasive messages, for example,
in political campaign rhetoric or in advertising, often strongly depend on
the capability of the respondent to recognize and interpret actions and
statements as being forms of rational argument connecting sequences
of reasoning. This lesson will be shown time and time again in the
following chapters. These patterns of rational thinking, familiar to both


The BDI Approach and the Commitment Approach 49


the message sender and the message receiver, enable the sender to leave
out certain parts of the message that he knows the receiver will fill in.
The cognitive structures shared by both parties enable the receiver to
decode implicatures in the form of indirectly implied suggestions. The
capability to persuade by this means is based on the presumption that
both speaker and hearer know that they are taking part in a collaborative
conversation of a kind that both recognize. So to understand persuasion
of the kind important for rhetoric in an adequate way, an act of persua-
sion needs to be seen as more than just empirically a stimulus and an
observed response. It needs to be seen as having a cognitive and dialec-
tical component that allows one party to communicate with the other by
understanding the implications of certain forms of argument and cer-
tain kinds of moves that are appropriate and relevant in a collaborative
conversation.

Immediately, however, there is an objection that calls for clarification.
Dialectic imports rationality into the subject of persuasion. A dialogue, in
the sense of the term used in argumentation and computational dialec-
tics, is a collaborative goal-directed conversation between two (in the
minimal case) parties who contribute to the conversation by following
certain rules. For example, at a minimum, in order to have a dialogue
in this sense, the two parties must take turns making “moves” or “speech
acts.” Each move must be responsive to the previous move, according to
conversational rules or maxims. Many in the social sciences will say that
they want no part of such rules, or even of rationality in any form. They
see persuasion as purely psychological. Persuasion is simply change of
belief, according to this view, and belief is psychological, meaning that it
is measured by stimulus and response, or by other empirical parameters.

To respond to this sort of objection, we must revert to the distinction
drawn in chapter 1 between two approaches to cognitive science, artificial
intelligence, and argumentation. One is called the belief-desire-intention
(BDI) approach. The other is called the commitment, or commitment-
based, approach. The BDI approach has been the dominant model of
thinking in cognitive science and in the social sciences generally. It has
been the main model in the development of multi-agent systems in dis-
tributed computing, and continues to be advocated in recent research
(Wooldridge 2000). It has also been the dominant model in analytical
philosophy. For the past fifty years or so, the leading work in analytical
philosophy of mind has been built around the central notions of belief,
intention, and desire, and it still is (Bratman 1987). Itis only recently, in
argumentation theory, and especially with the advent of Hamblin’s work


50 The Speech Act of Persuasion


on fallacies, that the commitment-based approach has even been articu-
lated as a distinctive viewpoint or analytical tool. The dialogue structures
proposed as models of rational argumentation by Hamblin (1970, 1971,
1987), van Emeren and Grootendorst (1992), and Walton and Krabbe
(1995) are all based on acentral notion ofan arguer’s commitment. Lead-
ing recent work in AT has now shifted to a commitment-based model of
communication in multi-agent systems (Singh 1991, 1997).

As applied to the simplest kind of case in which there are two par-
ties in a dialogue, a proponent and a respondent, argumentation can be
defined as commitment-based in the following sense. The proponent has
a claim to be proved, and he must use the respondent’s commitments
as premises in an argument having his own (the proponent’s) claim as
the conclusion. Similarly, the respondent, to prove his opposed claim,
must use only the proponent’s commitments as premises. The principle
of commitment-based argumentation represents a normative ideal that
is present in all my previous writings on argumentation. It derives from
the notion of commitment first set out by Hamblin (1970, 1971) as the
core of the method of formal dialogue theory used to analyze fallacies.
An equivalent term for commitment is acceptance. Commitment in this
sense, deriving from Hamblin’s use of the term, refers to what an arguer
has gone on record as accepting, as far as one can tell from the moves
he has already made in a dialogue. An arguer is committed to a proposi-
tion, in this special sense, when he has gone on public record as having
asserted it. But outright assertion is not the only way someone can become
committed to a proposition or make his commitment to it evident. A par-
ticipant in a dialogue can become committed to a proposition by putting
forward any kind of speech act. The commitment rules for that type of
dialogue determine what kind of move implies what kind of commitment.
For example, asking a question of a certain sort can imply, in a certain sort
of dialogue, that the questioner is committed to a presupposition of the
question. Or when the respondent gives a certain sort of reply or answer
to the question, that reply can imply that he is committed to a certain
proposition. In short, commitment is determined by given speech acts or
moves in a dialogue, in line with the type of dialogue and the rules govern-
ing the moves in that type of dialogue. Commitment also has some other
key characteristics. It can be retracted. But it can’t be retracted freely in
all cases. Sometimes there is a cost or penalty attached to retraction. How
freely commitments can be retracted depends on the type of dialogue. In
persuasion dialogue, commitments need to be retractable without severe
penalties.


The BDI Approach and the Commitment Approach 51


We must now come to the distinction between commitment and belief.
Belief is an internal psychological notion. Beliefs and desires are private
“mental states.” In contrast, commitments are public. Hamblin (1970,
p- 257) compared commitments to sentences written on a blackboard.
They are there and visible, or at least they can be traced. They are in a
dialogue somewhere in a database. At the beginning point of any dia-
logue, there is a set of commitments called a commitment store. As the
dialogue proceeds through the various moves, propositions are added to
this set or deleted from it. In a dialogue, when a commitment is incurred
or retracted, the act is external and public. Belief is different. It is a matter
of private mental states. Bob Smith’s beliefs are private to him. Nobody
else may know what they are. He may not even know himself. Beliefs are
obviously very important in psychology. But from a viewpoint of critical
argumentation, or informal logic and the study of fallacies, it may not
be necessary to know what an arguer’s actual beliefs are. What matters is
how he argued and what positions he took. The reason for utilizing the
notion of commitment in argumentation theory is that the goal is the
evaluation of an argument in a given text of discourse. It is not neces-
sary to probe into an arguer’s real beliefs to evaluate his argument. But
although commitment is different from belief, there is no doubt some
sort of indirect relationship between the two. As Hamblin put it (1970,
p- 257), commitment can act as a kind of persona of belief.

Of course, some would object to the whole basis of the distinction
between commitment and belief, as outlined above. They would say that
it’s alla matter of semantics. What does it matter whether you call it com-
mitment or belief? This objection is accurate and reasonable, up to a
point. Yet it is useful and even necessary to make some distinction of this
sort, no matter what terms we use for the two concepts. The basic differ-
ence is that commitment, by its nature, has a rationality component built
in. Itis all about rationality, even though it represents a kind of rationality
tied into the instrumental use of argumentation in dialogue. Belief, on
the other hand, could be rational belief. But it is basically an empirical
and internal psychological matter. I, and all of us, do believe certain
propositions; there are others we don’t believe. I don’t believe that Santa
Claus really exists, for example. But there are people, especially small
children, who do seem to believe that he exists. Later they reach an age
where that belief changes, and they begin to be doubters. Commitments
are different. They are just propositions inferred from the speech acts
you have put forward in a dialogue. You may believe them, or you may
not. But if challenged, you must defend them or retract them.


52 The Speech Act of Persuasion


If these remarks are right, there is a real opposition between the
commitment-based approach to rationality and the BDI approach. It
seems reasonable that both approaches could have places of importance
in the study of rational thinking and argumentation in communication
and computing. But one approach might be more difficult to imple-
ment than the other, and one may be more applicable to various cases
and problems of interest as a theoretical model of how rational thinking
works. Our central concern in this book is with argumentation, and with
mass media argumentation in particular. It is my opinion that the BDI
approach has its place, but it has turned out to be more complex and
cumbersome as a tool than many initially anticipated. Trying to give BDI
sets of conditions that define the most basic and apparently simplest kinds
of speech acts has turned into a messy business, resulting in an abstruse
metaphysics of speech acts that just hasn’t been very helpful in devising
clear and useful protocols and standards for computer communication.
On the other hand, the commitment-based approach, according to its
advocates, is much easier to work with and is proving more useful in com-
puting. Which approach will win out is impossible to say at the moment.
I have been an advocate of the commitment approach for many years in
the field of argumentation studies, and also think it will turn out to be
the most useful approach for the study of communication in computer
models like multi-agent systems. Whatever the outcome of the debate,
the commitment approach is easier to grasp and to apply to cases of
argumentation.

Various types of dialogue have now been recognized in the literature,
as indicated in Table 2.1 below (p. 60). The commitment-based approach,
according to the analysis of argumentation presented in Walton and
Krabbe (1995) and Walton (1998b), is applicable to all of them. What is
common to all argumentation in dialogue is that there are two partici-
pants (in the minimal case), and the arguments of the one should always
(ideally) be based on the commitments of the other. Such a commitment-
based argument structure is modeled in Figure 2.1.

The sort of structure represented by Figure 2.1 is typical of all argumen-
tation in the various types of dialogue. But it is implemented in different
ways in the different types of dialogue. For example, in persuasion dia-
logue, one party attempts to persuade a second party to come to accept a
claim by using a set of premises that are commitments of the second party.
In negotiation dialogue, the commitment-based pattern represented by
Figure 2.1 is still characteristic, but how it is implemented in that type
of dialogue is different. In negotiation dialogue, the one party makes an


Basic Components of Persuasion 53


Respondent’s Proponent’s
Commitment Set Commitment Set


Proponent’s Respondent’s
Conclusion Conclusion


FIGURE 2.1 Commitment-based argumentation in a dialogue.


offer and then tries to get the second party to accept that offer by argu-
ing that accepting the offer is in the interests of the second party. In this
model, commitment is not to the truth or falsity of a proposition but to
interests, usually in the form of goods or services.


2. Basic Components of Persuasion


The fundamental structure of the persuasion dialogue can be stated very
simply. The central notion is that there are two participants, and one is
trying to persuade the other to accept a designated proposition as true.
Let us say that the party who is trying to persuade is the proponent. The
proponent is trying to persuade the respondent to accept a designated
proposition as true. This is the central idea of persuasion dialogue. But
what does “persuasion” mean in this context? To define the notion of per-
suasion appropriate for persuasion dialogue, we must view persuasion as
a kind of speech act that gets its meaning within dialogue theory. Singh
has defined and analyzed many speech acts central to communication
and computing. An example of the speech act of asserting is the utter-
ance “The door is shut” (Singh 1999, p. 52). An example of the speech
act of committing is the utterance “I will shut the door.” Other speech
acts defined by Singh include permitting, prohibiting, and commanding
(directing). But Singh did not even mention the possibility of defining
a speech act of persuading, nor does persuasion seem to be included in
other lists of speech acts of the kind now common in the literature and
technology of computer communications systems. To define it, we must


54 The Speech Act of Persuasion


express it in terms of other notions that are also fundamental to dialogue
theory.

To grasp the root notion of persuasion, we must appeal to two other
notions, the notion of commitment and the notion of an argument that
is structurally correct, according to some standard. Each participant in
a dialogue has a set of propositions called his commitment set. These
are the propositions he is already committed to, at any given point in
the dialogue. And there must some notion in a dialogue of a structurally
correct argument. For example, an argument is deductively valid where
if the premises are true, then necessarily the conclusion is true. Notions
of an inductively strong argument and a presumptively plausible argu-
ment need to be added as well. But to keep matters simple for purposes
of exposition, let us assume that deductive validity is the standard that
matters in the dialogue we are considering. Given a grasp of these prior
notions, we can now explain what is meant by “persuasion.”


Persuasion: The First Definition
The proponent persuades the respondent to accept a designated
proposition A as true if and only if the proponent puts forward
a deductively valid argument, the premises of the argument are
all propositions that are commitments of the respondent, and the
conclusion of the argument is the proposition A.


This definition represents the basic idea of persuasion as the aim of the
kind of argumentation used in a critical discussion. So defined, persua-
sion has three elements. The first element is that the argument put for-
ward by the proponent is deductively valid or is otherwise structurally
correct. This indicates that the inference in the argument is such that
the conclusion follows from the premises. It means that if a rational
respondent accepts all the premises, then he must also accept the con-
clusion. Such an argument rationally forces acceptance downward from
the premises to the conclusion. This forcing is sometimes called the pro-
bative function of an argument, meaning that the argument can be used
to prove something to somebody. The second element is the commit-
ment of the respondent to the premises of the argument. In persuasion,
commitment is transferred from the premises to the conclusion of an
argument. The third notion is that of the special proposition that is des-
ignated as the conclusion of the argument. This proposition is the aiming
point of the persuasion. It is what the proponent must aim at, and must
successfully arrive at in his argument, in order to accomplish the speech


Basic Components of Persuasion 55


act of persuasion. The first definition defines what might be called a suc-
cessful act of persuasion. It is also possible to have what is sometimes
called a persuasion attempt.’ A persuasion attempt could be defined as
an attempt to carry out the successful speech act putatively defined by the
conditions stated in the first definition above. There are various ways an
arguer might attempt to persuade another arguer to accept something
or to do something without being successful or without completing all
the requirements of the first definition. So we might say that the first
definition defines persuasion, but only in a limited sense. It is possible
that there might be cases in which there is only unsuccessful or incom-
plete persuasion, although the attempt might still be called an act of the
persuasion type. Thus the first definition needs to be extended to cap-
ture the meaning of “persuasion” in such cases. But even so, by defining
successful persuasion as the aiming point of the speech act of persuasion,
the first definition is useful.

An example might help to relate this definition to everyday argumen-
tation. Suppose that Bob and Helen are having a critical discussion on
tipping. Bob is for tipping. He thinks it is a good social practice. Helen is
against tipping. She thinks it is a bad social practice. Both present various
arguments to support their views. For example, Bob argues that tipping
supports free enterprise. Helen argues that tipping supports inequality.
Each uses arguments to try to rationally persuade the other to change
her or his opinion about tipping. In such a dialogue, we have all the
elements of persuasion dialogue. Bob accepts a proposition that is his
ultimate thesis in the dialogue. It is the proposition that tipping is a good
social practice. Helen has as her ultimate thesis the proposition that tip-
ping is a bad social practice. Assuming that “good practice” is the opposite
of “bad practice,” we can say that the one thesis is the opposite (nega-
tion) of the other. The one proposition is true if and only if the other
proposition is not true. The conflict of opinions in the dialogue repre-
sents what is often called “strong opposition.” Presumably, each party in
the dialogue is trying to persuade the other to abandon his or her old
thesis and come to accept the opposed thesis. The means used for this
purpose are arguments. These arguments can be of various sorts, but they


3 The notion of an attempt is fundamental to the agent-based formalization of communi-
cation developed by Wooldridge (2000). He gave a definition of it (p. 13.4) in terms of
the BDI approach as an intention that is not satisfied by an agent’s action. But the notion
of an attempt can also be defined in a commitment-based approach, as an action that
falls short of achieving a goal. A commitment-based analysis of speech acts can be found
in Singh (1999).


56 The Speech Act of Persuasion


can supposedly be evaluated by some sort of structural standard. In the
example, then, each party has an ultimate conclusion to be proved by
means of argumentation. And each party tries to prove that conclusion
and thereby successfully persuade the other. Here we have the basic idea
of persuasion, which is encapsulated in the first definition above.

It is now time to introduce the first objection to the first definition.


First Objection
It isn’t really persuasion if the respondent is already committed
to the proposition A. For the speech act to be one of persuasion,
the respondent must not accept the proposition A prior to the act
of persuasion. After the act of persuasion by the proponent, the
respondent then comes to accept A, due to the argument presented
by the proponent.


This objection makes sense intuitively. Persuasion involves a changing
of one’s mind. Before the act of persuasion the respondent must be
committed to one proposition. But after the act of persuasion he must
become committed to a different proposition. But a problem arises here.
How different must the one proposition be from the other?

There is a nice way of solving this problem. The way is to add a further
requirement to the first definition. That requirement is that the propo-
sition A must be the ultimate conclusion that the proponent is trying to
prove in the dialogue. Because such a dialogue is based on a conflict of
opinions, the respondent will be opposed to it. Thus the very act of get-
ting him to come to accept it will imply that he is changing his mind. The
opposition in the dialogue itself will always mean that the respondent is
opposed to A. So if he does come to accept A at any point in the dialogue,
then that is a change from his initial opinion. That might seem to solve
the problem, and rescue the first definition of persuasion. But there is
another objection waiting in the wings.


3. Chaining of Argumentation


The first definition is helpful as a first step because it expresses very sim-
ply the fundamental notion of persuasion in dialogue theory. But it is
simplistic in one vitally important respect. It does not take the chaining
of arguments into account. In persuasion dialogue, the speech act of per-
suasion is typically not a one-step process. Instead, it starts out with one
small step of argument, and then proceeds through a series of connected


Chaining of Argumentation 57


steps forming a chain of argumentation. The typical case can be repre-
sented by the example of the Socratic elenchus in the earlier dialogues of
Plato (Robinson 1962). At the start Socrates gains some relatively small
and apparently harmless concessions from his respondent. But then, as
the chain of argumentation gets longer, even though the respondent is
still making only small concessions, the direction of the argumentation
ultimately moves toward a conclusion that is quite serious and dangerous
for the respondent’s view. This step-by-step process is fundamental to the
notion of persuasion in dialogue. It is familiar in the Socratic dialogues.

The reason that the chaining notion is so important to persuasion
dialogue is that a respondent will naturally tend to resist any argument
that seems to go directly against or refute his ultimate thesis. Once he sees
that the conclusion is contrary to his ultimate conclusion and that the
argument is valid, he will see the obvious. He will then take the route of
denying the premises, or of retracting his commitment to them. This issue
of retraction is central to persuasion dialogue. A participant must be fairly
free to retract commitments, at least in the normal kind of persuasion
dialogue that is typical of everyday argumentation. He can’t be entirely
free, but he must be free to retract if he is presented with an argument
that calls for changing his previous view of a matter. For this reason, it
is not possible to rationally persuade a respondent in one step. He must
be drawn along by small steps, so that retraction at any step is not so
easy.

For example, suppose that Helen presents the following argument to
Bob.


Example of a One-Step Argument
First premise: Any practice that supports inequality is a bad social
practice.
Second premise: Tipping is a practice that supports inequality.
Conclusion: Tipping is a bad social practice.


Suppose that Bob accepts each premise individually, as a proposition he
is committed to. Suppose that Bob accepts that the argument is deduc-
tively valid. Then Bob must accept the conclusion. He has no choice.
Once he has accepted the conclusion, the persuasion dialogue is over.
Bob has lost. He has converted to Helen’s view on the tipping issue. Of
course, in any realistic persuasion dialogue, Bob would not be likely to
accept defeat so easily. He might take issue with one of the premises.
Or he might argue that one premise or the other is not absolutely true


58 The Speech Act of Persuasion


as a universal generalization, but is subject to exceptions and counter-
vailing considerations. He might argue that yes, something that supports
inequality tends to be bad, but something that tries to enforce equal-
ity in a rigid way could be even worse. He might concede that tipping
does support inequality to some extent, but that this bad consequence
of it is outweighed by good consequences of it. And so forth. Bob, the
exponent of tipping, is going to find all kinds of ways of either denying
one premise or the other, or denying that the inference is valid. That
is the way of persuasion dialogue. That is what makes it interesting and
revealing.

This idea of a chain of argumentation is familiar not only in Socratic
dialogues. It is also a familiar tool in artificial intelligence. The techniques
called “forward chaining” and “backward chaining” are commonly used
in AI when formulating how reasoning is carried out from a set of premises
in a database. To see how the essential structure works in a simple case,
consider a modus ponens inference.


(Ir) If Athen B
A


B


This inference can be chained forward by using its conclusion as a premise
in a next step.


(2) If Bthen C
B


Cc


The two single-step inferences, once chained together, form a longer
sequence of argumentation. The second step could then be chained toa
third inference. The conclusion of the second inference then becomes a
premise in the third inference. This type of sequence can be expanded
indefinitely. In a lengthy sequence of persuasion dialogue, as in a Socratic
dialogue, for example, it is common to find quite lengthy chains of argu-
mentation of this sort.

Having introduced the basic notion of persuasion and having added
the notion of chaining of argumentation, we arrive at a structure with
four components. In an analysis of relevance in dialogue (Walton 1998b,
p- 43), these four components have already been identified as character-
istic of argumentation in persuasion dialogue.


Chaining of Argumentation 59


(Rr) The respondent accepts the premises as commitments.

(Rz) Each inference in the chain of argumentation is structurally
correct.

(R3) The chain of argumentation must have the proponent’s
thesis as its (ultimate) conclusion.

(R4) Arguments meeting Rz, R2, and R3 are the only means that
count as fulfilling the proponent’s goal in the dialogue.


These four requirements seem to form a core around which the rules of
the critical discussion are built. They represent the idea of how logical
reasoning is used for some purpose in a critical discussion. The aim of
the critical discussion can be seen as one of rational persuasion of one
party by the argumentation of the other. Hence the four requirements
can be taken (by hypothesis) to form the fundamental characteristics
of persuasion as a speech act. Several other assumptions are implicit in
this new definition of persuasion. One assumption is that two parties,
called the proponent and the respondent, are engaged in a dialogue.
Another is that the proponent has an ultimate conclusion (thesis) to be
proved in the dialogue. Putting these assumptions together with the four
requirements above leads to the formulation of a second definition of
the speech act of persuasion.


Persuasion: The Second Definition

The proponent persuades the respondent to accept a designated
proposition A as true if and only if the proponent puts forward a
chain of argumentation meeting the following requirements. First,
each step, or single inference in the chain, is a deductively valid argu-
ment. Second, the premises of the argument are all propositions
that are already commitments of the respondent in the dialogue.
Third, the ultimate conclusion of the chain of argumentation, at
the final step of inference, is the proposition A.


Another background assumption is that the respondent is (at least ini-
tially) opposed to A in the dialogue. Either he holds an ultimate con-
clusion that is the opposite of A or he has taken a position of doubting
that A is true. Thus, if the proponent gets him to come to accept A by
the process of argument indicated in the four requirements above, we
can say that the proponent has persuaded the respondent to accept A.
Accordingly, the requirements Rr through R¢z make up a second defini-
tion of the speech act of persuasion. The second definition provides a
set of criteria that are both necessary and sufficient for the speech act of


60 The Speech Act of Persuasion


persuasion. For as R4 makes clear, Rr, R2, and R3 are taken to be the
only means that count as persuasion in a dialogue. This definition takes
chaining into account. Thus, it overcomes the objection to the first def
inition of persuasion. Even so, there is another objection waiting in the
wings.


4. Types of Dialogue


Evaluating an argument using argumentation schemes presupposes a
context of dialogue in which the argument has been put forward. For
example, the argument from expert opinion might be used in a persua-
sion dialogue, in which the one party is trying to persuade the other
party to accept some claim as true. But as the appeal to expert opinion
is deployed, the argument may shift to an information-seeking type of
dialogue. For example, in court, the expert might be brought forward
to provide testimony based on having studied the facts and on being an
expert in a scientific discipline. Thus, the other important tool for the
study of argumentation is the classification of the types of dialogue. So far,
six basic types of dialogue have been recognized that are centrally impor-
tant to analyzing common arguments. Table 2.1, based on the types of
dialogue recognized in Walton (1998b, p. 31), represents the standard
classification of the basic types of dialogue. It is also very similar to the


TABLE 2.1. Types of Dialogue


Type of Dialogue __ Initial Situation Participant’s Goal Goal of Dialogue


Persuasion Conflict of Persuade other Resolve or clarify
opinions party issue
Inquiry Need to have Find and verify Prove (disprove)
proof evidence hypothesis
Negotiation Conflict of Get what you Reasonable
interests most want settlement that
both can live with
Information- Need Acquire or give Exchange
seeking information information information
Deliberation Dilemma or Coordinate goals — Decide best
practical choice and actions available course
of action
Eristic Personal conflict Verbally hit out at Reveal deeper


opponent


basis of conflict


Types of Dialogue 61


typology presented in Walton and Krabbe (1995, p. 66), except that var-
ious hybrid types of dialogue are also recognized in that typology.

One type of persuasion dialogue that has been clearly recognized and
defined is called the critical discussion by van Eemeren and Grooten-
dorst (1984, 1992). The goal of a critical discussion is to resolve the
initial conflict of opinions. At an earlier, opening stage of the dialogue,
the participants have agreed to engage in argumentation in order to try
to resolve the conflict. At a later argumentation stage, they put forward
their arguments. There are ten rules for conducting the critical discussion
during this argumentation stage (van Eemeren and Grootendorst 1987,
pp. 184-293). These ten rules can be summarized as follows. (1) Parties
must not prevent each other from advancing arguments. (2) An arguer
must defend her argument if asked to do so. (3) An attack on an arguer’s
position must relate to that position (and not some other position).
(4) A claim can only be defended by giving relevant arguments for it.
(5) An arguer can be held to his implicit premises. (6) and (7) An argu-
ment must be regarded as conclusively defended if its conclusion has
been inferred by a structurally correct form of inference from premises
that have been accepted by both parties at the outset of the discussion.
(8) Arguments must be valid or be capable of being made valid by the
addition of implicit premises. (g) If a proponent fails to defend his argu-
ment successfully, he must withdraw it. (10) Formulations must not be
unduly vague or ambiguous.

Rule g states that an attack on a point of view must be directed to
the point of view really advocated by the protagonist. In the theory of
van Eemeren and Grootendorst, fallacies are violations of the rules of a
critical discussion. For example, violations of Rule 9 cited are “imputing a
fictitious standpoint to someone” and “distorting someone’s standpoint”
(p. 286). These violations correspond to the straw man fallacy, the fallacy
of setting up a distorted version of an opponent’s thesis (standpoint),
and then demolishing this distorted version, thereby claiming to have
refuted the opponent’s argument. An example would be the person who
argues against an environmentalist position by setting up an extreme or
exaggerated version of that position — for example, “You are trying to
make the world a pristine wilderness. That is not practical!” — and who
then proceeds to demolish that extreme position by using arguments
against it.

The critical discussion is a subtype of a more general type of dialogue
called persuasion dialogue. The critical discussion can be seen as a species
of persuasion dialogue because each party is trying to persuade the other


62 The Speech Act of Persuasion


to come to accept the thesis of the first party. The inquiry is a type of
dialogue in which an investigating group tries to prove some designated
proposition, to disprove it, or to show that it cannot be either proved or
disproved. To achieve this goal, the group collects data or “the facts” that
can be verified, and the group also tries to assess what is not known. Nego-
tiation is a type of dialogue in which there are some goods or resources
that are in short supply, and the two parties try to reach some agreement
on how to share them. Each side makes offers and concessions.

Information-seeking is a type of dialogue in which one party tries
to communicate information to another party. The importance of
information-seeking as a type of dialogue does not appear to have been
noticed very much, if at all, in the history of either rhetoric or dialectic.
But intelligent deliberation clearly depends on the ability of a decision
maker to take in relevant information on a current situation. A type of
mass media format that fits the normative model of information-seeking
dialogue is that of the presentation of the news in the media.

Eristic dialogue is a quarrelsome type of dialogue in which the two par-
ties “hit out” at each other and try to attack each other verbally. The goal
of each participant is to articulate some grudge or grievance against the
other. Plato and Aristotle equated eristic dialogue with sophistry. Thus,
a clear distinction can be drawn between persuasion dialogue and eristic
dialogue. From a dialectical point of view, persuasion can be described
as a process of rational argumentation in which one agent uses premises
that a second agent is committed to, or can be gotten to commit to,
through a sequence of argumentation chained together in a dialogue,
with the aim of getting the second agent to come to accept an ultimate
conclusion that he doubts. In all the types of dialogue in Table 2.1, there
is an ultimate issue, a problem to be solved or a conflict to be resolved,
and argumentation using rational persuasion seems to be the main tool
for the job.

Actually, no mention is specifically made of persuasion in the account
of the four elements presented in section 3, above. In all these types of
dialogue, the respondent has to overcome an opposed view initially held
by the respondent. If so, the definition of persuasion given above could
be too wide. The structure comprised of the four elements Rz through R¢
could be characteristic of argumentation in other types of dialogue, such
as negotiation or deliberation, as well as persuasion dialogue. So here
we have a puzzle. It has been shown above how Rr through R¢ are quite
characteristic of how an argument is used to persuade in a persuasion
dialogue. The four components above do seem to intuitively represent


Types of Dialogue 63


the speech act of persuasion. Does this mean that persuasion is involved
in these other types of dialogue as well? Or is the second definition above
unique to persuasion dialogue, and can what is going on in these other
types of dialogue be shown to be something different from persuasion?
To solve this puzzle, it is necessary to examine the characteristics of these
other types of dialogue, referring again to Table 2.1.

If we look at what happens in all the types of dialogue represented
in Table 2.1, we see that the initial situation is always some disagreement
between the proponent and respondent. There is some unsettled issue or
difference of opinion, and each side tries to get the other side to change
his or her opinion so that the issue becomes settled. In the inquiry, there
is some open factual proposition that needs to be proved or disproved
by collecting all the available evidence. If the proposition can neither be
proved nor disproved, then that could be an outcome of the inquiry as
well. In the inquiry, the participants are not literally trying to persuade
each other. At least it does not appear that way. “Persuasion” is nota strong
enough word. Instead, they are trying to collectively prove something by
establishing it with evidence that cannot later be challenged. They are
looking for a kind of conclusive proof, whereas persuasion is generally
less than conclusive when it comes to settling an issue beyond reasonable
doubt by an exhaustive search that collects all the relevant evidence.

In both the information-seeking and the eristic types of dialogue, it also
appears plausible, even on a superficial analysis, to say that persuasion is
not the central kind of move made in the dialogue. In an information-
seeking dialogue, one party asks the other a question that is a request for
some information. The other then answers that question by trying to sup-
ply the information, if possible, or indicating where it can be obtained.
Persuasion may be involved in how the information is later used, but
the speech of persuasion is not central to the exchange of information
that is the principal function of information-seeking dialogue. In eristic
dialogue, each party attacks the other, often using personal attack argu-
mentation. The ultimate purpose is to bring hidden grievances that are
not normally articulated to the surface for discussion. In a quarrel, one
party will sometimes put on a show of trying to rationally persuade the
other party. And one will sometimes accuse the other of falling below
a level of argumentation appropriate for rational persuasion dialogue.
But these moves are deceptive. The purpose of making any move in an
eristic dialogue is not to persuade the other party by using a chain of
reasoning with premises that are commitments of the other party. The
move may look like this on the surface, but under that appearance, it


64 The Speech Act of Persuasion


is simply meant to be an attack on the other party, meant to accuse the
other party of being a bad person or of having done something wrong.
Each move is really a “hitting out” at the other party. Thus, it is fairly easy
to rule out the information-seeking dialogue and the eristic dialogue as
having the speech act of persuasion as a type of move that is central to the
dialogue.

This leaves us with the deliberation and negotiation types of dialogue.
It seems initially much more plausible that the speech act of persuasion
could be a central kind of move in these types of dialogue. In deliberation
an agent, or group of agents, examines the arguments for and against a
particular action being considered. Of course, one agent will often try
to persuade another that this course of action is a good idea, or a bad
idea. So it seems that persuasion, or something very much like it, is quite
common in deliberation dialogue. In negotiation dialogue, one party is
trying to persuade the other to accept some sort of offer or proposal
that the first party has made. So here, too, the speech act of persuasion
seems to have a central place as a move in the argumentation. The job
that confronts this investigation then is to examine the role of persuasion
in these two types of dialogue more closely. We begin with deliberation
dialogue. Having reached some conclusions about it, we then move on
to consider negotiation dialogue.


5. Deliberation


Deliberation as a type of dialogue has been recognized as important in
both rhetoric and dialectic. The deliberative genre in rhetorical studies is
described by Hart and Dillard (2001, p. 209) as a kind of ideal model or
“act of faith” that proposals can be decided on in the best way when
persons have a discussion with four characteristics. First, the persons
are “gathered together with their peers.” Second, they are “discussing
important matters of the day.” Third, the atmosphere is “nonautocratic.”
Fourth, public policy can be changed by the discussion. But Hart and
Dillard admit that this framework is an “idealized model” that can easily
lose its way, in a real instance, and not “prove worthy.” In postmodern
times, the advent of mass media political rhetoric has cast doubt on the
ancient Greek notion that deliberation is a form of rational discussion
that people can engage in with their peers in a city-state. Even so, in the
theory of democracy that came to us from the Greeks, deliberation is an
ideal we can still strive for. Hart and Dillard have expressed this ideal
concisely: “Deliberative reason is . . . a special kind of reason, the kind of
sense people make when thinking aloud together.”


Deliberation 65


The paradigm case of deliberation is the kind of case where a per-
son is trying to decide what to do. For example, suppose I am trying to
decide whether to take radiation therapy or chemotherapy in a medical
treatment. Deliberation arises out of the need to take action. An agent
finds himself in a certain situation, and he needs to make a decision on
Wednesday. There are two kinds of problems typically encountered by an
agent in a deliberation. One is to find out what the relevant facts of the
given situation are. The other is for the agent to try to determine what
his goals are (and possibly also the goals of other affected agents). In
the medical treatment case, the agent presumably needs to find a lot of
relevant medical facts. This is normally done by getting input in the form
of expert advice from physicians. But then the agent has to decide what
his own goals are, or what he takes them to be. Some goals are obvious.
For example, presumably in this case one of the agent’s main goals is to
preserve his life. The goals always need to be evaluated in relation to a
possible trade-off against other things that may be consequences of bring-
ing about the goals in the given situation. For example, chemotherapy
may extend his life, but the side-effects may be severe, and therefore he
may want to take into account factors concerning the quality of the life
so extended.

Deliberation is a type of dialogue in which an agent or group of agents
is confronted with having to make a decision about which course of action
to take in a given situation. All of the agents involved have goals, and given
their knowledge about the situation as they see it, they try to cooperate
among themselves and with others to carry out these goals as well as
they can. Hitchcock, McBurney, and Parsons (2001) have devised a for-
mal model of deliberation dialogue as a framework of argumentation.
According to this model, a deliberation dialogue arises from a need to
take action, and begins by posing a “governing question” that expresses
a problem to be solved. At the opening stage, the governing question
is posed, and then during the argumentation stage there are “propose”
moves where possible action options appropriate to the governing ques-
tion are put forward by both parties. These proposals can then be revised,
considered, rejected, recommended, or confirmed at subsequent moves.
Finally, there is a closing stage at which agreement is reached on which
course of action of those proposed is the best one to take. Both parties
have commitment sets, and the argumentation stage proceeds by both
parties putting forward arguments of various kinds. Rules define what
kinds of moves are permitted, and how each move affects the given com-
mitment of either participant at any point in a dialogue. In their model
(p. 7), a deliberation dialogue goes through the following seven stages.


66 The Speech Act of Persuasion


1, Opening of the deliberation dialogue, and the raising of a govern-
ing question about what is to be done.

2. Discussion of: (a) the governing question, (b) desirable goals,
(c) any constraints on the possible actions that may be considered,
(d) perspectives by which proposals may be evaluated, and (e) any
premises (facts) relevant to this evaluation.

3. Suggesting of possible action options appropriate to the governing
question.

4. Commenting on proposals from various perspectives.

5. Revising of (a) the governing question, (b) goals, (c) constraints,
(d) perspectives, and/or (e) action options in the light of the com-
ments presented, and the undertaking of any information gath-
ering or fact checking required for resolution. (Note that other
types of dialogues, such as information-seeking or persuasion, may
be embedded in the deliberation dialogue at this stage.)

6. Recommending an option for action, and acceptance or non-
acceptance of this recommendation by each participant.

7. Confirming acceptance of a recommended option by each partic-
ipant. We have assumed that all participants must confirm their
acceptance of a recommended option for normal termination.


6. Closing of the Deliberation Dialogue


These stages do not necessarily occur in the order above, in actual cases.
Some of the stages represent kinds of moves that are repeated. But the
outline of the stages gives the reader an idea of how a deliberations
dialogue proceeds. Of course, there are rules governing each type of
move in the sequence. Using a formal model of deliberation dialogue
can help us to evaluate, in any given case, whether an argument is rele-
vant or not as a move made when two parties are deliberating with each
other.

In this model, two agents engage in argumentation by making pro-
posals and counter-proposals that are meant to represent actions that
can solve a problem. A deliberation dialogue arises out of a need to take
action to solve a problem, expressed in the form of a governing question,
such as, “How should we respond to the prospect of global warming?”
Both participants in the dialogue are agents who have goals and who are
presumed to have the capability of practical reasoning. First, there is an
opening stage, then a stage where information is shared, then a stage
for making proposals and counter-proposals, then a stage for confirming


Closing of the Deliberation Dialogue 67


accepted proposals, and finally a closing stage. The third stage is the one
where something most closely approximating a speech act of persuasion
would take place. A key move at this stage is the speech act for making
a proposal. In one kind of move, a participant can propose a proposition.
In another kind of move, a participant can prefer one action option over
another. In a third kind of move, one participant can ask another to jus-
tify a proposal. It would seem that justifying a proposal might be close
to a speech act of persuasion. How Hitchcock et al. handle sequences of
dialogue surrounding such a justification request is very interesting. Sup-
pose, for example, that the respondent has requested that the proponent
justify a proposition A that the proponent has previously put forward as
a proposal in the deliberation dialogue. According to the rule governing
such a move, the proponent must reply by either retracting A or shifting
into an embedded persuasion dialogue in which the proponent seeks to
persuade the respondent to accept A.

How would this model work as applied to the medical treatment case
outlined above? It would mean that when the patient examines the argu-
ments for or against chemotherapy, he shifts to a persuasion dialogue.
When this dialogue comes to a conclusion, or closing stage, he then uses
the outcome as input into the deliberation dialogue that then continues.
Thus the persuasion dialogue is embedded in the deliberation dialogue.
In the persuasion dialogue phase, the patient lists all the pros and cons
of the proposed course of action. This dialogue can then be transported
into the deliberations. In another shift, all the pros and cons of radiation
therapy could be considered. Then both options could be weighed more
thoughtfully in the ensuing deliberations.

Although this single-agent type of case is the most obvious kind of
example of deliberation, it is helpful to also consider a multi-agent case.
For example, let’s consider a case of deliberation where two parties are
trying to arrive ata common course of action, even though they disagree
on what is the best thing to do. An example cited in Walton (1998b, p.
169) is the debate in the Rhode Island Assembly on whether or not to
bring in no-fault insurance.


Case 1: The No-Fault Insurance Example

One side wanted to bring in a new system of no-fault insurance similar to one that
had recently been adopted by other states. The problem perceived by the citizens
of Rhode Island was that insurance rates were too high, and paying the premiums
had become burdensome. The goal of both sides then was presumably to deal with
this problem by, if possible, lowering insurance rates in some way. One side had


68 The Speech Act of Persuasion


made a proposal to do this, and the other side opposed it. Of course, in all such
cases there are other goals in the background that would come into consideration.
The opposed side, for example, argued that the no-fault system would unfairly
make good drivers pay for bad drivers. The opposed side also argued that the
proposed no-fault system would fail to lower insurance premiums.


In this case, then, we have a deliberation dialogue in which there were two
groups engaged in debate with each other. The argumentation appears
to be similar to the notion of persuasion in the speech act definitions
above. We need to ask whether the arguments used in this dialogue meet
the requirements of the second definition of persuasion. Were the two
groups trying to persuade each other to accept a particular designated
proposition using arguments based on the commitments of the other
side? It may seem so. But it is possible to argue that the argumentation in
such a case does not fit the second definition of persuasion. The reason
is that both sides are arguing from common commitments. They are
arguing that the proposals for action put forward by the other side will
not fulfill the goals they both agree on. For example, both sides began the
discussion by agreeing on common goals. Both wanted lower insurance
rates. The argument of the one side was that the new system of no-fault
insurance would in fact succeed in producing lower insurance rates. The
other side denied this claim. They might give reasons to support their
contentions. For example, the first side might cite what was happening
in other states. The other side might then come forward and argue that
the no-fault system in other states has failed to lower premiums there. So
what is happening here is different from persuasion dialogue. It is not
that the one side is trying to use the commitments of the other side as
premises to get the other side to agree to a different view. It seems more
like both sides have common goals and the one side is trying to argue that
the proposal of the other side would not in fact be successful in leading
to these goals.

The formal model of negotiation dialogue given by Hitchcock et al.
(2001) shows how deliberation dialogue is structurally different from
persuasion dialogue in the kinds of moves that are appropriate and in
how these moves are used at different stages. In deliberation, persuasion,
of the kind represented in the two definitions above, is not the central
goal, nor is it the function of the arguments used at the various moves.
In this model of deliberation as a type of dialogue, the two sides have
common goals, or at least they have some commonality of goals. It is
this common element that steers them through the various proposals
and counter-proposals toward agreement on the best course of action to


Acts of Persuasion, Inducement, Threats 69


resolve the problem posed by the governing question. So while persuasion
may be involved at various points, itis not the central theme or mechanism
that drives the deliberation dialogue forward toward its goal. To see more
clearly why this is so, however, persuasion must be contrasted with other
kinds of argument moves.


7. Acts of Persuasion, Inducement, and Making a Threat


Simons et al. (2001, p. 7) put forward the following definition of persua-
sion. Persuasion is “human communication designed to influence the
autonomous judgments and actions of others.” According to this def
inition, persuasion is a form of attempt by one party to alter the way
another party thinks, feels, or acts. This definition does make persuasion
take the form of a dialogue between two parties. But one of the most
interesting aspects of the way Simons et al. defined persuasion is the way
they distinguished it from other forms of influence, such as coercion
and inducement. They offered the toy truck example to illustrate the
difference between persuasion and these other two forms of speech act.
The outline of the truck example presented below has been paraphrased
from Simons etal. (2001, p. 7), but the six arguments (A1—A6) are quoted
verbatim.


Case 2: The Truck Example

A boy called Reynaldo has been sitting on a toy truck. A girl called Janie
wants to play with the truck. To get the toy truck, according to the exam-
ple, Janie has three options. Each of these options is characterized by
certain sorts of typical argument moves, as indicated below. Persuasion is
characterized by the following two arguments.


(A1) Aren’t you tired of being on the truck?
(Ag) That doll over there is fun. Why don’t you play with it?


The speech act called inducement is typified by the following two argu-
ments.


(Ag) Ifyou let me play on that truck, I'll play with you.
(A4) Ill stop annoying you if you let me play with that truck.


The speech act of coercion is characterized by the following two argu-
ments.


(As) If you stay on that truck, I'll stop being your friend.
(A6) Get off that truck or I'll tell Mrs. S.


70 The Speech Act of Persuasion


The role of Janie is described as persuader insofar as “she identifies the
benefits or harms from the adoption or nonadoption of the proposal but
does not claim to be the agent of those consequences” (p. 8). By con-
trast, in the speech acts of inducement and coercion, she is the agent.
The difference between inducement and coercion is that inducement
offers positive consequences, whereas coercion threatens negative con-
sequences.

Let us examine the various arguments A1 to A6. Ai takes the form of
a question. But by examining the indirect speech act structure under the
question, it is possible to reconstruct it as an argument. Janie is suggesting
to Reynaldo that he may be tired of playing with the truck. And if it were
true that he was tired of playing with the truck, that would be a reason for
him to get off the truck and play with something else. So Janie’s argument
could be described as a persuasion attempt. She is trying to persuade
Reynaldo to get off the truck by giving him a reason to do so that might
be acceptable to him. Let’s say that Reynaldo has been sitting on the truck
for while. It is known that kids tend to get bored with activities that are
prolonged. Thus Reynaldo might well be moved by this argument. Notice
also that Ai is an example of a speech act of persuasion used to try to get
the respondent to take action. Ag can also be described as an argument
and as a persuasion attempt. Janie is giving Reynaldo a reason to move
off the truck in order to play with something else. Here she is giving him
a more positive reason by suggesting that playing with the doll would
be fun. Ag and A4 can be contrasted with Ai and Ag. The latter pair of
arguments are not really persuasion attempts, although they may initially
seem to fall under this category. They are more like the kind of quid
pro quo moves typical of arguments used in negotiation dialogue. They
have the form “If you give me this, I’ll give you that.” Loosely speaking,
they may be called attempts to persuade the respondent to take a certain
action. But really they are not attempts to persuade in the sense captured
by the first or second definitions above. They are not attempts to prove
to the respondent that a designated proposition is true or that the act it
describes is a good thing for the respondent to carry out, based on the
respondent’s prior commitments. Instead, they are proposing a trade-off
so that the respondent can get something he presumably wants — some
goods, commodities, or outcomes that he might like to have and would
enjoy. In other words, with Ag and A4, we are entering into the area of
the arguments of the kind centrally used in negotiation dialogue. Can
they be classified as speech acts of persuasion? Simons et al. seem to be
right in not so classifying them and in contrasting them with persuasion.


Acts of Persuasion, Inducement, Threats 71


Finally, we come to As, and A6. These examples are classified by Simons
et al. under the heading of coercion. Coercion has been recognized as
being antithetical to the aims of persuasion. As noted above, the first rule
of critical discussion formulated by van Eemeren and Grootendorst is to
the effect that parties must not prevent each other from putting forward
arguments. One of the defining hallmarks of persuasion is freedom. The
respondent of a genuine act of persuasion must freely decide to accept
the conclusion that the other party is trying to persuade him to accept.
Borderline cases, like “brainwashing,” can be denied the status of genuine
persuasion. They are not intended to be captured by the first and second
definitions above. Examples As and A6 correspond to a type of speech act
that is both very familiar and important in the world of argumentation.
It is the speech act of making a threat. This, of course, is the very kind
of move meant to be banned by the first rule of a critical discussion, and
it corresponds to a known fallacy, the argumentum ad baculum. Thus the
question is posed of how the speech act of making a threat should be
defined. For if it could be clearly defined, the contrast with the speech
act of persuasion might be made evident.

The speech act of making a threat has been defined in Walton (2000,
pp. 113-114). It is presupposed that there are two parties engaging in
a dialogue. In line with the definitions of persuasion given above, let us
designate these two parties as the proponent and the respondent. It is
also presupposed that there is some designated event or outcome that
is perceived as bad by the respondent. This event represents something
that the respondent would prefer to avoid if possible. The definition
of a threat involves three conditions. The preparatory condition states
that the respondent has reason to believe that the proponent can bring
about the event and that without the intervention of the proponent,
the event will not occur. The sincerity condition states that both parties
think that the event is not in the respondent’s interest. The sincerity
condition assumes that the respondent would like to avoid this event’s
occurring if possible. By the same condition, it is also presupposed that
the respondent would take steps to avoid the offensive event coming
about if he thought these steps were necessary to avoid the event coming
about. The essential condition requires that the proponent is making a
commitment to bring about the event unless the respondent carries out
the action designated by the proponent. The third (essential) condition
is part of the notion of a credible threat. A credible threat is one that
the respondent thinks that the proponent really can bring about, and
one that the respondent thinks that the proponent seriously intends to


72 The Speech Act of Persuasion


bring about if the respondent fails to comply. This third condition, the
necessary condition, is very important because it marks the distinction
between a warning and a threat. The condition characteristic of a threat,
as opposed to a warning, is that the proponent is declaring his intention
to actually bring the event about if the respondent fails to do what the
proponent indicates. In the case of a warning, the proponent tells the
respondent that the bad event will or may occur. But he does not tell
the respondent that he (the proponent) will be the agency that makes
it occur. Thus, in principle, the distinction between the speech act of
making a threat and that of giving a warning is clear. In real cases in
natural language discourse, however, many threats are of the type called
indirect threats in order to give the threatener a route of denial. Such
disguised threats are made to look like warnings on the surface.

Having defined the speech act of a threat, we might now ask how
an inducement differs from a threat. First, we should note that the two
actions have something in common. Both making a threat and offering
an inducement involves the interests of the respondent. And in both mak-
ing a threat and offering an inducement, the proponent has the goal of
trying to get the respondent to take an action of some sort. In making
a threat, the proponent is saying that he will do something that goes
against the interests of the respondent unless the respondent complies
by doing something else. When offering an inducement, the proponent
offers something that is in the interests of the respondent. But it can
be a positive or negative inducement. As the saying goes, it can be the
carrot or the stick. A positive inducement is something the respondent
would like to see come about. It represents an interest to him. A negative
inducement is something the respondent would not like to come about.
It represents something that contravenes his interests. A threat appears to
be an especially negative kind of inducement that involves an event or out-
come that the respondent would especially not like to happen. A threat
also can be classified as a psychological form of inducement, because the
event that the proponent threatens to bring about is often something
that is fearful to the respondent. In practice, threats are often associated
with fear appeal arguments under the category of the traditional infor-
mal fallacy of the arguwmentum ad baculum. To sum up, you could say that
a threat is an especially serious form of negative inducement.

Now we come to the question of how the speech act of persuasion
contrasts with these other two speech acts. This difference is a little
hard to articulate, because persuasion seems so different in orientation
from either of the other two speech acts. The main reason is that both


Negotiation Dialogue and Persuasion 73


threatening and offering an inducement are based on trade-offs of goods
or services. Broadly speaking, goods and services that are traded off in
inducements can be classified as “interests” of the parties to the trans-
action. Interests are often in the form of money or things that a price
can be placed on, but they could also be things that would enhance
the status or self-esteem of a person. An interest can be anything a per-
son wants, or thinks he needs, or finds valuable to acquire and possess.
Speech acts offering inducements or making threats are always based on
interests. The proponent is trying to get the respondent to do something
by appealing to his interests. Persuasion is an entirely different type of
speech act. Offering interests, in the form of goods or services, won’t
work here. This type of inducement is not appropriate for persuasion.
To persuade somebody to come to accept a proposition or to carry out
an action, you have to give this person a reason to do it or accept it. This
means you have to do two things. First, you have to offer the person some
premises that he thinks are true or at least acceptable as opinions that
can be taken to represent the truth of a matter. Second, you have to show
the person a route from these premises to the claim you want to persuade
him to accept, or to the action you want him to bring about. Trying to
bribe the person or offering him inducements in the form of money or
making threats, is a wrong or inappropriate means of persuasion. In fact,
when we use the term “persuasion” in such a case, it has an ironic edge.
For example, we might talk of gangsters “persuading” a shop owner to
join their protection racket by threatening to wreck his shop. This speech
act is one of threatening. It is a form of inducement, a negative one, but
it is not really persuading in the sense represented in the two definitions
of the speech of persuasion given above.


8. Negotiation Dialogue and Persuasion


Offering inducements and even making threats are normal parts of nego-
tiation dialogue. Of course, they can sometimes be inappropriate or
excessive, so that they are not helpful arguments. Making a threat in
a negotiation dialogue, for example, is a high risk tactic. For a threat can
appear to be an ultimatum to a respondent. He could respond by refus-
ing to take any further part in the dialogue. But in a union-management
dispute, for example, suppose that the union side declares, “If you don’t
raise benefits, the workers will be out on the picket line tomorrow!” The
argument used here is definitely a threat. And it is not necessarily a bad
or fallacious argument for that reason alone. On the other hand, making


74 The Speech Act of Persuasion


a threat as an argument in a persuasion dialogue would normally be so
highly inappropriate that we would see right away that it was irrelevant.
Suppose that during an ethics seminar on the topic of whether tipping is
a good practice or not, one participant declares to another, “If you don’t
accept my view of the matter, I'll sit on your bag lunch!” This threat is
not relevant as an argument in the persuasion dialogue on tipping. Of
course, in this case, the threat would be so outrageously inappropriate
that it would be more of a joke than an ad baculum argument of the kind
that might seriously deceive anyone. But the point is that in a persuasion
dialogue, making a threat is irrelevant. It just does not fit in as a normal
sort of argument of the kind that makes the right sort of move to help the
dialogue along. It is more of a disruption than a collaborative contribu-
tion. By the same token, offering an inducement, for example, a financial
reward, as an argument during a persuasion dialogue also seems out of
place, although it could be appropriate in a negotiation type of dialogue.
These reflections about the argumentum ad baculum and about the use of
inducements as arguments suggest several interesting hypotheses. They
suggest that perhaps the speech act of persuasion is central to persuasion
dialogue in a way that it is not central to negotiation dialogue, and that
there may be a sort of asymmetry between persuasion dialogue and nego-
tiation dialogue in this respect based on the speech acts used in these types
of dialogue. But how well does this asymmetry thesis really stand up? For
it would seem that persuasion is used as a form of argument quite often in
negotiation dialogue, even though inducements and threats don’t really
belong very well in persuasion dialogue. These reflections call for some
investigations into negotiation as a type of dialogue.

Like persuasion dialogue, negotiation dialogue begins with an issue.
In persuasion dialogue, the issue is a conflict of opinions. In negotiation
dialogue, the issue is how to divide up some goods or services that are in
short supply and that both parties want. Each presently has something
that the other wants. So they try to make an agreement on how to trade
off. Because this kind of situation represents the basic issue in a negotia-
tion, the normal form argumentation takes is as follows. Each side makes
offers and tries to get concessions from the other side. It is not hard
to see, therefore, that the normal kinds of argument moves made in a
negotiation are different from those made in a persuasion dialogue. In
a persuasion dialogue, one side tries to get the other to come to accept
some claim, a proposition, as true. In a negotiation dialogue, the truth of
the matter does not matter all that much, at least directly. What matters


Negotiation Dialogue and Persuasion 75


is whether the other side will make a concession in order to get what he
wants.

In negotiation dialogue, persuasion of a certain sort does seem char-
acteristic. By making you an offer, Iam trying to “persuade” you to accept
the division of goods or services that I have put forward. But the term
“persuade” here is not used in the same sense as represented in the
second definition of the speech act of persuasion given above. And lit-
erally, Iam not trying to persuade you of anything in such a case. I am
not trying to get you to accept some proposition as true by giving you
reasons to come to accept it as true. I am only trying to “persuade” you
to take action by accepting the offer I have proposed. The term “per-
suasion” as used here does seem appropriate, because I am trying to get
you to change your mind, so to speak. I am trying to get you to change
your initial position in the negotiation. But this is not persuasion in the
sense that I am trying to get you to change your opinion. Whatever your
opinions may be, negotiation is all about your interests.

And yet persuasion is often involved in negotiation dialogue. To see
how, it is best to begin with an example.


Case 3: The Car Negotiation Example


Suppose I go to a car dealer and make an offer on a model I like to a salesman
in the dealer’s showroom. He replies that my offer is too low. I reply that I can
get it for that price at another dealership that is closer to my home. I argue that
getting the car serviced on the warranty would be more convenient at the other
dealership. The salesman then argues that the service is better at his dealership.
He gives a number of arguments to support this claim. His dealership has better
mechanics. His dealership gives customers a free ride in their van during servicing
of their vehicle. His dealership has a track record of taking good care of their
customers. I reply to these arguments by saying that I have a friend who bought
there, and he didn’t get any free ride in a van when his car was being serviced.


One can see in this example that the dialogue, especially the latter parts
of it, does seem to involve persuasion. There seems to be a conflict of
opinions on the issue of which of the two dealers is better at servicing a
vehicle. The salesman has presented several arguments that purport to
show that his dealership is better. The customer has expressed doubt
about the salesman’s claim by offering an apparent counter-example
to it.

The problem is to diagnose what has happened in a case like this.
There has been a dialectical shift from one type of dialogue to another


76 The Speech Act of Persuasion


during the sequence of argumentation. The example started out to be a
case of negotiation dialogue. The customer made an offer. The salesman
refused it. But then at some point, the dialogue shifted to a persuasion
dialogue about the issue of which dealership has a better maintenance
service. However, there is another analysis that could be applied to the
case. According to this analysis, the persuasion part is not separable as a
type of dialogue from the negotiation part. According to the model of
negotiation proposed by Fisher and Ury (1991, p. 4), the goal of nego-
tiation is to reach a so-called wise agreement that not only meets the
legitimate interest of each side, but also resolves conflicting interests
fairly. Fisher and Ury advocate what they call “principled negotiation” as
a method of reaching a wise agreement. Principled negotiation requires
that the parties reach agreement based on some standards independent
of the will of either side. As applied to the car negotiation example above,
principled negotiation could mean that both salesman and customer
could turn to some source of information or standard that is indepen-
dent of the will of either. The two could then appeal to that independent
standard to settle their disagreement about which dealer has the better
service. It would appear that Fisher and Ury’s analysis would not view
the car negotiation example as exhibiting a shift from negotiation dia-
logue to persuasion dialogue. Instead, it would see the argumentation in
the whole example as being part of the negotiation. On their analysis,
the customer made an offer to the salesman. The offer was not accept-
able, and so the bargaining appeared to be blocked. But the negotiation
then turned to matters of service of the car. This could be seen as a
turn toward at least the possibility of principled negotiation, because the
issue of which dealership is better for service is an objective difference
of opinions that could be settled by appealing to facts, or at least factual
arguments.

Negotiation is a type of dialogue that is vital for multi-agent computer
systems. An example from Chu-Carroll and Carberry (1995, p. 111; see
also case g.1) shows how negotiation is important in multi-agent planning
and how such cases can very often involve other types of dialogue as nec-
essary parts of the argumentation. In this example, the air-traffic control
system in a country failed, and two neighboring countries, X and Y, nego-
tiated to take over tracking and controlling all affected flights. To make
the plan successful, the air-traffic controllers in countries X and Yhad to
negotiate with each other on which flights each would take. For example,
when the controllers in the one country thought they were taking on too
many flights during a busy period, they had to try to exchange these flights


Negotiation Dialogue and Persuasion 77


for others they could take on when they were not so busy. Chu-Carroll
and Carberry proposed a computerized model of negotiation dialogue
to represent agent communication in this kind of situation. But one can
see that not just negotiation but other types of dialogue are involved as
well. At first, the air-traffic control systems are engaged in a deliberation
dialogue. They are attempting to find the best course of action so that
all three countries can solve the problem of air-traffic control. But in
order to conduct such deliberations in an intelligent manner, they will
have to exchange information with each other. For example, the one
group of controllers will have to tell the other when they are too busy
to handle all the flights they are now assigned to control. They will also
have to exchange information on matters such as which terminal is most
capable of guiding which flights. Thus, information-seeking dialogue will
have to be involved as well. Although it may be less obvious, persuasion
dialogue will have to be factored into the mixture as well. For suppose
the controllers for X and Y have a conflict of opinions on how many
flights it is reasonable to expect the controllers in country Y to handle
during a given time frame. To discuss and resolve this conflict of opinions,
they must engage in persuasion dialogue. Chu-Carroll and Carberry have
tacitly recognized the need for persuasion dialogue in this example by
stating that there are intervals of argumentation in such cases where one
agent needs to justify its beliefs to another agent.

One way to view the argumentation in this kind of example is to see
the deliberation dialogue, the information-seeking dialogue, and the per-
suasion dialogue all as parts of the negotiation dialogue. Another way to
see the argumentation is as a sequence of chained inferences that runs
through a complex communicative context in which the negotiation dia-
logue is embedded in the other three types of dialogue. On this model,
there are four separate types of dialogue involved, but each is embedded
in the others. As the chain of argumentation proceeds, there is a shift
from one type of dialogue to another. For example, the deliberation
shifts to a negotiation. Then during the negotiation dialogue, there are
some intervals where information-seeking dialogue occurs, and other
intervals where persuasion dialogue occurs. In the example considered
above, each of these shifts to information-seeking or persuasion intervals
improves the quality of the negotiation dialogue. These shifts represent
what are called embeddings of one dialogue into another. An embedding
is a positive or useful kind of shift in which the one dialogue contributes
to the goal of the other. Negative shifts are often associated with informal
fallacies. For example, a shift from persuasion dialogue to negotiation


78 The Speech Act of Persuasion


dialogue in the making of a threat can be associated with the ad baculum
fallacy.

Here then we have two ways of viewing negotiation as a process of dia-
logue. According to the Walton model, argumentation in negotiation is
about goods or services that the two parties have or want. In a nutshell, it
is about interests. In this model, an argument in a negotiation is not about
what you should believe or accept as true or false. It is about maximizing
your interests by reaching an agreement that gets enough of what you
want while also giving the other party enough of what he wants so that
he can accept the outcome well enough so that the agreement will last.
According to the Fisher and Ury model, negotiation dialogue includes
argumentation about what a participant should accept as true or false,
independently of the will or interests of that participant. On this view,
negotiation includes persuasion as a very important part of the negoti-
ation process itself. Other exponents of both these views can be found
in the literature. In a study of labor negotiations, Sycara (1990, pp. 217-
219) identified many kinds of arguments that are commonly used in such
negotiations and that seem to be familiar from the textbook accounts of
informal fallacies. These include arguments such as appeals to socially
sanctioned beliefs, appeals to self-interest, appeals to threats, and appeals
to authority. The common use of such arguments in negotiations suggests
that there is a strong element of persuasion dialogue in argumentation in
negotiation dialogue. That is one point of view, at any rate. According to
this point of view, persuasion attempts are an intrinsic part of the fabric
of negotiation dialogue, and thus the two types of dialogue cannot really
be separated as normative models of argument use. But according to the
opposed view, persuasion dialogue is distinct from negotiation dialogue,
and one primary reason is the centrality of the speech act of persuasion
in persuasion dialogue. This is the view expounded in the system of dia-
logue typology put forward in Walton (1998b), but it has also been clearly
expressed by Jon Elster, who identifies negotiation with bargaining and
sees it as distinct from persuasion by rational discussion, or giving of rea-
sons to support a claim. For example, Elster wrote, “Bargaining must be
distinguished from attempts to reach agreement by rational discussion”
(1989, pp. 50-51). He remarked that negotiation can be distinguished
from trying to reach agreement by rational discussion on the grounds
that certain forms of argumentation that are typical of negotiation are
not allowed in trying to reach agreement by rational discussion. All that
counts in rational discussion is “the power of the better argument.”

The analysis of the speech act of persuasion put forward in the first
and second definitions above can help to support my view and that of


Relevance and Argument Diagramming 79


Elster that persuasion dialogue can be seen as a normative model of
argumentation that is distinct from negotiation dialogue. This view can
acknowledge that negotiation dialogue often contains elements of per-
suasion dialogue. It can even acknowledge the thesis that persuasion
dialogue is vitally important in helping negotiations along. It even posits
an embedding of persuasion dialogue into negotiation dialogue, so that
the dialectical shift from negotiation to persuasion dialogue can be pos-
itive and can contribute to the success of the negotiation dialogue. This
sort of positive shift has been remarked on by Jacobs and Jackson (1983,
1992), in their work on divorce dispute mediation. They observed that
a deadlocked dispute about child custody can sometimes be resolved by
a shift from negotiation to persuasion dialogue. This can happen if the
mediator turns the dialogue from the issue of who should get custody
to a critical discussion on the issue of which parent would be the better
caregiver. The transition, in such a case, is from a negotiation dialogue to
a persuasion dialogue. But in this kind of case, the shift is a positive one
that could resolve the deadlock reached in the negotiations. However,
it need not follow that we should have to view negotiation dialogue as
indistinguishable from persuasion dialogue. We can hold the two models
of dialogue to be normatively distinct even though at any given point
in a case of divorce mediation argumentation, it may be hard to deter-
mine whether an argument is part of the persuasion or the negotiation
dialogue. What can now really help us in making a clearer theoretical dis-
tinction between the two types of dialogue, and in understanding better
how each type works, is the analysis of the speech act of persuasion. We
can see how this speech act contrasts with other speech acts, like making
a threat, and how it is central to the way arguments work in persuasion
dialogue. By contrast, we can then see how arguments work differently in
other types of dialogue, such as deliberation and negotiation. Needless to
say, the distinctions drawn above will remain highly controversial. There
does seem to be a competing view holding that persuasion and negotia-
tion, in particular, are so fused together in practice that any attempt to
separate out the speech act of persuasion from the interest-based moves
typical of negotiation is futile and misguided.


g. Relevance and Argument Diagramming


The first definition of persuasion above represented the notion of suc-
cessful or completed persuasion. As such, it can be taken to represent
the goal of the proponent in a persuasion dialogue. His goal is to prove
his ultimate conclusion A by means of a structurally correct argument in


80 The Speech Act of Persuasion


which all the premises are commitments of the respondent. The goal of
the respondent is to construct an opposed argument of the same kind
that has the opposite of A as its ultimate conclusion (or in the case of
the weaker kind of opposition, to throw doubt on the respondent’s argu-
ment as being a successful act of persuasion). In a persuasion dialogue
(Walton and Krabbe 1995), each party has an individual goal. These
individual goals can now be represented as acts of persuasion, using the
first definition of “persuasion.” The persuasion dialogue, as a type of dia-
logue, also has a collective goal. According to Table 2.1 above, that goal
is to resolve or clarify the conflict of opinions (or opposition) that is the
initial situation of the dialogue. Thus the first definition represents the
participant’s ideal goal or aim in a persuasion dialogue. When examin-
ing individual arguments, in the study of fallacies and so forth, we are
most often confronted with a single argument, or relatively short chain
of argumentation, that is an act of persuasion, but does not come even
close to realizing this goal. To see this kind of incomplete argument as
“persuasion,” the second definition must be applied. But to fit the two
definitions together, as applied to any real case, there is a large problem to
be confronted. How can we fit the short persuasion attempt in the given
case to the ideal and final goal of the dialogue represented by the second
definition?

For example, in the dialogue on tipping, Helen might argue that tip-
ping has bad consequences. She might argue that tipping leads to mis-
understandings that are socially awkward and embarrassing. Bob might
agree that this is so. Helen then might contend that because these out-
comes are bad, as Bob himself admits, tipping itself is a bad social practice
that should be discontinued. Here we can see that Helen’s argument is
leading toward her goal in the dialogue of proving that tipping is a bad
social practice. But by itself, this single argumentis not very likely to reach
that goal. Bob may admit that tipping sometimes leads to misunderstand-
ings, and even that such misunderstandings are bad and can hurt people’s
feelings. But he may argue in reply that people need to overcome this
problem by being more sensitive in how they tip. He may even argue that
despite this reasonable argument against tipping, there are many more
reasons why tipping is a valuable social practice that is worth preserving.
Helen may then launch into a longer argument that tipping leads to such
awkward and embarrassing consequences because of its underlying eli-
tist nature. She might argue that tipping is just one aspect of the social
inequality that is endemic to our society and that social inequality is the
root cause of war and of all evil.


Relevance and Argument Diagramming 81


In this example, we see a typical case of a relatively small and local
argument that is relevant in the dialogue on tipping because it has a
place within a longer chain of argumentation in the persuasion dialogue.
Helen’s local argument that tipping leads to misunderstandings that are
socially awkward and embarrassing is an act of persuasion. But it did not
fulfil her ultimate goal in the dialogue of successfully persuading Bob
that tipping is a bad practice, by itself. It was only one small argument in
Helen’s much longer and more complex chain of argumentation in the
dialogue. And yet we can judge that Helen’s local argument was relevant.
It was dialectically relevant precisely because it has a genuine place in her
longer chain of argumentation leading toward her ultimate conclusion
in the persuasion dialogue. Thus Helen’s local argument fits the second
definition of persuasion. It can be classified as a persuasion attempt that
was not successful, or wholly successful by itself but that has a place in
Helen’s longer chain of argumentation that (presumably) moves toward
her ultimate conclusion to be proved in the dialogue. As this example
shows, the problem is one of judging actual cases of argumentation to see
whether persuasion, as defined above, can be said to fit the argument, as
expressed in the text of discourse of a case.

The problem is one of defining relevance, in order to take a localized
argument and embed it in a context of dialogue as part of a longer chain
of argumentation. The local argument can be classified as a persuasion
attempt only where it is set within such a wider dialectical context of use.
The problem is how to judge whether the local argument is relevant in a
wider context. If the wider context is that of a persuasion dialogue, and
the local argument fits into the longer chain of argumentation aimed
toward the proponent’s goal of persuasion, as represented by the first
definition of persuasion, then the local argument can rightly be classi-
fied as an act of persuasion. The reason is basically to be found in the
second definition of persuasion. The local argument can be a persuasion
attempt that, while not successful in itself, is part of a longer chain of
argumentation aimed toward the ultimate goal of persuasion dialogue.
Thus certain dialectical methods are needed to make the definitions of
persuasion applicable to real cases of argumentation. One is the method
of argument diagramming, because it is the tool needed to identify the
chain of reasoning used in a given case to try to argue for a conclusion.
The other is the fitting of the local argument into a broader dialectical
context of use through the notion of dialectical relevance. To judge an
argument as dialectically relevant, you need to make an assessment where
the argument is supposedly going, judging from the text and context of


82 The Speech Act of Persuasion


the given argument. You need to first of all determine what ultimate con-
clusion the argument was supposed to prove in the dialogue. Then you
need to assess how far along the given argument went in that direction,
in light of the chain of argumentation it can be inserted into as one
part.

To test the given argument for relevance, the chain of reasoning in
the local argument needs to be extrapolated forward to see whether it
moves toward or reaches the ultimate conclusion to be proved in the
dialogue. A basic tool is the classification of dialogue types. An argu-
ment that is relevant in one type of dialogue may not be relevant in the
context of another type of dialogue. The classic case, as noted above, is
the argumentum ad baculum. The use of a threat might be relevant in a
negotiation dialogue. But suppose the very same threat is used as argu-
ment in a persuasion dialogue. In that context it may be irrelevant. And
indeed, as indicated above, threats tend to be visibly irrelevant in per-
suasion dialogue, where they are highly out of place. More subtle cases
concern the use of incentives that are not coercive but are interest-based.
They are the normal kinds of arguments used in negotiations, but they
too are not really relevant in persuasion dialogue. They don’t fit the
requirement for the definition of a persuasion attempt, but they do fit
the kind of argument normally used in negotiation dialogue. How could
interest-based arguments even appear relevant in a persuasion dialogue?
The answer to this question takes us to the phenomena of dialectical
shifts and embeddings. If one type of dialogue is embedded in another, a
chain of argumentation crossing the shift can still be relevant in the first
type of dialogue, even when the argumentation has led into the other
type of dialogue. For example, as considered above, a negotiation dia-
logue might shift to a persuasion dialogue. But suppose the persuasion
dialogue is embedded in the negotiation dialogue. The persuasion inter-
val might actually be helpful to move the negotiation toward its ultimate
goal. For example, in the case of divorce mediation dialogue studied by
Jacobs and Jackson, the shift to persuasion dialogue might actually help
the negotiation dialogue. Thus even though there has been a shift to a
different type of dialogue, the argumentation in the persuasion dialogue
could be relevant. The reasoning is the embedding of the one type of
dialogue into the other.

Another tool needed to analyze real cases is the method of argument
diagramming. The argument diagram can be taken to represent the chain
of reasoning reconstructed from the discourse in a given case of an argu-
ment. An important part of the evidence needed to test for dialectical


Relevance and Argument Diagramming 83


relevance is the argument diagram. The argument diagram can give a
view of the direction of the local argument by showing its conclusion and
what premises lead into it and how. The diagram is an important part
of the evidence needed to make a judgment of where the argument is
going as part of a longer chain of argumentation that may or may not
lead toward the ultimate conclusion to be proved in the dialogue. The
ultimate conclusion is the end point that the local argument should be
aiming toward. Is it going toward that end point or to some other end
point? This question poses the problem of relevance. But by looking at
the argument diagram, the direction of the argument at the local level
can be visualized. Then, using a global viewpoint that takes into account
the type of dialogue and the goal of argumentation appropriate for that
type of dialogue, a match can be made between the local and global
evidence.

Some cases of irrelevant argumentation, like many cases of the argu-
mentum ad baculum cited above, are easy to diagnose. The reason is that in
a persuasion dialogue, for example, the use of a direct and explicit threat
is obviously inappropriate to meeting the requirements of the proper
kind of persuasion argument that should be used. It may be that the ad
baculum works not because it is deceptive, in that it seems relevant, but
because it is a naked appeal to the interests of an arguer. Even if he knows
that the threat is a bad argument in the persuasion dialogue, he still has to
look out for his own interests and safety. Other cases of fallacies are more
subtle, because the fallacious argument appears to be relevant but is not.
Appeals to emotion, like appeals to pity or personal attacks, are often
of this sort. They can be relevant in some cases. But they are also power-
fully distracting. And hence they can have a persuasive effect, and may
even seem to be relevant, when they are not. To judge individual cases,
one should always ask which type of dialogue the argument is suppos-
edly a part of. Then one should ask what the ultimate conclusion is to
be proved in that dialogue. For example, in court, the defendant may
launch a tearful appeal to pity. This argument could be relevant at the
sentencing hearing after the criminal trial. But during the trial itself, the
issue to be determined is whether the defendant committed the crime
as charged. The argumentation here can be seen as a kind of persuasion
dialogue in which the prosecution and the defense represent two sides
that have a conflict of opinion. In that dialectical context, the appeal to
pity may be irrelevant.

Cases of legal argumentation can be used to illustrate the typical
kind of problem of relevance that one confronts in dealing with real


84 The Speech Act of Persuasion


arguments. For example, the prosecution may try to use an argument,
and then the defense says, “Irrelevant.” The judge, applying the rules
of evidence, then has to make a decision. Is the argument relevant or
not? It may be hard to say, because the trial may have started. Indeed,
relevance of evidence is sometimes a hotly contested issue between the
two sides, even at pre-trial hearings. The judge may not know, at this
early stage, what the line of argumentation taken by one side or the
other will be. The prosecuting attorney may even reply to the objec-
tion by countering, “If your honor will give me a little latitude, I can
show where this line of argument is leading.” What this kind of situa-
tion shows is that there can be two kinds of cases in which judgments
of relevance or irrelevance are made. One is the kind of case where the
line of argumentation on both sides has been completed and where the
text of discourse of the whole argument is complete. For example, once
a trial is over, a transcript of it can be examined. The other is the kind
of case where the argumentation is incomplete. In this kind of case, we
may only have a small text of discourse representing a local argument.
The larger context of how the argument was used or where it led or
may lead, may simply be unknown. In such a case, there is much less
data. The best that may be possible is to give a provisional assessment of
relevance.

Such matters of relevance are highly applicable to the problem of judg-
ing how the definitions of persuasion given above apply to actual cases
of argumentation. How can we tell, in a given case, judging from the text
and context of discourse, whether an argument is better classified as a
persuasion attempt or whether it is better classified under the heading of
some other type of speech act? For example, it might better be classified
as the making of a threat or the offering of an inducement. There will be
borderline cases. And in fact, many of the tricky borderline cases are pre-
cisely those identified with informal fallacies and other cases of deceptive
argumentation tactics that have to do with subtly biased arguments and
the like. What is most useful for assisting with the analysis and evaluation
of argumentation in such cases are the clear definitions of the speech act
of persuasion presented above.


10. The Cognitive Component of Persuasion


Once persuasion has been identified as a distinctive speech act, as above,
we are in a better position to understand persuasion dialogue as a norma-
tive model of argumentation that is distinct from other types of dialogue,


The Cognitive Component of Persuasion 85


such as deliberation and negotiation. Of course, the speech act of per-
suasion is not all that goes on in persuasion dialogue. Asking a question
is another important type of speech act in persuasion dialogue. But the
speech act of persuasion is central to persuasion dialogue in that it typi-
fies the main type of move that is so characteristic of what an argument is
meant to accomplish in this type of dialogue. Most especially, identifying
the speech act of persuasion gives us a clear basis for distinguishing
between persuasion and other interest-based kinds of moves in argumen-
tation that are influence attempts typical of negotiation. Understanding
this distinction is important for analyzing informal fallacies, and centrally
important to evaluating allegations of bias in argumentation. For one of
the common arguments of this sort is the allegation that an arguer is
biased because he has something to gain, or has an interest at stake in
a discussion. This criticism has sting where two parties are supposed to
be taking part in a critical discussion, for example, and one accuses the
other of having something to gain by sticking to one side. For example,
if two parties are having a critical discussion about an environmental
issue, one may accuse the other of being a paid advocate of an indus-
trial corporation. What is at issue in such a case is an alleged covert shift
from persuasion dialogue to a kind of interest-based argumentation that
could perhaps be identified with bargaining or negotiation. At any rate, a
clearer understanding of the speech act of persuasion, and how it should
work, can help us to analyze the argumentation in cases like these that
are central to informal logic and the analysis of fallacies and common
argument criticisms.

One issue that requires further commentary is the distinction between
psychological persuasion and the speech act of persuasion as a normative
notion. Some might say that it is the psychological notion of persuasion
that is really important and that because the speech act of persuasion
defined above is purely normative, it is of no real use in helping us to
analyze how persuasion really works in argumentative discourse. A com-
monly held attitude is that empirical persuasion, measured by behavioral
indicators, is all that really matters to any scientific notion of persuasion.
In public relations and mass media, for example, what matters is whether
an argument or persuasive technique really works. And that is, according
to this widely held view, a matter that can be decided only by measuring
how the target audience actually responds to the message by observable
behaviors. What this view overlooks is the cognitive component of persua-
sion. But why should such a cognitive component be of any importance?
The answer comes in the form of a hypothesis.


86 The Speech Act of Persuasion


Hypothesis on the Cognitive Component of Persuasion (HACCP)
When respondents find an argument persuasive, it is generally
because they think that the argument is a reasonable one based
on premises that they are committed to.


The HCCP provides a way of explaining how people are persuaded to
do things or to accept claims. It also provides a plausible explanation
of how sophistical (fallacious) arguments work as successful persuasion
attempts. The phenomenon to be explained is how people are led to
accept fallacious arguments. The basic explanation is that the respon-
dent accepts the argument because it looks like a good one to him. The
basis of the explanation is the assumption that people are not just empty
receptors, to be persuaded by inserting propositions into the blank area.
People, whether they have studied logic or not, are already equipped
with a functioning apparatus for sorting the good arguments from the
bad ones. Whether they are persuaded or not in any given case very much
depends on this capability that the respondents are already actively using.
But they can be fooled. When they are fooled, according to the HCCP, it
is because the argument they have been presented with looks enough like
one of the good forms of argument they are familiar with to pass muster.

If this explanation of how fallacies work turns out to be a reasonable
one, it implies that the cognitive component of persuasion is extremely
important. To analyze, judge, or explain any persuasion attempt, and
see how it really works, you have to look at several factors, as indicated
by the first and second definitions of persuasion above. First, you have
to look at the structure of the argument as a chain of inferences and to
examine the form of argumentat each step. Here you have to ask whether
the argument should be judged by deductive, inductive, or presumptive
standards. For example, if it is a presumptive argument, you then have
to identify its argumentation scheme, or form of argument. Second, you
have to look at the premises of the argument and judge whether they
are commitments of the respondent. Third, you have to look at where
the chain of argument is going. You have to judge whether it is relevant
by looking at the context of dialogue. These three factors represent the
cognitive component of the argument.

Of course, the empirical component is very important as well in any
analysis of how persuasion works in a given case of argumentation.
Nobody is denying that assumption, which is so well accepted in the
social sciences that there is really no need to argue for it. What tends
to be overlooked is the importance of the cognitive component. But if


New Definition of the Speech Act of Persuasion 87


the second definition of persuasion above is seen as a reasonable and
useful one, the role of the cognitive component can be much better
appreciated.


11. The New Definition of the Speech Act of Persuasion


Many of the problems arising from the attempts to study mass media
argumentation turn on the central notion of persuasion. In the study of
public opinion polls, the notion of the persuasive definition comes up
again and again. The central purpose of mass media ads appears to be one
of persuasion. In political rhetoric, the purpose of any argument seems to
be centrally that of persuading the audience to come to accept some view
or policy. Persuasion is also a central concept in speech communication,
especially mass media and interpersonal communication, as well as in
rhetoric. Thus it would be enormously helpful if persuasion could be
defined in precise terms in multi-agent systems as an interpersonal speech
act or communicative action. To construct such a definition has been the
purpose of this chapter. Of course, such a multi-agent definition defines
the speech act of persuasion as a dialogue exchange between rational
agents. Thus it cannot be emphasized enough that the definition is not
purely empirical. It has a rationality component. However, it has been
argued in this chapter that this property is an asset, not a liability.

To begin to present a summary of the key ideas of this chapter, it is good
to look back to the second definition of persuasion that was put forward
in section 3. In light of the discussion of that definition that followed,
a new, third definition can be formulated. This third definition meets
all the objections that were raised concerning the second definition. The
multi-agent structure is the same as that of the first two definitions. There
is a proponent who is putting an argument forth, and possibly also making
other kinds of moves in a dialogue with a respondent. The proponent is
trying to persuade the respondent to come to accept a designated propo-
sition A. To carry out the speech act of persuasion, the proponent should
be guided by the following definition of the speech act of persuasion. It
presents a recipe, so to speak, of how persuasion should be carried out
in a multi-agent dialogue.


Persuasion: The Third Definition
The proponent persuades the respondent to accept a designated
proposition A as true if and only if the proponent puts forward a
chain of argumentation meeting the following requirements. First,


88 The Speech Act of Persuasion


each step, or single inference in the chain, is a structurally correct
argument according to some appropriate requirements set out in
the opening stage of the dialogue. Second, the premises of the argu-
ment are all propositions that are already commitments of the
respondentin the dialogue or are propositions that he can tentative-
ly accept or be gotten to accept by argument later in the dialogue.
Third, the ultimate conclusion of the chain of argumentation, at
the final step of inference, is the proposition A.


One key component in this definition is the notion of commitment. It is
vital to draw a distinction, in using the definition, between commitment
and belief, as the latter would be viewed in the BDI model. Another key
component is the notion of argument chaining. The proponent cannot
normally persuade the respondent by a one-step argument. The reason
is that once the respondent sees that the conclusion follows from the
premises, he will tend to reject at least one of the premises immediately.
At least, this sort of reaction can be taken to represent the normal case.
The respondent is strongly opposed to the conclusion in the typical case.
Thus as soon as he realizes that the premises imply the conclusion, he
also realizes that the negation of the conclusion implies that one or more
of the premises must be false. Hence he will resist by finding any means
to reject one of the premises. He will look for the weakest link in the argu-
ment. This principle is basic to all strategy of persuasion. It means that,
for most practical purposes, the proponent needs a chain of argumen-
tation. As the chain gets longer, the respondent tends to forget where it
started out. It is this chain that makes persuasion realistically possible.
Another key component in the definition of persuasion is the assump-
tion that there can be different kinds of arguments. We may assume that
as well as deductive arguments, there are also inductive arguments, and
a third type that could be called presumptive or abductive arguments.
Each type of argument has its requirement for structural correctness.
Deductive and inductive forms of argument have been thoroughly stud-
ied in logic. Presumptive forms of argument are represented by argu-
mentation schemes. The study of these forms of argument is still at the
exploration stage. But it is this third category that is the most important
for the analysis of many common forms of argument used in mass media
persuasion attempts, including appeals to fear and pity and ad hominem
arguments. Each type of argument needs to be evaluated by its own stan-
dards for structural correctness. Agents in a dialogue sometimes dispute
whether an argument is deductive or inductive, for example. Sometimes
they will dispute whether the proponent originally meant the argument


New Definition of the Speech Act of Persuasion 89


to be deductive or inductive, when he put the argument forth in the dia-
logue. Such disputes can be settled in individual cases only by examining
the text of discourse and setting out requirements for structural correct-
ness of arguments at the opening stage of a dialogue. What matters for the
third definition of persuasion is that there should be structural standards
of some sort in place.

Now it needs to be added that the third definition represents a persua-
sion attempt by the proponent in a dialogue. A successful act of persua-
sion is one where the respondent has agreed to all the premises, or the
proponent has shown that he is committed to them. Then, by the stan-
dards for structural correctness, the respondent also becomes committed
to the conclusion. Getting the respondent to become committed to the
conclusion is the goal of the proponent’s act of persuasion, and is what
makes an act of persuasion successful. The following is the goal aimed at
in persuasion.


Successful Persuasion: The Definition Based on the Third Definition

The proponent persuades the respondent to accept a designated
proposition A as true if and only if the proponent puts forward a
chain of argumentation meeting the following requirements. First,
each step, or single inference in the chain, is a structurally correct
argument according to some appropriate requirements set out in
the opening stage of the dialogue. Second, the premises of the
argument are all propositions that are already commitments of
the respondent in the dialogue. Third, the ultimate conclusion of
the chain of argumentation, at the final step of inference, is the
proposition A.


To grasp this definition, one has to come to understand the role of retrac-
tion in persuasion dialogue. It should generally be possible for the respon-
dent to retract a commitment. Retracting a proposition, once the other
party has shown it is false or indefensible, is an important part of ratio-
nality. An arguer should be open-minded, and should not just stick dog-
matically to his opinion, even when he is shown it is wrong. Thus it is a
very important property of persuasion dialogue that retraction of com-
mitments should be possible. On the other hand, a respondent should
not always be free to retract, in any situation. If this were possible, then
the proponent could never, at least realistically speaking, be capable of
successful persuasion. Thus it is very important to make the distinction
between a persuasion attempt and an instance of successful persuasion.
The pair of definitions above attempts to make this vital distinction clear.


go The Speech Act of Persuasion


Now that we have defined the speech act of persuasion, we are in a
much better position to confront the various problems of mass media
argumentation that have proved so puzzling. Of course, a central and
recurring one is the key notion of the persuasive definition. Within the
field of speech communication, there is more and more interest in defini-
tions as a topic of investigation, as it has become more and more evident
how powerful definitions are as a way of framing an issue and controlling
an argument. Having grasped the speech act of persuasion in multi-agent
terms, we now have a much better chance of coming to understand how
persuasive definitions work and how they should be evaluated.

In the dialectical models of argumentation outlined in this chapter, two
parties interact with each other by taking turns to put forward arguments,
ask questions, or perform other speech acts. Typically, the proponent tries
to persuade the respondent. This model applies very well, for example,
to the Socratic dialogue in which one party argues directly with another,
trying to convince the other to accept some viewpoint. But what hap-
pens in cases where only one person argues with himself (playing devil’s
advocate), or in a case of legal argumentation in a trial, where many par-
ties are involved? How can such cases be assimilated to the dialectical
model? Another vexing kind of case is one where the speaker addresses
a mass audience, for example, by designing a television commercial or
by addressing an assembled audience in a speech. Govier (1999) posed
this problem poignantly by titling one of her chapters “When They Can’t
Talk Back: The Noninteractive Audience and the Theory of Argument.”
One way to solve the problem is to consider how an argument stands up
against some hypothetical questions or objections of a second party who
does not really exist but is merely set up as a hypothetical construct. She
sees carrying out this suggestion, however, as an important unsolved prob-
lem, and doubts that it can be solved with current resources. She writes
that “to envisage a challenger who fits one’s intended audience is virtually
impossible in any case in which one’s audience is a mass audience whose
views are likely to be heterogeneous and largely unknown” (p. 187). This
large theoretical problem will be posed even more pointedly in chapter 3,
which concerns the kind of argumentation designed for a mass audience
using propaganda. A clue to how to solve it by directing argumentation
to the values of the audience to be persuaded was given in the Star Trek
example, in chapter 1, section g. But it won’t be until chapter 9, section 4,
that the problem will be taken up further, once some cases have been
studied that will make the depth and importance of the problem more
apparent.


Propaganda


A recurring problem for the normative analysis and evaluation of mass
media argumentation is the use of the term “propaganda.” One of the
most common forms of attack on, or negative criticism of, rhetorical
argumentation used in mass media is to label it as propaganda. What
frequently happens is that arguments are automatically dismissed as irra-
tional or fallacious, as soon as they are categorized as propaganda. This
form of dismissal is especially evident in textbooks on logic and critical
thinking, where forms of argument are frequently evaluated as fallacious
using the term “propaganda.” In this chapter, I critically question such
a policy of automatic dismissal of arguments used in propaganda. I will
seek out a better method of evaluating such arguments, so that evalua-
tions can be supported or refuted on a case-by-case basis by employing
clearly stated criteria that can be used to assess the textual evidence given
in the particular case. This method could be called an evidence-based
approach.

One of the thorniest problems is to define the term “propaganda” or at
least to grapple with the contradictions that appear in its current usage.
One of the results of this chapter is a proposed set of criteria for the
identification of propaganda as a type of discourse. Ten defining char-
acteristics (as well as several other typical properties) of propaganda as
an identifiable type of discourse will be set out and argued for. A second
task addressed is how mass media argumentation used in what is called
propaganda should be analyzed. Some advice is given on how to ana-
lyze argumentation dialectically in propaganda and how to reconstruct
certain types of arguments that are central to mass persuasion attempts


gl


92 Propaganda


commonly identified with propaganda. But the main problem addressed,
and the most difficult one, is how to evaluate mass media argumentation
used as propaganda. The term “propaganda” has such negative conno-
tations that people tend to see only the arguments of their opposition as
describable with this label, as if their own arguments could never be. The
aim of this chapter is to get us over this one-sided or dismissive approach
to evaluating arguments allegedly used as propaganda, in order to bring
us to a dialectical perspective that takes a balanced but evidence-based
approach.

This chapter ties in very closely with chapter 6. In chapter 6 a much
broader approach is taken by analyzing the wider category of arguments
based on popular opinion, including arguments that might fairly be con-
sidered as falling under the heading of propaganda and other kinds of
arguments based on popular opinion that would not be considered pro-
paganda. The general topic of chapter 6 is the form of argument called
appeal to popular opinion, or argwmentum ad populum, as it is called in
the logic textbooks. Any argument based on a generally accepted opinion
is covered in this broad category, including arguments based on public
opinion polls and arguments based on common knowledge. However,
there is one special subtype of this more general type of argumentation
that specifically cites mob appeal arguments, or arguments directed to the
enthusiasms of the multitude. This type of argument is closely related to
the literature on propaganda, and the latter topic is scarcely compre-
hensible without dealing with it. It is therefore treated in this chapter.
However, the reader must keep in mind that the more general type of
argument traditionally called appeal to popular opinion will be analyzed
in chapter 6, based on the assumption that the mob appeal type of argu-
ment often fitted into this category will have already been treated in this
chapter.


1. Negative Connotations


According to the account of the origin of the term “propaganda” given
in Ellul (1967), the term originally referred to a committee of church
officials called the Congregatio de Propaganda Fide (Congregation for
the Propagation of the Faith). The name of this committee continued
as the name given to previous meetings of Pope Gregory XIII with three
cardinals in 1572-1585, which had the aim of combatting the Reforma-
tion. It may be presumed that in this original meaning, the term did
not have the negative connotations it has now, at least for the Catholics


Negative Connotations 93


who originated the term. However, it is also reasonable to assume that it
would soon have taken on negative connotations for the Protestants who
became aware of what the word meant to the Catholics. The committee
had the purpose of advocating a particular point of view, or taking one
side, on an important issue of church doctrine. And it had an interest at
stake in doing so. Thus it is easy to see how the modern, negative con-
notations of the word “propaganda” developed from this original use of
the term.

Marlin (1989, p. 47) tells us that the word “propaganda” was used
by the Allies during both world wars to characterize only the opinion-
forming activities of the enemy, treating these so-designated enemy activ-
ities as composed mostly of lies. These practices left the word with strongly
negative connotations. However, “here and there” in the literature on
propaganda, according to Marlin, “one finds voices trying to rehabilitate
the word for neutral usage.” The negative connotations are so deeply
entrenched, however, and the word is so charged with negative emotive
connotations that the word itself is frequently used as a verbal weapon
to attack views or arguments one is opposed to or wishes to condemn
as not being rationally compelling. The strong negative connotations
attached to the word “propaganda” imply that such discourse is both
unethical and illogical. The ethical aspect implies intentional deception
and manipulation of a mass audience. The logical or dialectical aspect
implies that the argumentation used is not based on good evidence of the
kind appropriate for a rational discussion, and instead is of an emotional
and crowd-pleasing sort.

As Marlin noted, the word “propaganda,” as used in the modern
English-speaking world, still has the strong negative connotations set in
place by its use in the two world wars. Politicians and bureaucrats would
definitely avoid this term to describe their own public relations and pro-
motional activities, using it only to describe those of their opponents.
Generally, to describe any discourse or message as propaganda is to down-
grade it by suggesting that the information content of the message, or
its usefulness as reliable evidence, is suspect. The use of this word even
suggests that the message referred to is intentionally manipulative and
deceptive. For example, to describe a story in a newspaper or a televised
report as propaganda would be to say that the story or report is not an
objective presentation of the facts, not a balanced account of both sides
of an issue. It would be classified as a biased argument with a spin that
advocates some cause or particular viewpoint or interest. Generally, to
say that something is propaganda is to say that it is the output of some


94 Propaganda


interest group or organization that is pushing a particular viewpoint in a
way designed to promote it to a mass audience.

But the negative connotations of the term are not universal. As Marlin
(1989, p. 47) reminded us, Lenin and Goebbels did not mind its being
used to describe their own activities of molding public opinions. The
Russian usage seems to have persisted despite the Allies’ use of the term
in World War II to refer only to the enemy opinion-forming activities,
presumed to be manipulative lies designed to deceive a gullible public
that did not have access to free media. So the word has a mixed quality. It
is generally negative in its connotations. The negative aspect seems to be
at least partly logical in nature, suggesting that the discourse in question
is somehow untrustworthy, deceptive, or not a kind of argumentation
that is based on a balanced consideration of the evidence relevant to the
issue being discussed. Also, there is a negative ethical implication to the
effect that propaganda is intentionally manipulative, and involves lying
or dishonesty of some sort. The implication is that this type of discourse
masquerades as something else, that it is not what it appears to be on the
surface, and hence that some kind of duplicity or pretense is involved
in it.

Apart from ethical questions, these negative connotations of the use
of the word “propaganda” raise some logical questions (logical in the
sense of being questions of how to evaluate argumentation used in a
text of discourse as rational or spurious, as correctly used or fallacious).
What is propaganda as a type of discourse in which arguments are used
for some purpose? And should the term “propaganda” be defined in an
inherently negative way so that it is always bad or wrong? Thatis, should all
arguments used in propaganda be judged to be fallacious or incorrect (or
at least suspect or ill-supported) just because they were used for purposes
of propaganda? Or should “propaganda” be defined in a neutral way that
does not beg the question or foreclose the question of the worth of the
arguments used in it?

Marlin (2002, pp. 18-22) has classified definitions of propaganda into
three categories: negative, neutral, and positive. The positive definitions
are quite rare. Most of the definitions offered fall into the two first cate-
gories of negative and neutral. Eight negative definitions are cited. The
first definition says that the goal of propaganda is always to promote the
interests of those who contrive it, instead of to benefit to the audience to
whom itis addressed. The second definition also adds the characteristic of
indifference to the truth, and defines propaganda as the management of
opinions and attitudes by the manipulation of social suggestion. The third


Negative Connotations 95


definition calls propaganda the attempt to control the behavior of indi-
viduals when the ends are considered unscientific or of doubtful value.
The fourth definition defines propaganda as a means of gaining power
by psychological manipulation of groups or masses. The fifth defines pro-
paganda as any attempt by means of persuasion to enlist people into the
service of one party to any dispute. The sixth definition defines propa-
ganda as the systematic effort to manipulate other people’s beliefs and
attitudes or actions. The seventh definition focuses on corporate propa-
ganda, referring to communication that has the purpose of bringing a
target audience to adopt attitudes and beliefs chosen by the propagan-
dist. The eighth definition defines propaganda as the advocacy of what
we do not believe, as opposed to education, defined as the advocacy of
what we believe.

Three neutral definitions are cited (pp. 20-21). According to the first,
propaganda is dissemination of ideas, information, or rumor for the pur-
pose of helping or injuring an institution, cause, or person. The second
defines propaganda as the attempt to influence public opinion through
the transmission of ideas and values. The third states that the real aim of
propaganda is the spreading of information, whether true or false, good
or bad.

Two favorable definitions are cited. The first is a wartime definition
describing propaganda as a respectable name for the conveyance of infor-
mation. The second describes propaganda as part of democratic educa-
tion to promote active citizenship in a country by giving each individual
a living conception of the community.

Of course, offering an abstract definition of a controversial word such
as “propaganda” could be seen as using a persuasive definition (see sec-
tion 3, below, and chapter 8) that makes the definition of propaganda
itself a kind of propaganda. Even so, propaganda as a type of discourse
does have certain characteristics that enable us to recognize it, or at least
to use the word to make claims and criticisms in everyday conversations
and in academic arguments. To claim that an argument is propaganda
or is part of a discourse that may be described as propagandistic, is a
common way of criticizing arguments or of evaluating them in a negative
way that suggests that the argument is not based on reliable evidence
or rational argumentation. By this means an argument can be attacked,
suggesting that it may be rejected as logically unconvincing to a rational
person.

But perhaps such common practices are naive or not based on a form
of evaluation that can be rationally justified by appeal to good evidence.


96 Propaganda


Even worse, perhaps such condemnations are prejudicial and fallacious.
For perhaps propaganda is not inherently bad or illogical. Perhaps it
has a purpose as an organized and methodical type of discourse that
is recognizable as such. And perhaps argumentation in such a type of
discourse ought to be evaluated in relation to the goals appropriate for
such a use of arguments. The suggestion that propaganda may not be all
bad, or notas bad as those who use the term in a negative way so often take
for granted, may seem slightly scandalous. But until some clear account
of what the term is supposed to mean is given, no way of throwing light
on the issue is open.


2. Public Discourse and Reason


When an arguer addresses a mass audience using some form of commu-
nicative discourse to try to get the audience to accept a particular view
or to support a particular policy, to what extent is such argumentation
based on rationality? Many who have a negative view of rhetoric would
say that such an appeal to emotions and crowd prejudices should not
be described as any kind of rational argumentation. This ambivalence
about the role of arguments that appeal to popular opinion will be made
evident in chapters 6 and 7. But even without considering the ambivalent
view of the logic textbooks on appeal to popular opinion, and the reser-
vations about the role conventional public opinion polling in mass media
argumentation, the same kind of ambivalence is expressed by those who
have written about political decision making in a democracy.

Political issues should be decided by citizens engaged in public dis-
course with each other in a democratic and civil exchange of arguments,
in the political theory of public decision making. This, at any rate, is the
ideal of public discourse advocated by Rawls (1993). Primary components
of this process of rational argumentation in public discourse, according
to Rawls’s theory (1993, p. 224) are “principles of reasoning and rules of
evidence in the light of which citizens are to decide whether substantive
principles properly apply,” and rules that determine the kinds of con-
siderations that can legitimately be appealed to in advocating a position
or in voting on a policy. But where do such rules and principles come
from? The answer given by Rawls is that we are to appeal to “presently
accepted general beliefs and forms of reasoning found in common sense,
and the methods and conclusions of science when these are not contro-
versial” (p. 224). Part of this answer is evocative of the form of argument
identified as argumentum ad populum in chapter 6. When arguing about
laws and policies in public discourse, Rawls tells us, the duty of civility


Public Discourse and Reason 97


requires us to stay within the bounds of public reason. For Rawls, then,
when a political speaker addresses a mass audience, to try to get them to
accept some view she advocates or to support some policy she expounds,
the ideals of public discourse require that the speaker should appeal to
presently accepted general beliefs and forms of reasoning found in “com-
mon sense.” But how should she do this? To get any answer here, we are
driven back to reconsider issues related to the argumentum ad populum as
a form of argument, taken up in chapter 6. Rawls appears to be of the
opinion that an argument based on appeal to public discourse is not only
a rational kind of argumentation. He seems to combine this assumption
with the view that such an argument is useful in mass communication
and can be successful in getting a mass audience to accept your view or
to follow a policy you advocate.

These assertions are, of course, at odds with the traditional view that
the argumentum ad populum is a fallacy, as expounded in chapter 6. Many
would be highly skeptical about Rawls’s claims and would say that viewing
public discourse with a mass audience in his way is hopelessly optimistic.
They would say that his view is a distortion of what really takes place in
real public discourse, and would be hopelessly impractical as a method
of getting a mass audience to do anything. The form of argument called
appeal to popular opinion will be shown in chapter 6 to be reasonable
under the right conditions. But is it reasonable when used by a mob
orator to stir up emotions in a mass audience?

Among the skeptics at the other end of the spectrum from Rawls’s
view is that of Le Bon (1896), who argued that crowds think in images
and are especially impressed by colorful images and marvelous stories,
and that therefore crowds are not influenced by reasoning. Le Bon
(p. 81) started from the premise, based on his observations, that crowds
do not use logical reasoning to influence their actions and what they
accept. From this premise he inferred that it would be a great mistake
for a speaker who hopes to influence a crowd to use logical reasoning
to try to persuade the crowd to do anything. Le Bon saw the public, or
“the crowd,” as he termed the mass audience, as irrational and driven by
emotion. He drew the conclusion that what a mass media arguer needs
in order to successfully influence the crowd is an appeal to emotion.
Whether the appeal to emotion is logical or rational, in his view, matters
very little or not at all.


We have shown that crowds do not reason, that they accept or reject ideas as a
whole, that they tolerate neither discussion nor contradiction, and that the sug-
gestions brought to bear on them invade the entire field of their understanding


98 Propaganda


and tend at once to transform themselves into acts. We have shown that crowds
suitably influenced are ready to sacrifice themselves for the ideal with which
they have been inspired. We have also seen that they only entertain violent and
extreme sentiments, that in their case sympathy quickly becomes adoration, and
antipathy almost as soon as it is aroused is transformed into hatred.


According to Le Bon’s account, the nature of the convictions of crowds is
more like that of religious faith, or even religious fanaticism, than it is like
that of reflective, balanced, logical thinking. Characteristic or the convic-
tions of crowds, according to Le Bon (p. 83) are intolerance, fanaticism,
and “whole-souled ardour” in the cause of an individual or in the ser-
vice of a “victorious leader” who arouses their enthusiasm, and thereby
becomes a guide to their actions. There does not seem to be much room
for civil public discourse and rational thinking based on common sense,
of the kind described by Rawls, in Le Bon’s view of how the convictions
of a mass audience can be influenced. The French writer Alexis de Toc-
queville was also skeptical about the rationality of appeal to popular opin-
ion as a form of argument in democratic politics. Tocqueville observed
that popular opinion in political argumentation fluctuates rapidly in a
way that is impossible to predict. He wrote (1966, p. 230): “All of the
projects [of the majority] are taken up with great ardor; but as soon as its
attention is turned elsewhere, all these efforts cease.” This insight is even
more valuable in an age of mass media. The attention span of the public
seems to have become shorter and shorter. Something instantly becomes
a public issue as all the media sources compete to give central attention
to it, like President George W. Bush choking on a pretzel in January
2002. This story was on all the front pages and was the lead story in the
news for one day. A few days later nobody was hearing about it. Another
example was the disappearance of the Gary Condit story exactly at the
time of the 9/11 attack on New York and the Pentagon. The reporting of
news to the public goes in a disjointed way from one crisis or spectacular
incident to another. This “snapshot” effect was observed by Yankelovich
in his remarks on public opinion, discussed below in chapter 4. Report-
ing of news results in a disjointed sequence of public thinking, leaping
from one attention-grabbing story to another. As Yankelovich observed,
the public gets information in the form of a snapshot of the event, but
there is not enough continuity to represent intelligent deliberation. Thus,
Toqueville’s view of public opinion in mass thinking is almost as skeptical
as Le Bon’s.

The views presented by Rawls and Le Bon represent the two extremes
on how mass media argumentation influences popular convictions and


Appeal to the People Revisited 99


attitudes. Rawls’s viewpoint seems to represent a normative model of
how public discourse is to be conducted in a democracy, if it is to be
just and represent liberal values. Le Bon’s account is more descriptive in
nature, based on his own observations of how crowds behave. Le Bon was
an astute observer of how convictions are led in a particular direction
by the rhetorical arguments of leaders and popular orators. But even if
the two views do not irreconcilably conflict, they are strongly opposed
in certain ways. Suppose Le Bon is right about how argumentation in
popular discourse actually works in influencing mass audiences. Surely,
it follows that an account such as that of Rawls, which assumes a fairly
high level of rationality in public discourse, is hopelessly impractical,
idealistic, and out of touch with how mass conviction works and can be
altered. Suppose, on the other hand, that Rawls is right that his model
of public reason is a good method for conducting the civil exchange of
arguments in a democracy. Then surely it follows that cynics who pander
to the worst instincts of crowds by engaging in Le Bon’s methods of
dramatic appeal to emotion are engaging in the very sort of irrational
demagoguery that most threatens a democracy. The two opposed views
represent an interesting problem that can be posed in the form of a
dilemma. Can a speaker engage in a rational kind of deliberation or
persuasion dialogue with a mass audience, say, in an election campaign
or a political speech? And is this kind of rational argumentum ad populum
necessary for public discourse in a democracy? Or does public discourse
influence a mass audience only by appealing to emotions and popular
enthusiasm in a way that makes it a deceptive, myth-making, or distorted
type of argumentation that is logically suspect or even fallacious?


3. Appeal to the People Revisited


One aspect of propaganda is that, by its very nature, it is designed to
reach and influence a mass audience and, as such, is a kind of tech-
nique that must appeal successfully to the emotions, commitments, and
enthusiasms of the crowd to win acceptance for a conclusion. The fact
that propaganda is an “appeal to the people” as a type of argumentation
makes it inherently suspicious to logicians. Indeed, itis shown in chapter 6
that the so-called appeal to the people has traditionally been treated by
logic textbooks as a fallacious type of argument. Examples from two of the
leading introductory textbooks will indicate how this type of argument
has generally been treated in logic as a fallacy.


100 Propaganda


Chapter 6 will concentrate on the ad populumargument and its variants.
The type of appeal to popular opinion argument in which a premise
is “Everyone accepts this proposition” is one variety of the argument,
but there is also another one, sometimes called the “mob appeal” type.
The distinction between the two types was drawn by Hurley (1994) in
his popular logic textbook, A Concise Introduction to Logic. According to
Hurley (1994, p. 120), the “indirect approach,” or “appeal to the people,”
variant of the argumentum ad populum has the following basic structure as
an argument: You want to be accepted/included in the group/loved/
esteemed. ... Therefore, you should accept XYZ as true.

The indirect approach can be classified as a subtype of the more
general ad populum argumentation schemes defined in chapter 6, sec-
tion 4, an indirect type of appeal. By contrast, in the “direct approach”
(p. 119), the arguer directs his or her appeal to the individuals in the
crowd, as a mass audience. According to Hurley’s account, as quoted
below (p. 120), the contrast is that in the direct approach, each per-
son feels united with the crowd, and anyone who fails to go along with
the conclusion accepted so enthusiastically by the crowd risks the loss of
the security of acceptance by the crowd. Thus the two arguments are con-
nected. But the direct approach is identified with crowd-pleasing rhetoric
directed to the mass audience.

The direct approach occurs when an arguer, addressing a large group
of people, excites the emotions and enthusiasm of the crowd to win accep-
tance for his conclusion. The objective is to arouse a kind of mob men-
tality. This is the strategy used by nearly every propagandist and dema-
gogue. Adolf Hitler was a master of the technique, but it is also used with
some measure of success by speechmakers at Democratic and Repub-
lican national conventions. Waving flags and blaring music add to the
overall effect. Because the individuals in the audience want to share in
the camaraderie, the euphoria, and the excitement, they find themselves
accepting any number of conclusions with ever-increasing fervor.

The direct approach is not limited to oral argumentation, of course;
a similar effect can be accomplished in writing. By employing such emo-
tionally charged phraseology as “fighter of communism,” “champion of
the free enterprise system,” and “defender of the working man,” polemi-
cists can awaken the same kind of mob mentality as they would if they
were speaking.

Hurley does not consider the possibility that the appeal to the peo-
ple argument could be reasonable (non-fallacious) in some instances.
The appeal to the people is classified by Hurley (p. 116) as a fallacy of


Appeal to the People Revisited 101


relevance. This categorization means that the appeal to the people is a
fallacy because it fails to be relevant as an argument. This analysis allows
that the premises of such an argument can be psychologically relevant to
the conclusion, making the conclusion seem to follow from the premises.
But it denies that they are logically relevant, in the sense that they “pro-
vide genuine evidence in support of the conclusion.” Hurley’s citing of
Hitler as a propagandist who was a master of the technique of appeal
to the people seems to make “appeal to the people” sound particularly
despicable. The choice of example seems to be based on the assumption
that propaganda is inherently wrong as a form of argumentation, because
it is based on the appeal to the people as an underlying argument. The
assumption seems to be that propaganda is something that contains, or
is based on, the fallacious argument called “appeal to the people.”

Other leading textbooks have reaffirmed this approach. Copi (1982,
p. 104) defined argumentum ad populum as the attempt to win popular
assent to a conclusion by arousing the emotions and enthusiasms of the
multitude, rather than by appeal to the relevant facts. He went on to link
this fallacious type of argument with the use of propaganda.


This is a favorite device with the propagandist, the demagogue, and the adver-
tiser. Faced with the task of mobilizing public sentiment for or against a particular
measure, they will avoid the laborious process of collecting and presenting evi-
dence and rational argument by using the shortcut methods of the argumentum ad
populum. Where the proposal is for a change and he is against it, he will express sus-
picion of “newfangled innovations” and praise the wisdom of the “existing order.”
If he is for it, he will be for “progress” and opposed to “antiquated prejudice.”
Here we have the use of invidious terms with no rational attempt made to argue
for them or to justify their application. This technique may be supplemented by
displaying the flag, brass bands, and whatever else might serve to stimulate and
excite the public. (p. 104)


Copi went on to criticize the “twentieth-century advertiser” in particular,
as a “huckster” and “ballyhoo artist” who has elevated the argumentum
ad populum “almost to the status of a fine art” in designing commer-
cials that sell “day-dreams and delusions of grandeur” (pp. 104-105), as
will be noted in chapter 6. Copi, like Hurley, classified such ad populum
arguments as fallacious on the grounds that they commit fallacies of rele-
vance (p. 98). Like Hurley, Copi (p. 99) saw the failure as one of a failure
of logical relevance, masked by a psychological relevance that makes such
an argument seem persuasive and correct.

Now the basic assumption that propaganda uses, or is even based
on, the argumentum ad populum because it does address a mass audience


102 Propaganda


does seem to be true. Propaganda does try to persuade a mass audience
to accept a conclusion based on premises that are popularly or widely
accepted, and it does typically work by exciting the emotions and enthu-
siasms of the crowds. If propaganda is based on this fallacious kind of
irrelevant argumentation, surely that explains both why propaganda is
negatively evaluated from a logical point of view and why it contravenes
rational standards of argument. But there are grounds for doubt about
this explanation. According to the analysis in chapter 6, below, at least
some kinds of ad populum arguments are not inherently fallacious and
can sometimes be reasonable. To clarify the question, it is necessary to
reconsider the grounds on which the logic textbooks condemn ad popu-
lum arguments as fallacious.

One of these is that ad populum arguments appeal to emotions, specif-
ically the emotions and enthusiasms of the crowd. But is the use of emo-
tional appeal in itself sufficient grounds for judging an argument to be
fallacious? I have argued previously (1994) that use of emotional appeal
does not necessarily mean, by itself, that an argument is fallacious. In the
following chapters, we will see that appeals to emotion can often provide
good grounds for presumptively accepting a conclusion on a default basis.
This means that in the absence of the hard information needed to con-
clusively resolve the issue, the argument can function in a dialogue such
as a deliberation as a way of steering conduct toward a prudent line of
action based on practical reasoning.

Another reason ad populum arguments are often classified as fallacious
is that they pander to the crowd by drawing on premises that are popu-
larly accepted. As Copi (1982, p. 105) warned, “popular acceptance of a
policy does not prove it to be wise [and] general assent to a claim does
not prove it to be true.” According to this account, ad populum arguments
are based on premises that are commitments of the mass audience, and
therefore they are not rational arguments based on evidence that is fac-
tual and has been verified. But is this factor, by itself, a sufficient reason
for judging all ad populum arguments to be fallacious? The answer is no,
according to the analysis presented below in chapter 6, because endoxic
arguments, arguments based on popular opinions or that have premises
that express widely held assumptions, are not necessarily and in them-
selves fallacious. Also, arguments addressed to a specific audience, and
based on the commitments of that specific audience as premises, are not
necessarily fallacious either. It depends on how those premises are used
in an argument in a specific case, whether the premises are subject to
doubt and critical questioning in the discussion, and which other kinds


Appeal to the People Revisited 103


of arguments and evidential considerations are used alongside these ad
populum arguments. Once again, as long as the ad populum arguments are
not taken as conclusive or as the only basis for arriving at a conclusion,
they can have a legitimate role in shifting a weight of presumption to one
side or the other in a rational discussion.

The main ground Hurley and Copi bring to bear in classifying ad pop-
ulum arguments as fallacious is that of relevance. On both their accounts,
ad populum arguments are said to be fallacious because the premises of an
appeal to a mass audience or a crowd are psychologically relevant to its
acceptance of a conclusion but are not logically relevant. To be logically
relevant, they must provide good evidence to support the conclusion.

But are premises based on popular opinions, or on the enthusiastic
convictions of a crowd, always logically irrelevant to a conclusion? It
would seem not. As will be shown in chapter 7, in public opinion polls of
the kind commonly used to predict election results, poll-based appeals
to popular opinion can be reasonable when they have the following
form. The premise is the statement that the majority, or such-and-such
percent of respondents polled, accept proposition A (such as believing
that someone is the better candidate for office). The conclusion that
proposition A is true is rationally justified as a reasonable presumption
with a certain weight of likelihood — for example, the proposition that
so-and-so will win the election. In many cases, polling is quite a good way
to judge public opinion or to help set social policy. The use of the poll
to draw an inference, as shown below in chapter 7, is not an inherently
fallacious form of argumentation. In fact, in many arguments commonly
used in everyday conversational exchanges and deliberations, the fact
that a proposition is widely accepted is rightly taken as a reasonable (but
not conclusive or irrefutable) and relevant premise for provisionally
accepting that proposition as plausible. As has been emphasized so
often above, such an argument needs to be evaluated in a dialogue
framework. It needs to be seen as subject to further questioning, before
hasty inferences are drawn from it to other propositions.

Much depends here on what is meant by “logically relevant.” A proposi-
tion based on crowd appeal or popular acceptance would not be logically
relevant in a scientific discussion, say, in physics or chemistry. But it could
be logically relevant in an argument used in a court of law or in a busi-
ness meeting about advertising strategy in marketing a product, as shown
below in chapter 4. Dialectical relevance depends on the purpose of the
discourse the argument in question is being used to contribute to. If the
purpose of a speech is to mobilize the country for war or to persuade an


104 Propaganda


audience to support a cause like protecting the environment, appealing
to the commitments of the audience or even to its enthusiasm may be
relevant. It may be necessary and appropriate in order to convince them
that a particular course of conduct would be wise and should be accepted
as a policy. In the right setting, an appeal to mass enthusiasm to get sup-
port and commitment for a proposed policy or course of action can be
suitable rhetoric.

Our tentative conclusion (which will require more support) is that
propaganda is based on an appeal to the people type of argument, espe-
cially the so-called direct type. The problem is with the leap from that
premise to the conclusion that propaganda must be wrong or fallacious
for that reason alone. The urge to take this leap seems to stem from what
has become the routine assumption that rhetoric directed to a mass audi-
ence is inherently illogical, deceptive, or full of trickery. This pervasive
assumption seems hard to combat. As shown in chapter 1, the negative
attitude toward rhetoric has itself become a popular opinion. But once
that assumption is seriously questioned, the need to look at propaganda
in a different normative light becomes apparent. The characteristic that
propaganda is a form of mass media argumentation should not, in itself,
be regarded as sufficient for drawing the conclusion that all propaganda
is irrational or illogical or that any argument used in propaganda is for
that reason alone fallacious.


4. The Dialectical Viewpoint on Propaganda


Propaganda is itself such a negative term that any attempt to redefine it
runs the risk of being labeled as a persuasive definition of the most ques-
tionable sort. In public opinion, propaganda is just something bad, and
it is very hard to argue against a firmly entrenched public opinion in a
philosophical or intellectual discussion. But having introduced dialectic
as a normative framework for argument analysis and evaluation in chap-
ter 1, can we apply it now to a discussion of propaganda? Can we play
devil’s advocate, and argue that when used in an appropriate dialecti-
cal setting, argumentation that could be classified propaganda could be
reasonable? It all depends, of course on what one means by “reasonable.”
Rationality, as argued in chapter 1, must always be judged according to
some standards. Traditionally in logic, arguments have been evaluated
as valid or invalid according to semantic standards. But recently, prag-
matic or dialectical standards of the kind outlined in chapter 2 have been
developed to also evaluate how arguments are used in different types of


The Dialectical Viewpoint on Propaganda 105


conversational contexts. In such a dialectical framework, each type of
dialogue has its goal, and an argument is successful (or used correctly)
to the extent that it contributes to the chosen conversational goals. This
pragmatic framework has also been used to investigate informal (and
formal) fallacies in Walton (1995), where an argument is judged to be
used incorrectly or inadequately if it fails to contribute to a given conver-
sational goal. Within such a framework an argument is said to be used in
a fallacious way, in a given context of conversation, if it hinders or even
blocks the fulfillment of the goal of the conversation (often by the use
of deception, by seeming to be used correctly). So how does propaganda
fit in? Evidently, it is a type of persuasion, to get action, judging from
the characterizations considered so far. But also, as made evident in the
discussions of Rawls, it has to do with public deliberation in a democracy.
Thus deliberation would seem to be part of it. As Le Bon showed, it also
has to do with mass appeal crowd rhetoric, suggesting perhaps an eristic
aspect. Somehow, the kind of mass appeal argumentation characteristic
of propaganda combines these dialectical elements.

In chapter 2 the six types of conversational frameworks — called types of
dialogue — were identified. They are especially basic to evaluating argu-
mentation of the kind typically used in everyday conversational argu-
ments. To review, these are eristic dialogue, persuasion dialogue, deliber-
ation, inquiry, information-seeking dialogue, and negotiation. Each goal-
directed type of dialogue provides a conversational framework in which a
given argument can be normatively evaluated as used correctly or incor-
rectly to contribute to the goal of a type of dialogue the participants are
presumably engaged in. Of course, each argument in a given case needs
to be evaluated in light of the text of discourse from which the argument
can be reconstructed and identified. Eristic dialogue —-the quarrel being
the leading subtype — is the type of verbal exchange where each party has
a grievance and “hits out” at the other party to try to humiliate him or
her. The quarrel is often an angry, emotional exchange, and as the saying
goes, it generates more heat than light, and is not much of a friend to
logic. This observation is evocative of some of Le Bon’s observations on
propaganda as an emotional appeal to the mass audience, mobilizing the
crowd to “hit out” aggressively. In persuasion dialogue, each participant
has the goal of getting the other party to become committed to a par
ticular proposition, based on arguments using only premises the other
party is already committed to. The key concept is that of an arguer’s com-
mitment. The problem with the direct or mob appeal type of ad populum
is how the mass speaker can appeal to the audience as a whole group


106 Propaganda


or argument community, rather than just targeting single individuals as
respondents. In the inquiry, the goal is to prove a particular proposi-
tion (or disprove it, or prove it cannot be proved, or prove it cannot be
disproved) based on premises that are verified (known to be true). The
inquiry uses cumulative argumentation ofa kind that is so well established
that no propositions in the chain of reasoning ever need to be retracted.
At least that is the goal (ideally) of the inquiry type of dialogue. Thus,
the inquiry seems to have little to do with appeal to popular opinion, for,
as Tocqueville pointed out, mass public opinion is inherently unstable.
In information-seeking dialogue, one party tries to get some information
that the other party possesses but that the first party lacks. This type of
dialogue is relevant to propaganda that is so often presented in a news
format. In the negotiation type of dialogue, the goal is to “make a deal” —
to come to a division of some goods, services, or interests that are in
short supply. Each party tries to get a share of the goods that represent
what is most important to her, while leaving the other party enough of
a share of what is important to him so that he does not feel cheated.
Negotiation dialogue is not about searching for the truth of a matter or
about rationally convincing the other party that a particular proposition
is true or false. It is simply interest-based bargaining. This type of dia-
logue also seems relevant to propaganda, which often seems to be based
on advancing interests and not on getting to the truth of a matter.


5. Persuasion and Propaganda


The ultimate goal of propaganda is to get the respondents to take a par-
ticular course of action. Many definitions of “propaganda” postulate that
the goal of propaganda is to change the respondents’ beliefs or to per-
suade the respondents to accept some proposition as true (or false). But
these goals, although they are typically part of propaganda, are secondary
to the ultimate goal, which is always (as a matter of practical politics) to
get the respondents to do (or abstain from doing) something. These sec-
ondary goals are always means to the ultimate end of propaganda, which
is action or compliance with action.

Thus propaganda involves rhetoric. For as indicated in chapter 2, the
purpose of rhetoric is persuasion (Wenzel 1990, p. 81). But how is pro-
paganda related to dialectic? Is the speech act of persuasion a kind of
argument move used in propaganda? And could propaganda be seen,
or judged normatively, from a viewpoint of persuasion dialogue? In per-
suasion dialogue, the proponent’s goal is to use the commitments of


Persuasion and Propaganda 107


the respondent as premises in order to persuade the respondent to
also become committed to some particular proposition he previously
had doubts about accepting. This process of persuading a respondent to
accept some particular proposition as true is tied in with how propaganda
is used. And therefore, many conclude that from a dialectical point of
view, propaganda can be defined essentially as a type of persuasion dia-
logue. But it certainly is a peculiar type of persuasion dialogue. Many
would say it is a degenerate or false (pseudo) persuasion dialogue used
to try to influence a mass audience.

But the aim of propaganda is not just to secure a respondent’s assent
to a proposition by persuading him that it is true or that it is supported
by propositions he is already committed to. The aim of propaganda is
to get the respondent to act, to adopt a certain course of action, or to
go along with and assist in a particular policy. Merely securing assent
or commitment to a proposition is not enough to make propaganda
successful in securing its aim. Whether or not an audience really believes
a particular viewpoint or accepts it as true, the aim of propaganda is to
get them to go along with a policy or program in a more practical sense,
by taking part in it and by allowing it to be implemented as a plan of
social action.

This way of defining propaganda has important implications for the
issue of whether propaganda is inherently bad, deceptive, or against truth.
For if you see propaganda as a type of persuasion dialogue, then once you
note its indifference to the truth, you then can pinpoint its bad aspect
as being a defective kind of persuasion dialogue. For participants in per-
suasion dialogue are supposed to have a regard for the truth of a matter.
This is particularly crucial in a critical discussion, where participants are
not supposed to ignore matters relevant to the issue of the discussion.
This is certainly true in the critical discussion type of persuasion dialogue
described by van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1987, 1992). Hence pro-
paganda, once seen as a species of persuasion dialogue, is easily seen as
inherently defective, because it ignores or even suppresses relevant evi-
dence on the issue being argued when such an ignoring is convenient
to its purpose. But if you don’t see propaganda as a type of persuasion
dialogue, it may be less easy to convict it as being inherently negative or
critically defective in nature. Thus, from a dialectical point of view, it is
useful to at least initially view propaganda as persuasion dialogue of a
sort.

Ifthe goal of propaganda is to get the respondent to act in a certain way,
then ignoring evidence on whether certain propositions are true or are


108 Propaganda


relevant to accepting them as true is not necessarily a deviation from or a
subverting of the goal of the dialogue. Defining propaganda as a kind of
action-getting dialogue, as opposed to a persuasion type of dialogue, it is
harder to condemn propaganda as being inherently negative in nature.
Its indifference to the truth may no longer necessarily be a failure or
critical defect of propaganda that makes it inherently bad or deceptive. It
could be that propaganda is indifferent to truth because finding the truth
of a matter is simply not its purpose. It shouldn’t be ethically condemned
for failing to pay attention to some aim that is not central to its purpose
as a type of discourse.

On the other hand, it is clear that persuasion is typically an important
part of propaganda and that much of its method involves persuasion.
And it does seem that, descriptively speaking, one of the main means
used in propaganda to get an audience to act in a certain way is to use
persuasive argumentation targeted to their commitments. The goal is to
get them to accept or to adopt a favorable attitude to certain propositions
they may have doubts about. Propaganda is in this respect comparable to
the discourse of commercial ads, such as those used on television. The
purpose of the ad seems mainly to get the viewers to buy more products.
Try talking to representatives of the advertising firms that make these
ads, and suggest to them that the ads should use rational persuasion to
convince the viewers that the product is good or better than those of the
competition. They will dismiss this account of the purpose of commercial
advertisements as both naive and too narrow. Sometimes the ads are
evidently designed to rationally convince the potential buyer that the
product has certain good or useful features or is a good buy. But more
often the strategy of the ad is simply to draw attention to the brand or to
generate a favorable ambience associated with the brand, by using visual
images to arouse emotions.

Similarly, the goal of propaganda is basically to get compliance for
action, or action itself, and surely its success or failure ought to be judged
by this criterion. Persuasion by logical reasoning designed to rationally
convince the audience is not necessarily involved — although it could be
used in some cases — even though persuasion of a sort is involved as part
of the modus operandi.

Propaganda then is a mixed type of dialogue that does not fit any of
the six normative models of dialogue in chapter 2 exactly. It seems to
be a distinctively different type of discourse altogether, even though it
can directly involve elements of at least five of the six types of dialogue
noted. Propaganda is best seen as a type of goal-directed discourse in


Characteristics of Propaganda 109


its own right that has ten essential, identifying characteristics. As such,
it can function in its own right as a normative structure in which argu-
ments can be evaluated as used correctly or incorrectly (provided the
other normative models of dialogue are also used) in a given case. Like
deliberation dialogue, it is directed toward recommending a course of
action; like persuasion dialogue, it works by calling on the commitments
of the audience to gain its acceptance for a standpoint; and like eristic
dialogue, it is aggressively partisan and emotional.


6. Characteristics of Propaganda


Below, ten essential characteristics of propaganda as a mode of discourse
are set out, followed by a discussion of some other incidental character-
istics.

1. Dialogue Structure. Propaganda has the form of a dialogue (com-
municative discourse) between two participants. The one party, who can
also be a group, or a person representing a group, is called the propo-
nent and is the speaker or sender of the message. The other party, called
the respondent, and who is generally a mass audience of people, is the
receiver of the message. Typically, the proponent is the active partici-
pant, while the respondent is a passive receiver of the message sent out
by the proponent. But this asymmetrical relationship is not characteris-
tic of all cases of propaganda. In some instances, the respondent group
does engage in a bilateral dialogue exchange by responding positively or
negatively to the proponent’s message, or even by questioning or criticiz-
ing it — information that the proponent can use as feedback to craft her
message more persuasively. Also, propaganda has a dialogue structure in
that the argumentation of the proponent is based on what she takes to be
the commitments of the respondent. The goal of the argumentation is to
alter the convictions or actions of the proponent in a particular direction
or toward a particular view different from the one the respondent already
has.

2. Message Content. The content of the proponent’s message is an
argument, expressed in a verbal discourse and/or in other means of
altering convictions that are not verbal in nature. The message can be
purely verbal, as in a speech, but it can also be pictorial. Or it could be
a mixture of these, as in the case of a news reporter commenting on
videotaped clips. Propaganda frequently involves props, such as drums
and flags, and it may also use music or drama or be conveyed in a dra-
matic format, such as a film or a novel. In some cases, propaganda can


110 Propaganda


be conveyed by objects such as coins or statues or even by costumes
and settings that express the values of a particular life-style or social
class.

3. Goal-Directed Structure. Propaganda is essentially goal-directed as
a type of dialogue exchange. The proponent’s goal is to get the respon-
dent to carry out a particular action or to support a particular policy for
action. This purposive aspect of propaganda is so marked that it is fre-
quently described as “manipulative” in nature. As well as there being a
goal for the proponent, against which the success or failure of the pro-
ponent’s argumentation can be evaluated, there is also a general goal
for propaganda as an institutionally recognizable type of dialogue. The
general purpose is to support the existence, aims, and interests of a par-
ticular regime, organization, viewpoint, or interest group. Frequently, the
purpose of propaganda is to support the interests of a country or a polit-
ical party, government, or regime that directs the affairs of the country.
But other groups or individuals, such as religious groups, political action
groups, or advertisers, can also engage in propaganda.

4. Involvement of Social Groups. Propaganda is not just any argumen-
tation meant to persuade or to get action. The respondent is a mass audi-
ence. And while the message may be delivered by an individual speaker,
she always represents some broader agency or organized group that has
interests or views that binds its members together.

5. Indifference to Logical Reasoning. The goal of propaganda is to
move a mass audience in a certain direction, and its success or failure as
argumentation used in a context of discourse should be judged in relation
to how well (or badly) it performs in fulfilling this purpose. If methods of
logical reasoning are useful for this purpose, then they should be used in
propaganda. Thus propaganda is not, as a structure of discourse, either
for or against using logical reasoning and relevant evidence. If appeals
to emotion, of a kind that would be judged dubious or even fallacious by
logical standards of good reasoning, work better than rational evidence
to achieve the goal of argumentation used in propaganda, then such
appeals are appropriate and should (normatively speaking) be used by
good propagandists.

6. One-Sided Argumentation. Propaganda is a kind of advocacy dia-
logue that uses partisan argumentation to advocate one side of an issue
and to present the arguments in favor of that side as strongly as possible.
Propaganda is not an attempt to rationally deliberate on the wisdom or
prudence ofa course of action by looking at all the alternatives and weigh-
ing them judiciously or fairly. Neither is it an attempt to critically discuss
an issue by openly considering all the arguments on both sides. Instead,


Characteristics of Propaganda 111


it is inherently one-sided as a type of discourse in which argumentation
is used.

7. Involvement of Persuasion Dialogue. The primary goal of propa-
ganda is to get an audience to support the aims, interests, and policies
of a particular group, by securing the compliance of the audience with
the actions being contemplated, undertaken, or advocated by the group.
The goal of the propagandist then is not just to persuade or “re-educate”
the audience to change their beliefs. It is also to gain their commitment
to the extent that they will act on the basis of the new viewpoint they have
come to accept or to take part in or support actions in line with or justi-
fied by this viewpoint. So persuasion is involved, but the speaker’s goal in
propaganda is more than just to change the beliefs of the audience. The
proponent’s fundamental goal in propaganda is to move the masses to
action (to go to war, to buy a product, etc.), to comply with action, or to
accept and not oppose a certain line of action. But persuasion is involved
in a secondary but essential way, because the means used to get action,
or support for action, is that of persuading the audience to become com-
mitted to a particular point of view that the audience did not accept (or
did not fully embrace) before.

8. Justified by Results. Because its central purpose is to get action,
propaganda as a socially organized activity is justified by the results it
is supposed to achieve (both normatively and, in fact, by its defenders,
in particular instances). In fact, propaganda is justified by the supposed
value of bringing about a particular outcome said to be necessary for
a good end, such as public safety or the saving of human lives in war.
Propaganda is generally justified by citing a danger to the group, and
then stressing that the adoption of a particular point of view is needed
to combat or guard against that danger. Such a justification balances the
costs of engaging in one-sided or even deceptive argumentation against
the danger or loss of life that might result from an open-minded rational
discussion that might turn up good arguments for the other side. The
justification of propaganda is, in this respect, similar to the justification
of lying in ethics, illustrated by case 3.6 below. Propaganda tends to be
justified, as a matter of fact, in terms of its consequences, by those who
try to justify or excuse its use. But also, from a normative point of view,
propaganda ought to be justified by such a use of argumentation from
consequences, for its goal is to lead to action.

g. Emotive Language and Persuasive Definitions. An essential part of
all propaganda is the use of emotively charged words and phrases that
make the advocated viewpoint take on a highly positive coloration, and
any opposed viewpoint take on a highly negative coloration. For example,


112 Propaganda


supporters of an advocated view may be called freedom fighters, while
supporters of the opposed viewpoint are designated as terrorists. A whole
new vocabulary may be invented, and all kinds of pejorative words and
phrases may be used to denote the opposed viewpoint. Another char-
acteristic of propaganda is the use of persuasive definitions, as defined
by the theory of emotive meaning of Stevenson (1944). This theory will
be outlined, developed, and extended to mass media argumentation in
chapter 8. Now it can be seen as applicable to propaganda as a type of
argumentation. According to Stevenson’s theory, the purpose ofa persua-
sive definition is to engender a favorable or unfavorable attitude toward
something by changing the descriptive meaning of the word for that thing
while leaving the evaluative meaning the same. How persuasive defini-
tions are so characteristic of propaganda can be already appreciated by
reviewing some illustrative examples given in a popular logic textbook.
Hurley (1994, p. 92) offered the following two examples.


Case 3.1
“Abortion” means the ruthless murdering of innocent human beings.


“Abortion” means a safe and established surgical procedure whereby a woman is
relieved of an unwanted burden.


Case 3.2
“Liberal” means a drippy-eyed do-gooder obsessed with giving away other people’s
money.


“Liberal” means a genuine humanitarian committed to the goals of adequate
housing and health care and of equal opportunity for all of our citizens.


Persuasive definitions tend to be deceptive as used in argumentation
(and objects of suspicion, from a logical point of view) because, as Hur-
ley (p. 92) pointed out, they conceal the approving or condemning of
something by masquerading as an honest assignment of meaning to a
word. Thus there is a very close resemblance between the deceptive tech-
nique of propaganda and the deceptive kind of tactic used in putting
forward a persuasive definition in argumentation.

10. Eristic Aspect. Propaganda has a structure of argumentation like
that of the quarrel, or eristic type of dialogue. It postulates a dichotomy
for the audience: “We are the good guys. If you are not for us, you must
be against us. All those opposed to our view are the bad guys.” Often the
words “fight” or “struggle” are used in propaganda. The implication is
that any means required to fight against the “evil” or danger posed by the
“enemy” is justified. Propaganda is most visible and has been most studied


Characteristics of Propaganda 113


as used in war. In time of war, the participants become caught up in an
emotional attitude of hate and bitterness that is not conducive to what
Thouless (1942) calls “calm thinking” of the kind that dispassionately
weighs the evidence on both sides of an issue. Even when used outside
war, propaganda often paints the picture of an emergency or danger of
a kind that provokes fear and panic. The circumstances are portrayed as
like that of a war, where a “fight” is needed to combat the danger facing
the group.

Another characteristic of propaganda (Marlin 1989, p. 46) is the phe-
nomenon of orchestration, meaning that it manipulates different media
over time to produce a cumulative message. Other characteristics asso-
ciated with propaganda cited by Marlin are misuse of statistics, manip-
ulation of opinion polls, photomontage techniques, and the use of psy-
chological techniques of persuasion. Misuse of opinion polls by advocacy
groups will be studied in chapter 7. Propaganda is known to use psycho-
logically effective techniques, such as visual imagery, repetition, massed
crowds, and symbols of group identification, to create a climate of accep-
tance for its message. Propaganda is also known to often use suggestion
in place of or to supplement explicitly verbalized arguments for a conclu-
sion (Thouless 1942, p. 65). Thus, suggestion and implicature are vitally
important modes of argumentation in propaganda.

These additional characteristics are not essential to propaganda, but
only typical of it, whereas the first ten characteristics listed above are
all essential for a text of discourse in a given case to qualify as propa-
ganda. This definition is not meant to be purely stipulative in nature
but is meant to represent, within the limits of any abstract philosophi-
cal theory, the conventionally accepted view of propaganda as a familiar
kind of discourse. You could say it is a persuasive definition of “pro-
paganda” as a type of discourse, partly characterized itself by using
persuasive definition. But I believe that the circularity or reflexivity of the
definition can be defended and rationally justified. Because it has been
argued here that persuasive definitions are not inherently fallacious, it is
also possible to argue for the claim that a persuasive definition of “pro-
paganda” is possible and legitimate. What is the purpose of offering a
definition of “propaganda”? Primarily, it is meant to be part of a norma-
tive model of a type of argumentation familiar in a kind of conversational
discourse known to us in examples of mass media argumentation. The
definition is primarily dialectical, in that it relates to norms of conversa-
tion. The normative model is meant to be used in a helpful way to identify,
analyze, and evaluate argumentation used in particular cases in a given
text of discourse.


114 Propaganda


7. Is Propaganda Necessarily Dishonest or Irrational?


One approach has been to capture the negative connotations of the word
“propaganda” by defining it as a type of discourse that expressly has the
purpose of going against or circumventing critical thinking of the kind
used in a rational discussion ofan issue, based on good evidence and infor-
mation. This type of definition makes propaganda inherently negative,
illogical and/or deceptive in nature, on the grounds that it is opposed to
rational discussion and logical evaluation of arguments. The definition
given by Marlin (1989, p. 50) is of this kind.


PROPAGANDA = (def.) The organized attempt through communication to affect
belief or action or inculcate attitudes in a large audience in ways that circumvent
or suppress an individual’s adequately informed, rational, reflective judgment.


This definition is very helpful in capturing several important features of
propaganda, but in light of the approach proposed here, it goes question-
ably far in defining propaganda as inherently negative on grounds of its
being opposed to informed, rational argument and discussion. According
to Marlin’s definition, the purpose of propaganda includes the circum-
vention or suppression of informed, rational, and reflective judgment.
But there are grounds for questioning such a negative way of defining
“propaganda.”

Thouless (1942, p. 71) has discussed the issue of whether the word
“propaganda” should be defined in a negative way that makes it contrary
to the aims of logical thinking. He argued that if “propaganda” means
any attempt to influence attitudes or opinions of a group, it does not
follow that propaganda is necessarily dishonest or irrational. To support
this point, he cited a case where a true statement is made as a propaganda
claim.


Case 3.3

Men’s opinions may be changed by telling them a perfectly true fact that was
previously unknown to them. Thus a statement that British fighting aeroplanes
have shot down thirteen German bombers with a loss of seven to themselves may
serve the ends of propaganda by creating confidence on our side and alarm and
despondency in the enemy (if he hears it). Yet it may be perfectly true. This is
one honest and reasonable way in which propaganda may influence opinion; by
giving new and true information. (p. 71)


In this kind of case, propaganda presents a statement that is both true
and informative to the audience. In such a case, the propaganda is not
dishonest, deceptive, or against the aims of rational discussion, because


Is Propaganda Necessarily Dishonest or Irrational? 115


informing the audience of a true statement has propaganda value.
Case 3.5 provides a counter-example to the thesis that propaganda should
be defined as inherently negative, in the sense of always being against
informed, rational judgment or always consisting of lies or deceptions.

However, there is another sense in which propaganda does seem to
be against informed, rational, and reflective thinking of the kind char-
acteristic of a critical discussion that takes into account all the relevant
information on an issue. Propaganda selects out the facts it presents to
an audience, and although it may present some true statements, it may
ignore other true and relevant statements that lack propaganda value,
even though they are relevant, in a logical sense.

As Thouless put it, “The difficulty is that not all truth has propaganda
value.” He uses the following case to illustrate the point.


Case 3.4

Let us suppose that there were two air battles in one of which the enemy losses
were heavy and our own were light, while in the other battle our own losses were
heavy and the enemy’s were light. If our own news service chose to tell us only
about the first battle while the enemy news service only reported the second, there
would be a certain (not very important) sense in which both sides were telling the
truth. Neither side would be telling the whole truth, and it would no longer be
honest propaganda. This is a very simple example of what is meant by “selection”
of the facts, perhaps the commonest of all the devices used by propaganda which
is intended to mislead. (p. 71)


In this case, reporting the outcome of the one battle has propaganda
value to one side but not to the other. Whereas reporting the outcome of
the other battle has value only to the other side. Thus both sides are telling
the truth in their propaganda reports. The fault lies in the selectivity —
both sides are giving a biased account.

In case 3.4, what makes the propaganda at odds with a balanced critical
discussion, or a presenting of information that tells the whole truth, is
the selectivity type of bias evident in the discourse. It is not that the
propaganda lied or was deceptive in reporting what was not true. The
problem, from a point of view of informed and rational thinking, was that
the propaganda showed evidence of a bias, by ignoring those facts that
had no propaganda value or would even have had propaganda disvalue.
And this aspect does seem to imply that propaganda is against the aims
of a rational discussion based on an informed assessment of the facts.
The conclusion implied is that propaganda is necessarily irrational or


116 Propaganda


dishonest in the sense of being opposed to the critical and informed
rational discussion of an issue.

But now the question is raised whether all bias is necessarily bad bias,
in the sense of being bias that is dishonest or contrary to the aims of
logic and reasoned discussion and argumentation: Blair (1977) argued
that not all bias is of the kind that could be called “bad bias” and that in
many cases, bias is normal partisanship or advocacy, of the kind that is
expected in a certain type of case. I have previously defined dialectical bias
in argumentation as one-sidedness of an argument (1999b). Such one-
sidedness, exemplified in arguing to support one’s own point of view in a
critical discussion, is normally expected in that type of dialogue. Advocacy
is required for the dialogue to be successful, and is not a sound basis (by
itself) for condemning the given argument, used in a particular case in
that context, as logically defective or fallacious. Where bias does become
what could be called bad bias, from a logical point of view, it occurs in the
kind of case where the argumentation is supposed to be balanced, in
the sense of considering the evidence on both sides of an issue, but where
the argumentation is only one-sided. It is in just this kind of case that
fallacies of relevance tend to occur, that is, cases in which an argument
is supposed to be part of a balanced type of dialogue, such as a critical
discussion, but is really being advanced in eristic fashion. In such a case,
the problem is that the argumentation is not supposed to be exclusively
one-sided. Such an argument can be said to be appropriate and useful
as part of a quarrel. From that point of view, it could be productive in
getting both sides to express buried grievances. But it is not a productive
way of taking part in a critical discussion, where openness to both sides is
essential. From a point of view of persuasion dialogue it could be counter-
productive.

It is in just this kind of case where a dialectical shift has occurred of
the kind that makes an argument appear (psychologically) to be rele-
vant when it (logically) is not. And this explanation of fallacies of rel-
evance pinpoints exactly the problem of evaluating arguments used in
propaganda. If a discourse is supposed to be propaganda, and if the
audience is aware that the discourse is of this type, then no decep-
tion or irrelevance need be involved. This can hold true even if the
speaker uses arguments that appeal to the commitments and enthusi-
asms of the people by using emotional language slanted to one side of a
cause, or even persuasive definitions that involve emotive connotations
of words and phrases. However, if such a discourse purports to be a criti-
cal discussion, a rational deliberation on the issue, or some other type of


Openness to Contrary Evidence 117


dialogue requiring standards of argumentation, the evaluation could be
quite different. If the argumentation uses emotional mass appeals that are
inappropriate or non-contributing to the goals of that type of dialogue,
then it could be correctly judged to be irrelevant. It may be psycholog-
ically relevant but dialectically irrelevant to the goals of the dialogue
that the participants are supposed to be engaged in. It could reason-
ably be judged to be fallacious on that basis, from a dialectical point
of view.

It follows then that propaganda is not in itself irrational or deceptive,
in the sense that arguments in it should always be judged as critically
defective, not based on good evidence, fallacious, or whatever. The key
to the dialectical evaluation of propaganda is in the deception and in
the dialectical shift. It is the mismatch between appearances conveyed to
the mass audience by the proponent and the reality of the proponent’s
argumentation. The basic fault is one of irrelevance in argumentation.
Propaganda is a type of discourse in which arguments can be justifiably
dismissed as logically defective on grounds of irrelevance where there
has been an illicit dialectical shift from some other type of dialogue that
is supposed to represent a balanced account of two sides of an issue.
The shift is to a purely one-sided attempt to engage in a kind of mass
appeal to emotion to push in a one-sided way to gain the commitment
of an audience to accepting a particular conclusion. Typically, this is an
eristic type of dialogue in which the proponent has adopted the strategy
of engaging in a “fight” to get action. It also often involves the reality
of a negotiation type of dialogue in which the proponent is engaged in
interest-based bargaining. The underlying reality is that the proponent
is only putting on a superficial display of considering the arguments on
both sides of the issue.

According to our proposed analysis and definition of propaganda so
far, then, there are not sufficient grounds for concluding that propaganda
is inherently irrational or deceptive as a type of discourse. But one key
factor remains to be carefully considered.


8. Openness to Contrary Evidence


The eristic and one-sided characteristics of the argumentation used in
propaganda raise further questions about the closed nature of propa-
ganda as a type of discourse. As noted in describing the eristic charac-
teristic of propaganda, a dichotomization typically occurs, and the words
“fight” and “struggle” are often used. One of the properties of the quarrel


118 Propaganda


as a type of dialogue is that the one side being advocated is never really
open to defeat. Any argument that presents good evidence for the other
side will be deflected by any means possible, instead of admitting that it
makes a good point. Propaganda also has a biased manner of treating
the evidence, indicating a lack of openness to arguments on both sides
of an issue. Thus the question is raised whether propaganda is essentially
a closed type of discourse that never judges an argument on the basis of
the evidence that is brought forward to support it.

To begin with, it is evident from instances of propaganda that it does
have a way of interpreting a situation that conforms to the viewpoint
being advocated. A good case in point was found by Thouless (1942,
pp. 72-73) in an article, “Germany and the Law at Sea,” in the Sunday
Times of December 24, 1939.


Case 3.5

The writer described how a British fishing trawler was sunk by a German
submarine; the boats were stated to have been shelled while they were being
lowered, the submarine afterwards going away. Here we have a typical atrocity
story. If the shelling of the boats was deliberate and not accidental and if the
submarine went away intending to leave those who were in the water to drown,
this can properly be condemned as wicked and cruel behavior. The article also
reported, however, that the submarine came back, picked up survivors out of the
water, took off their wet clothing, and gave them hot drinks and blankets. That
surely would seem to an impartial observer to be a good and kind action. It might,
in fact, arouse some doubtas to whether the earlier atrocity story was not perhaps
based on inaccurate observation.

The matter is not, however, so simple to the propagandist. The writer of the
article says: “This sort of thing makes it clear that the German submarine comman-
ders, while acting with true German ruthlessness, are also acting in accordance
with a carefully prepared plan designed to impress upon the world that Germany
is, in fact, employing chivalrous and humane methods despite the well-established
and widely known facts to the direct contrary.” So it appears that if the Germans
are ruthless to their enemies, they are showing their ruthlessness; if they are kind
to their enemies they are carrying out a plan to conceal their ruthlessness.


Thouless described the argumentation in this case as similar to that used
by the handwriting expert in the Dreyfus trial, where Alfred Dreyfus was
accused of giving military secrets to his country’s enemies. When the
handwriting on the document in evidence resembled that of Dreyfus, this
was taken as proof that he wrote the document. But when other aspects
of the handwriting on the document differed from that of Dreyfus, the
differences were taken to prove that he had disguised his handwriting.
So it was a case of “Heads I win, tails you lose.” This kind of argument


Openness to Contrary Evidence 119


represents a persistent twisting of the evidence so that it always comes out
only one way.

Case 3.5 shows how propaganda has a tendency to interpreta situation
in such a way that the evidence presented always supports the advocated
viewpoint and goes against the opposed viewpoint. What seems like it
should be exactly the right sort of empirical evidence to support the other
side is somehow cleverly interpreted in a way that it comes out looking
like positive evidence supporting the advocated view instead. This twist-
ing of evidence phenomenon in cases of propaganda raises questions
about the verifiability and falsifiability of arguments used in propaganda
generally. It suggests that argumentation used in propaganda is never
really open to refutation, even by clearly opposed evidence. What one
may conclude is that propaganda is an inherently closed type of dia-
logue, like eristic dialogue, that never really admits defeat, even when
good evidence supporting the opposed view has been presented. What
reinforces this conclusion are certain aspects of examples of propaganda
that are often cited, such as Nazi propaganda, communist propaganda,
or any political kind of argumentation meant to promote a cause in which
the world is divided into converted believers and enemies. Another type
of discourse that fits the description in some cases could be called reli-
gious preaching rhetoric of a kind designed for conversion of unbelievers
and reaffirming the beliefs of the faithful. In this kind of rhetoric, there
is no middle ground. The arguments are one-sided, and the dialogue
may appear open, but there is no possibility that the proponent will ever
admit defeat. A good argument for the other side will always be repelled
or discounted, and that outcome is determined in advance. These cases
represent a kind of argumentation that could in some cases be called
fanatical. They are fanatical in the sense that the argumentation repre-
sents the proponent’s ideological view of things that is not really open
to refutation by means of rational arguments citing factual or verifiable
evidence. These fanatical kinds of discourse always twist the evidence to
support the one side exclusively, exhibiting a closed kind of attitude that I
have called hardened bias. The bias is not only a one-sided argumentation
but a pattern of argument that is relentlessly one-sided in a predictable
way.

But is propaganda inevitably one-sided, exhibiting this pattern of hard-
ened bias as a type of discourse? It seems that it is not. For often propa-
ganda is most effective when it pretends to be balanced, to admit con-
trary evidence, and to present true statements in a reporting format. To
make such a pretense effective for an audience, it has to admit some true


120 Propaganda


statements and to acknowledge some evidence that does not support the
point of view being advocated. Hence this twisting of evidence, while it
is a typical feature of propaganda, is not so constant that it makes pro-
paganda exhibit the hardened form of bias as an essential characteristic.
Propaganda has a tendency to interpret evidence in such a way that it
supports the advocated viewpoint, but it also often makes a pretense of
being impartial, which requires an admitting of some evidence that may
support the opposed viewpoint.


Q. Deceptiveness and Relevance in Propaganda


Bernays (1923, p. 212) distinguished between education and propaganda
by defining the former as “the advocacy of what we believe” and the
latter as “the advocacy of what we do not believe.” This definition makes
propaganda a species of lying, that is, of advocating as true something
one does not believe is true. Certainly, it makes propaganda deceptive
in a way that makes it an insincere or dishonest kind of advocacy. But
is propaganda necessarily insincere or deceptive in this way? It would
seem not, for it is possible to put forward propaganda for a cause the
propagandist believes in, and not all propaganda consists in saying what
is false or what is known or believed to be false.

What then does the deceptiveness of propaganda consist in? The
deceptiveness of propaganda is not just due to the conveying of state-
ments that are known or believed to be false, which is really more of an
accidental feature of it. The deceptiveness is due to the format within
which propaganda is typically presented. For example, the news reports
in Nazi Germany mixed factual reporting in with the lies and distortions
to enhance the credibility of the message reported. The audience may
well have been aware that what was presented to them was propaganda —
that is, biased advocacy of a cause — but its presentation in the news for-
mat set in place an expectation that the function of the discourse was
to report the news. Thus the deception, the clever illusion that is at the
basis of propaganda as an effective kind of advocacy, is the expectation of
the audience concerning the type of discourse that is supposedly being
engaged in. Because it is placed within a format, like news reporting,
propaganda of this kind is designed to look like information-seeking dia-
logue. The appearance presented is that information is being reported
to the mass audience through the media. Information-seeking dialogue
normally (or at least supposedly) has a balanced format of reporting facts.
Thus, propaganda in such a setting is not likely to be so easily dismissed


Deceptiveness and Relevance in Propaganda 121


as simple partisanship and promotion deliberately used to get compli-
ance to action by appealing to emotions and working on the audience
psychologically.

So the explanation of the deceptiveness of propaganda that makes it
a kind of discourse that can be used effectively for persuasion to a course
of action is the dialectical shift, or change from one type of dialogue to
another. By invoking a context familiar to the audience, expectations are
put in place that one particular type of dialogue is being engaged in. But
the reality is that a quite different sort of dialogue is being engaged in
(unilaterally, and generally without the other side knowing about the real
purpose of the discourse).

It is exactly this kind of dialectical shift from one type of dialogue
to another that underlies the evaluation of the logic textbooks of the
argumentum ad populumas a fallacy of relevance. In itself, there is nothing
logically fallacious about appealing to enthusiasms of a crowd or to popu-
lar beliefs, if you are trying to get a mass audience to accept a conclu-
sion they did not accept before or to commit to a policy of action. But
such an argument would be irrelevant, and could be fallacious on such
grounds, because the speaker was supposed to be engaged in convincing
the audience with rational arguments that presented all the available evi-
dence on both sides in a calm and dispassionate way. So the question of
relevance depends on an assessment, in a given case, of what the speaker
was supposed to be doing in the given situation. The question is one of
what type of dialogue she was supposed to be engaged in (as known or
reasonably presumed in a given case).

The next question is whether this kind of deceptiveness, which is asso-
ciated with the failure of dialectical relevance, or relevance of use of
arguments in a purposive context of dialogue, is essential to propaganda.
Does it have to be present for a given instance of discourse to qualify as
propaganda? The answer is that it does not. If it has already been made
clear at the outset that the purpose of an advertisement is to sell a product
or that the purpose of a speech is to rouse crowd enthusiasm to support
a cause, there need not be any deception to try to pretend that the dis-
course is supposed to be a critical discussion of the issue or a balanced
deliberation on what could be the prudent course of action. Such an
advertisement or speech could be described as propaganda, because it is
based on an appeal to the people and has all the other characteristics of
propaganda, but the arguments used in it could be dialectically relevant.
In such a case, then, an argument that appeals to the people to sell the
product or to get support for the cause could be dialectically relevant


122 Propaganda


within the discourse (in relation to the goals for this type of dialogue).
There has been no dialectical shift, no failure of relevance, no deception,
and no fallacy.

To judge the dialectical relevance of an argument used in a particular
case, a critic has to look at the direction the argument is taking. Then he
must identify the goal of the type of dialogue the participants are sup-
posed to be engaged in. Then he must ask whether the argument could
(actually or potentially) be used to contribute to that goal. For example,
if the discourse is supposed to be a critical discussion, an argument used
in that discourse is dialectically relevant if it could be used to help resolve
the conflict of opinions at issue in the discussion. This can be done by
supporting (or refuting) the point of view on one side or the other of the
conflict. Advocacy in a critical discussion is not inherently wrong.

The question is thus raised: when is an argument dialectically rele-
vant as used in propaganda (assuming there has been no dialectical shift
from another type of discourse)? As expressed in the seventh characteris-
tic of propaganda as a type of discourse, the goal of propaganda is to get
an audience to support the aims, interests, and policies of a particular
group, by getting the audience to act in compliance with these aims and
interests. The goal of propaganda, somewhat like that of negotiation dia-
logue, is to try to get the audience or respondent to serve the interests of
the person or group who is arguing. Any argument used in propagandis-
tic discourse to contribute to the goal is dialectically relevant. Thus the
relevance involved in assessing propaganda as a type of discourse is an
instrumental kind. To say that an argument is relevant in this sense is not
necessarily to say that it is a perfectly good argument in every respect. It is
not to judge it as a rational argument that successfully furnishes evidence
supporting the conclusion that a proposition is true or false, or that a
course of action is a practically reasonable thing to do, or that to assent
to it is a wise policy. An argument also has to meet other requirements to
receive this accolade, as shown in chapters 1 and 2.


10. Evaluating Argumentation in Propaganda


The ten characteristics set out in section 6 above give a rational critic
a means of identifying discourse as propaganda in a given case where a
text of argumentative discourse has been presented. Of course, such an
identification is bound to be subject to dispute, because arguers are often
very much opposed to their discourse being labeled as propaganda, and
may have a lot to lose by such an identification. But the ten defining char-
acteristics at least give relatively clear criteria that may be used to support


Evaluating Argumentation in Propaganda 123


this identification. The second task is the analysis of argumentation in a
context of use in propaganda, to try to find missing premises required
to support arguments. The third task is that of evaluating the argumen-
tation. This task has proved the most controversial and confusing. These
three tasks characterize the evidence-based approach to argumentation
in propaganda advocated in this chapter.

On the evidence-based approach, propaganda is not necessarily
against informed, rational, reflective judgment or logical thinking on
an issue, in the sense that its goal is opposed to these ways of thinking.
Instead, its goal is to get the desired action by any persuasive means.
If logical thinking and informed rational judgment work for that pur-
pose, then propaganda can or will use these means. But if these means
don’t work, then propaganda will use other means that can or do work,
including myths, stories, symbols, group loyalties, group-oriented appeal
to the people, popular enthusiasms, visual imagery, and any techniques
of persuasion that are psychologically effective. All these ways of argu-
ing can be dialectically relevant in propaganda, and therefore ad popu-
lum arguments or appeals to the people, the kind of arguments typically
used in propaganda, should not be evaluated as irrelevant and fallacious
per se.

Our attitudes toward propaganda are highly ambivalent. It is a much
more common type of discourse than is generally recognized, no doubt
partly because people are given to the verbal practice of describing only
the opposed viewpoints as propaganda, while refusing to admit that their
own arguments could be so categorized. But it is a type of discourse that
can be justified, or at least excused, on instrumental grounds, despite this
aversive attitude. Propaganda comes under the heading of what Garner
(1993) calls “convenient fictions,” or stories that are useful for getting
people to do things and, in particular, for running a state or country.
Such convenient fictions have been advocated and justified by philoso-
phers. Garner (p. 89) cited Plato’s advocacy of the noble lie, the kind of
convenient fiction in the form of a “caste-fixing myth” used by the rulers
to convince the various classes, such as the guardians, that their role is a
noble one.

Convenient fictions are also used in Buddhist philosophy, such as the
tradition that when understanding is reached, the Buddhist doctrine can
be discarded as something only provisionally needed to get there. Justifi-
cation of the use of convenient fictions is similar to the kind of justifica-
tion cited for some instances of lying in moral philosophy. For example,
Garner cited the case of the Lotus Sutra where a father tells his children
a lie in order to save their lives.


124 Propaganda


Case 3.6


In chapter three of the Lotus Sutra a parable is offered to support the practice of
using expedient devices. The parable, told by the Buddha to his disciple Sariputra,
is about a wealthy lord who has placed his children in a huge but run-down house
that catches fire. The children are occupied with their toys, to which, we are told,
they are addicted. When the father cries to them about the fire, they pay no
attention, so busy are they with their play. Finally the desperate father hits upon
the expedient of telling them that just those toys they most love are outside the
door waiting for them. This they hear and understand, and immediately scamper
to their safety. (p. 91)


In this case, the father lied to save the lives of his children, and our
inclination is not to condemn the lie, at least not as wholly wrong, in the
dangerous circumstances. Instead, we see it as an act that, while deceptive,
was necessary to save lives, even at the expense of telling the truth. Hence
it can be ethically justified.

Propaganda is not necessarily lying, as we have seen. But it is a use of
argumentation that is not directed toward the truth of a matter. To justify
its use, for example, in time of war, the danger of putting forward balanced
arguments that fairly and dispassionately consider all the evidence on
both sides of a question is cited. In particular, the danger may be the loss
of life that may result by giving information or encouragement to the
enemy. Propaganda is an instrumental type of discourse that is justified
(appropriately) by the use of argumentation from consequences. Such
arguments are not necessarily fallacious, but care is needed to watch for
dialectical shifts in using them.

Certain aspects of propaganda are commonly associated with it, but
by themselves do not define it or enable a one-step evaluation of it. Pro-
paganda associated with the use of argwmentum ad populum in appeals to
crowd enthusiasm is often condemned in the context of teaching courses
on logic and critical thinking. But such dismissive one-step condemna-
tions (as noted in section 3) tend to be more reflexive than thoughtful.
Propagandistic discourse sometimes takes the high ground of pretend-
ing to be a rational discussion of an issue, by portraying the opposition
as being illogical, deceptive, or dishonest. But this is not an essential
property of propaganda, even though it is a characteristic of the quarrel.
Propaganda is not inherently deceptive or illogical, but once discourse
has been identified as propaganda, it is wise to be on guard to realize
that it is not a critical discussion or rational deliberation of the kind that
openly examines arguments on both sides of an issue.

Thus some skepticism toward arguments used in propaganda is justi-
fiable and prudent, from a logical point of view of critical thinking. As


Evaluating Argumentation in Propaganda 125


a normative framework of the use of argumentation of the kind that
is worthy of rational assent on the grounds that it provides evidence
to support a view, propaganda is not much a friend of logic. It has a
kind of dialectical relevance that represents only an instrumental use
of argumentation, somewhat like that of negotiation dialogue or eristic
dialogue.

The best critical attitude to take toward propaganda is not to dismiss
every argument used in it as critically defective, of no value as an argu-
ment, or even fallacious. For such an argument may be based on good
evidence, and may be a form of reasoning that is rationally compelling.
The evidence-based approach recognizes that the argumentation in this
type of discourse as a whole is a biased kind of advocacy. It is specifically
designed to be persuasive, to get action, and to push for the one side of an
issue in as strongly partisan a manner as possible (or is useful for the pur-
pose of getting a particular action). On the evidence-based approach, the
best attitude to adopt concerning any argument said to be propaganda
is one of careful skepticism, but not one of routine or holistic dismissal
with respect to the arguments in the discourse.

On the other hand, if the discourse is supposed to be that of a bal-
anced critical discussion or other type of dialogue that requires a bal-
anced consideration of the arguments on both sides of the issue, then a
different evaluation of it as argumentation is called for. Propaganda is
an extremely inappropriate and inefficient method of argumentation to
fulfill the goals of this type of dialogue. If the propaganda pretends to be
one of these other types of dialogue, but covertly and systematically takes
the one-sided approach characteristic of propaganda (as defined above)
as a type of discourse, then the argumentation should be evaluated as
demonstrably irrelevant, on grounds of there being an illicit dialectical
shift. The deceptive tactic used here is the device of the concealed shift
from one type of dialogue to another, and this is in fact the very type of
tactic so often (but not always) used by propaganda to gain credibility.
As shown above and in chapter 6, in some cases, the appeal to the peo-
ple can be evaluated as a fallacious argument. But the evidence required
to support the charge must be based on an assessment of the purpose
of the discourse the argument is supposed to be part of, as compared with
the way the argument has been put forward in the text of discourse of
the case. This evidence can then be used to support (or refute) a charge
of dialectical irrelevance in a given case.

So once something is identified as propaganda in a given case, that
is not the end of the story. The job of evidence-based evaluation of the
argumentation (and especially the assessment of dialectical relevance)


126 Propaganda


remains to be done. This job of collecting, analyzing, and evaluating the
evidence in a given case is actually quite hard work. It is much easier
to use “propaganda” eristically as a negative emotive term to dismiss an
opponent’s views and arguments peremptorily. The problem with this
approach arises when one’s own arguments are thoughtlessly dismissed
as propaganda.


4


Appeals to Fear and Pity


Appeals to fear and appeals to pity are two types of argumentation widely
used in the media in political debates and advertising by advocacy groups,
public relations firms, governments, and corporations. Johnson (2000,
p- 269) has emphasized that mass media rhetoric, to be effective, needs
to take the human emotions, in particular, fear and pity, into account.
Both types of rhetorical argumentation can have a tremendous emo-
tional impact on a mass audience, when presented in the right way. Mass
media argumentation as a persuasive effort involves strategic maneuver-
ing based on advocacy, audience adaption, and presentational devices,
which are used to resolve a difference of opinion in one’s own favor (van
Eemeren and Houtlosser 1g99b, 2000, 2001, 2002). On the other hand,
both kinds of arguments are so well known to be subject to exploitation
and manipulation that they have been traditionally classified in logic as
fallacious. Recently, it has come to be recognized, however, that the tradi-
tional blanket condemnation is not warranted (Walton 1994). Appeals to
emotion should be generally recognized as having legitimate standing as
being, under the right conditions, reasonable arguments carrying some
weight in shifting a burden of proof in a balance of considerations case
where exact calculation of the outcome is not a practical possibility. But
if appeals to fear and pity are sometimes rational arguments, how can we
strike the right balance between recognizing their rhetorical power and
the logical defects they admittedly have in some instances? The key is to
probe beneath their rhetorical uses as strategically persuasive rhetorical
tools to their underlying dialectical structure that makes them rationally
persuasive.


127


128 Appeals to Fear and Pity


In this chapter, it is shown that the key to understanding how appeals
to fear and pity work as persuasive arguments can be discerned using
the dual process model of persuasion (O’Keefe 1996). According to this
model, there are two routes to persuasion, a central and a peripheral
route. The central route requires an elaboration of the rational argu-
mentation in the mass of evidence in a case. But appeals to fear and pity
offer a short cut to a mass audience by suggesting a peripheral route.
The short cut, using heuristics that appeal to fear and pity, may suggest
leaping to a conclusion prematurely but is not inherently wrong or falla-
cious. Applying this dual process model in a helpful way requires grasping
the subtle relationship between the rhetorical and dialectical routes of
argumentation underlying both types of argument. To meet this require-
ment, a structure of practical goal-directed reasoning as a deliberation
process is presented. Knowledge of this structure is shown to explain how
appeals to fear and pity can be judged to be rhetorically persuasive and
to explain how the dialectical task of evaluating real arguments of these
kinds in particular cases can be judged to be reasonable or fallacious.
Once we see more deeply how these appeals work both rhetorically and
dialectically, by grasping how they function as persuasive arguments in a
multi-agent framework of practical reasoning, it can be shown how, and
to what degree, they are sometimes more persuasive than they should be
in media argumentation.


1. Appeals to Fear and Pity in Mass Media


A classic example of the appeal to pity in mass media argumentation is the
Nayirah case, summarized below (Walton 1997b, ch. 5; and Marlin 2002,
pp. 194-200). An atrocity story that was covered widely in the news media
in 1990, Amnesty International was the source named as confirming its
authenticity (Marlin 2002, p. 196).


Case 4.1
Just after the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq in August 1990, there was
a meeting of the United Nations to deliberate on the question of
whether to respond with military force if Iraq did not pull out. At the
meeting a videotape was shown, among other presentations. The
videotape showed a fifteen-year-old girl identified only as Nayirah,
who tearfully testified that she had seen Iraqi soldiers take babies
out of incubators in a hospital and leave them to die on the cold
floor. The story had powerful appeal and was widely publicized in


Appeals to Fear and Pity in Mass Media 129


the mass media, supported by an Amnesty International report on
the incident. In January 1991, the U.S. Senate voted to go to war
against Iraq. But then in March 1991, it was revealed that Nayirah
was the daughter of a member of the Kuwaiti royal family and that
there was a public relations campaign connecting Kuwaiti financing
with the presentations made to the U.N. and the U.S Congress. The
New York firm of Hill and Knowlton was paid over ten million dollars
for persuading the public that the atrocity took place, funded by a
group called Citizens for a Free Kuwait. Subsequent investigations
also found no evidence that the incubator story was true.


This example is interesting for many reasons. It shows how powerful an
appeal to pity can be in the mass media. The videotape was so effective
because it supplied just the right emotion-arousing ingredients to attract
the sympathy and fuel the indignation of the American public. It shows
how this form of argument can be powerfully deceptive when used at
the right moment in a developing situation. It can be seen as typical of
how atrocity stories are used to try to get a reluctant nation to go to
war. The technique takes the form of an appeal to pity that tugs at the
heartstrings.

But how should we evaluate the appeal to pity in such a case? In this
particular case it appeared that the story Nayirah told was simply false
and that the mass presentation was a public relations technique used to
persuade by those who paid for it and stood to gain by it. It seems like a
pretty bad argument. It was intentionally deceptive, and it was based on
a lie. But are appeals to pity inherently wrong, deceptive, or fallacious?
The answer appears to be no. Whether this form of argument should
be criticized as inappropriate or even fallacious seems to depend on the
context. During a criminal trial, for example, it may be questionable if
the defendant appeals to pity when the issue is whether he is guilty or
not of the charge. But during the post-trial sentencing stage, it might be
legitimate for the defendant to throw himself on the mercy of the court,
using an appeal to compassion as his form of argumentation. There has
been a tradition in Western culture of treating emotional appeals of any
sort as questionable, suspicious, or even irrational. But many charitable
appeals to raise funds for medical research and treatment of diseases or to
aid victims of poverty are frankly based on appeal to pity. Often the appeal
is visual and quite graphic. Do we want to condemn all such instances of
mass media argumentation as fallacious, deceptive, or irrational? Such
a policy probably goes too far in a negative direction. As even Aristotle


130 Appeals to Fear and Pity


acknowledged, appeal to pity is a form of argument that is central to
rhetoric.

McClurg (1992) has used argumentation on both sides of the gun
control issue to illustrate emotional appeals in rhetoric. He argues that
such appeals are not always fallacious, however, in a democratic society
where political action rightly depends on persuasion, and persuasion
depends on rhetoric. However, McClurg uses the following case, among
many others, to show how bad rhetoric can take the form of fallacies. This
particular argument in the gun control debate appeals to both fear and
pity at the same time.


Case 2.2

In arguing against the Brady bill, Representative Barbara
Vucanovich, a Republican from Nevada, invoked the tragic episode
of serial murders that occurred in Gainesville, Florida, in the sum-
mer of 1990. She posed the following query: “If the Brady bill were
law, who knows how many more young women would be dead in
Gainesville because they had to wait to protect themselves.” Then,
in almost the same breath, she urged her fellow representatives “not
to let their judgments be clouded by the antigun lobby’s emotional
banter.” (pp. 65-66)


McClurg evaluates this case by commenting, “Conjuring up the night-
marish image of defenseless coeds being butchered by a mad killer was
a blatant attempt to use emotion to generate opposition to the Brady
bill” (p. 66). McClurg sees the emotional appeal as fallacious because
the argument is weak and questionably relevant. But however the argu-
ment in this case is evaluated, it certainly is an excellent example of an
appeal to pity and fear combined into one argument. This kind of case is
common in cases of political rhetoric. The problem of having an objec-
tive framework in which such arguments can be fairly and reasonably
evaluated requires not just concentrating on the fallacious cases, how-
ever. Because in other cases the same kinds of emotional appeals can be
reasonable arguments, the prior problem is to determine the right condi-
tions under which such an argument can be correct and reasonable. But
what are the right conditions? To answer this question, it is shown in this
chapter that we need to consider multi-agent communication structures
containing sequences of means-end reasoning in which agents have dia-
logues about their goals and about the actions required to achieve these
goals.


Appeals to Fear 131


The first thesis argued in this chapter is that arguments appealing to
fear and pity share an underlying inferential structure that can be mod-
eled by Aristotelian practical reasoning. The second thesis is that such
arguments are neither deductive nor inductive in nature. They are defea-
sible arguments that shift a burden of proof onto the side of a respon-
dent in a multi-agent dialogue. Their proper function in a dialogue is to
carry a certain weight, or occupy a ground, in a dialogue on a contested
issue in which there is uncertainty and on which exact knowledge cannot
directly or conclusively be brought to bear. In light of these two theses,
recommendations are made on how to analyze and evaluate appeals to
fear and pity. Once an objective framework is set in place for seeing how
such an argument can be correctly used to make a legitimate point in a
given case, then the analysis can be extended to achieve a solid basis for
understanding and dealing with the fallacious cases.


2. Appeals to Fear


The fear appeal argument is currently recognized within the social sci-
ences as a distinctive type of argument format used by those in the busi-
ness of changing public opinion and attitudes through the mass media.
Fear appeal arguments are currently in vogue with advertisers, corpora-
tions, public relations firms, and government agencies — all the powerful
organizations that use the media to mold public opinion. Fear appeal
arguments are typically used on issues of heath and safety. One ad tells
smokers they will die an excruciating death if they do not quit smoking.
An ad for Trojan-Enz, Inc. shows a man with a serious expression talking
about the need to use condoms. He relates that he has heard the Sur-
geon General’s warning about the new severe threats of venereal disease
(LaTour and Zahra 1989, p. 62). Another warns teenagers that their teeth
will decay if they do not brush them properly. An ad for American Express
Travelers Checks shows a couple on vacation victimized by a robbery and
left in a state of shock and desperation (LaTour and Zahra 1989, p. 62).
In another ad for the Lifecall System, an elderly woman falls and pushes
the “panic button” worn around her neck. Paramedics and physicians are
shown responding to the medical emergency. In an anti-smoking ad, a
woman reaches for her cigarette, and then puts the filter end into a small
hole at the base of her throat. She inhales deeply, and a message comes
on the screen, “The tobacco industry denies that nicotine is addictive.”
The message is that the woman has lost her vocal chords to cancer, expos-
ing the lie of the tobacco industry (Allossery 1999).


132 Appeals to Fear and Pity


The much-publicized ad that started all the interest in fear appeal ads
was the famous Grim Reaper ad produced by the National Advisory Com-
mittee on AIDS in Australia in 1987. The ad portrayed a skeletal, black-
shrouded, skull-headed figure carrying a scythe. This figure was shown
throwing bowling balls that knocked down a series of typical Australians,
including a housewife, a baby, a footballer, and a little girl. The message
was that all members of the community, and not just homosexual males,
were at risk from AIDS. The general perception was that the ad was suc-
cessful (Morgan 1987). Following this perception, use of fear appeal ads
has become highly popular. Government agencies in Canada, for exam-
ple, produced the following fear appeal ads. A man at a bar is shown
squeezing a bunch of cigarettes over a beer glass. As a brown goo oozes
into the glass, a voice-over intones the message that arsenic, cyanide, mer-
cury, lead, and other chemicals in cigarettes form a “lethal brew” that kills
40,000 Canadians every year. In another ad, a baby in a crib is gasping for
air as smoke drifts under the door and into the room. In one much-shown
ad, teenagers are pictured drinking at a party, and their car crashes as
they drive home. The boy who drove the car tries to follow the stretcher
as his girlfriend is taken away in an ambulance. In the next scene police
officers appear telling the girl’s mother that she is dead.

Fear appeals are not only used in advertising and in public safety mes-
sages. They are also widely used in political debates, and particularly by
advocacy groups in rhetoric designed to influence legislation on public
policy issues. Three excellent cases of the use of fear appeal arguments
on the gun control issue by the National Rifle Association have been cited
by McClurg (1992, p. 67). The first used graphic pictures and a series of
rhetorical questions.


Case 4.3

After the 1992 riots that followed in the wake of the jury’s decision
to acquit most of the police officers charged with using excessive
force against motorist Rodney King, the NRA employed a four-page
advertisement to boost membership by shamelessly exploiting the
fear and horror generated by images of the violence. The adver-
tisement, featuring color pictures of looters and burning buildings,
asked: “Must your glass be shattered? Must your flesh and blood be
maimed? Must your livelihood be looted? Must all you’ve built be
torn down? ... What will it take before you stand up with the one
group that will stand for no more?”


Appeals to Fear 133


A second ad depicted a woman’s mangled locket under the headline,
“Your mother just surprised two burglars who don’t like surprises.” A
third ad showed a high heel shoe with the heel broken off, and read,
“He’s followed you for two weeks. He’ll rape you in two minutes.” These
ads all have a factual basis, and the fears they appeal to may not be at all
unreasonable. Yet one can’t help having the impression that one is being
manipulated somehow in a questionable way by the ad. On the other
hand, the NRA should have the right to present the strongest and most
persuasive possible arguments to represent their view, and to try to get
others to accept it. So we are perplexed by these appeals to emotion and
frustrated by the problem of finding an objective way of evaluating what
is reasonable or unreasonable about them. If we had some objective way
of judging such arguments, it would be a powerful tool, for both logic
and rhetoric.

Social scientists have conducted many empirical investigations of fear
appeal arguments to try to see how they work to change behavior and
attitudes with experimental subjects. The general perception is that fear
appeal arguments do work, but not everyone agrees. Some think that such
arguments are inherently negative and that positive ones work better to
persuade an audience to take action (Tripp and Davenport 1988). The
empirical work has not been very conclusive, mainly, it seems, because
fear appeal arguments have a cognitive component that is not well under-
stood. Three main theories or models have been formulated to try to
explain how fear appeals work in modifying behavior. According to the
drive theory, in a fear appeal, there is a so-called drive, or bodily state that
leads to activity, that moves a subject toward reduction of fear (Dillard
1994, p. 297). According to Rogers (1983), the drive theory had to be
abandoned because it failed to show a direct relationship between the
drive (fear) and attitude change. The parallel response model cites two
independent systems at work in fear appeals: fear control, which is seen to
work in a way similar to drive theory, and danger control, which involves
changing the circumstances to reduce the danger (Leventhal 1970). In
Leventhal’s parallel response model, fear control and danger control are
seen as two simultaneously operating variables, rather than as sequen-
tially related (Leventhal 1971, p. 1211). A criticism of this model is that it
does not predict how the subject will reason in choosing the one response
or the other. According to the protection motivation model, response to
a fear appeal depends on three factors: (1) the perception of the severity
of the danger, (2) the probability of occurrence of the danger, and (3)
the belief in the effectiveness of the subject’s coping response (Rogers


134 Appeals to Fear and Pity


1983, pp. 157-158). This third factor refers to how well the subject feels
she can cope with the danger, given her existing resources. The protec-
tion motivation model sees the subject as a kind of rational calculator.
Because it stresses the cognitive aspect so much, some critics say it has
lost sight of the “fear” in fear appeals (Tanner, Day, and Crask, 19809, p.
269). While all three models have been valuable in bringing out different
aspects of fear appeals, none has been regarded as altogether successful
in predicting experimental outcomes.

In the logical tradition, fear appeal arguments have been treated under
the category of the argumentum ad baculum, which includes the use of
threats and force in argumentation, as well as fear appeals. The early
textbooks typically cited use of force, but most of the logic textbooks
in the first half of the twentieth century featured examples of threat
appeal arguments. These are arguments in which the proponent actually
makes a threat to the respondent in order to try to get the respondent
to accept her conclusion. The speech act of making a threat requires the
proponent conveying to the respondent the message “If you don’t accept
what I propose, I will see to it that a cited harmful outcome (to you) comes
about.” The speech act of making a threat goes beyond the speech act of
warning in that the proponent actually commits herself to (undertakes)
bringing about the harmful outcome, if the recommended action is not
carried out. As stated above, most of the older textbooks regard threat
appeal arguments as the central instances of the argumentum ad baculum.
But the trend in the more recent textbooks is to include and emphasize
fear appeal arguments under this category as well. Fear appeal arguments,
by definition, do not rest, as part of the argumentstructure, on the making
of a threat by the proponent.

Both fear and threat appeals appear to be practical kinds of arguments
that address the self-interest or personal safety of the person to whom
the argument is addressed. Fear appeals, in particular, postulate a state
of affairs that is perceived as a danger to the respondent. Then the fear
appeal argument recommends an action as an indicated way of avoiding
the danger.


3. Appeals to Pity


Like fear appeals, appeals to pity have been widely used by public relations
experts in commercial ads and initiatives of various kinds. Most visibly,
Third World children are shown in order to solicit food or charitable


Appeals to Pity 135


contributions. Typically, a TV ad or letter features a particular child who
is evidently starving or in some other kind of distress. The appeal then
directs the reader or viewer to send a check or credit card number, to
the organization. I personally receive a steady stream of these ads in the
mail. On January 23, 2002, I received a brochure from World Vision.


The World Vision Example
On the cover of the brochure was a large photograph of a child’s
distraught face, accompanied by the words, “Let my heart be broken
with the things that break the heart of God.” Inside the brochure,
the same child’s picture was reprinted, with three other pictures of
faces of small children, two said to be from Africa and one from
Peru. The message inside the brochure read as follows.


World Vision’s founder, Bob Pierce, wrote those words more than 50 years
ago. It was during the Korean War, and he was deeply moved by the suffer-
ing of war orphans he saw there. Back home, he couldn’t forget those little
ones. He began recruiting friends and relatives to help them. That’s how
World Vision was born. And today, caring people sponsor over 1 million
needy children around the world through World Vision. Will you join
them today? As a sponsor, you'll help provide things like clean water,
schools, clinics and agricultural training that will help lift your sponsored
child, his/her family, and community out of poverty. For a dollar a day,
you can help change a child’s life forever. To start your sponsorship, just
return the coupon below. You'll receive information and a photograph of
a child who needs your help. Let your heart be broken. Sponsor a child
today.


At the bottom of the brochure was a form to be filled out, asking for
a credit card number or a check. The appeal to pity in this ad is based
on a formula common to many of these ads. A prominent photograph,
usually of a child who appears to be in distress, is supposed to evoke an
emotional reaction on the part of the respondent. The premise is, “Here
is something bad, a problem that needs to be solved.” The recommended
solution is to send money. This form of the appeal to pity appears to be
quite legitimate, on the ground that if people are to be persuaded of
the urgency of the need, telling the story of a particular child is prob-
ably the most graphic way to convey the appeal. Whether the solution
recommended is the right one, or one that will really solve the problem,
is of course something that should be examined. Before sending money,
it would also be appropriate to ask critical questions about the agency


136 Appeals to Fear and Pity


sponsoring the ad and to have some assurance that they really spend a
reasonable proportion of the money received on helping those individ-
uals said to be in distress. There is much more that could be said about
the technique of appeal to pity used in these ads. One assumes that the
technique is effective in collecting money, because such ads are so very
common. However skeptical one might feel about them, though, it would
not be justified to declare that the appeal to pity used in them is a falla-
cious argument. Thus the problem is posed in a sharpened form. When
is an appeal to pity fallacious and when is it not fallacious? Assessing each
case individually could be a non-trivial task.

A method for helping the reader to distinguish, on a case-by-case basis,
between the fallacious and non-fallacious uses of this argument is pre-
sented in Walton (1997b). The fallacious uses of appeal to pity have
been widely illustrated in the traditional treatment of the ad misericordiam
fallacy in the logic textbooks. It is not hard to appreciate why this type
of argumentation has been classified as a fallacy. Its use as an effective
courtroom tactic is well known to pleaders. Appeal to pity has frequently
been exploited with amazing success as a deceptive tactic of argumenta-
tion, even in ancient trials, so notoriously that its traditional treatment as
a fallacy is well warranted. It can be a powerful form of argument, as all
lawyers know, and it can be used in a manipulative way to influence the
decision of a jury.

The analysis in Walton (1997b) used a case study method to examine
uses of appeals to pity and compassion in real arguments, in order to clas-
sify, analyze, and evaluate the types of arguments used in these appeals.
One case studied was that of the Jerry Lewis telethon for muscular dystro-
phy, which was much criticized by activists for the rights of the disabled
on the grounds that Lewis exploited pity by televising pathetic images of
the “tortured bodies” of disabled children to raise money. In the Nayirah
example, outlined above, the appeal to pity was instrumental in Senate
deliberations that led to the invasion of Kuwait by U.S. forces. In another
classic case, a student argued that if his professor didn’t give him a passing
grade, he would be deported, and then shot. As evidence of how widely
accepted the use of appeal to pity by students has become, one profes-
sor found the following complaint on one of his student evaluations:
“Not once, when grading an exam, has the instructor shown mercy, or
signs of heart.” This remark is interesting in suggesting how legitimate
the appeal to pity is perceived to be as a basis that should be used for
evaluating assignments.


Appeals to Pity 137


The problem with many cases of use of appeal to pity by students is
that the emotional appeal is put forward as a reason for changing a grade
or a deadline, even when there is no basis on the merits for making
such a change. The suggestion is that the professor should take action to
avert an allegedly harmful outcome, even though the action would not
be justified in light of what the professor should do as a fair grader. A
fair grader is obliged to judge academic work on the merit of the work in
her discipline. Each case needs to be judged on its individual merits, but
the problem is that in many cases, appeals to pity are weak and poorly
substantiated as logical inferences, yet pressed forward in an aggressive
and emotionally powerful presentation that is designed to overwhelm the
critical judgment of the respondent.

One fault often cited in logic textbooks is failure of relevance. But in
some cases, appeals to pity can be relevant, yet still fallacious because
they are exploited to have a much greater impact than should properly
be the case. The successful use of such arguments for purposes of per-
suading an audience often has to do with the timing of the argument at
the opportune moment in presenting a larger body of evidence. If the
case hangs in the balance, a strategic use of appeal to pity just at the
right moment can tilt the burden of proof enough toward one side to
make a big difference in the outcome of the case. But relevance in the
dialectical sense appropriate for evaluating argumentation depends on
the context of use of a given argument in relation to some kind of com-
municative exchange. As noted above, in a debate on matters of public
safety, appeals to fear or pity — for example, in gun control rhetoric —
could be relevant. The reason is that the proponents or the opponents of
a gun control bill should properly use the arguments that will persuade
the public to come to accept their view of the matter. Emotional argu-
ments, such as appeals to fear or pity, are in fact often the most highly
persuasive on matters of public debate. In principle, then, such argu-
ments should be regarded as relevant, unless it can be shown in specific
cases why they are not. The reason is that in public deliberations on what
to do on a social issue, the ramifications are so complex that neither
party can have any claim to know the truth of the matter. It is a matter
of using good judgment to weigh the relative strengths and weaknesses
of the argumentation on both sides. That is the way it should be in a
democracy.

The problem of how to evaluate appeals to pity, and accord each its
proper weight in a case, seems to be a formidable one. The first step


138 Appeals to Fear and Pity


is to get some grasp of the structure of the reasoning used in this kind
of appeal. Because, presumably, appeals to pity can be reasonable argu-
ments in at least some cases (even if they tend to be weak arguments
by themselves), the place to begin is to describe the kinds of premises
used in such an argument, and the kind of conclusion they are used to
support. It will be the thesis of this chapter that such arguments have the
conclusion that the person to whom the argument was directed should
carry out a recommended course of action. The premises support such
a claim by appealing to the interests or goals of that person, and alleged
facts about his circumstances.


4. The Respondent-to-Dialogue Problem


Many mass media rhetorical arguments, including those that appeal to
fear and pity, do not appear to fit the dialogue format outlined above as
a model for evaluating argumentation. In the types of dialogue outlined
above, the argumentation was composed of an exchange of connected
question and reply moves between the proponent and the respondent.
In some of the examples, this sort of dialogue exchange was evident.
For example, in the gun control case, a debate was ongoing. And in the
Nayirah example, when the video was presented in the U.S. Congress,
the context was also that of a debate. But in the examples of fear appeal
ads, the role of the respondent is questionable. The ad was targeted at a
mass audience. No single respondent was meant to be the receiver of the
message. And if there was any dialogue, it appears to be curiously one-
sided. The proponent broadcast the message or paid to have it sent out by
the media. But the audience did not then reply and start a dialogue. The
message just went out. The audience presumably saw the presentation
and was presumably influenced by it in some manner. Maybe all it did was
influence many of them to turn to a different channel. But the message
can be presumed to have had some sort of effect. There the dialogue (if
it was one) ended. The audience never had a chance to raise questions,
to criticize the argument in it, or to verbally respond by agreeing or
disagreeing with it. So what kind of dialogue is that?

In contrast to some cases of argumentation, in which the proponent
and the respondent are clearly identified, rhetorical mass media argu-
ments tend to be diffuse as a class. They often seem to share many char-
acteristics with comparable arguments used to influence a single respon-
dent, or a smaller, more precisely defined group of respondents. But
that contrast by itself is perhaps the first characteristic of mass media


The RTD Problem 139


arguments. They are diffuse, in that they are not aimed at a specific
respondent. Instead, they are aimed at a mass audience at a national
or even international level. They may even be attempts to influence an
audience or readership that continually changes over time. Some readers
who may be strongly influenced by the argument may not even have been
born at the time the argument was expressed in writing. At that point,
others who were influenced by it may be long dead. Thus mass media
arguments are diffuse in this respect. It may be problematic to define
who the respondent is or was meant to be.

As noted in chapter 2, section 10, Govier (1999, ch. 11) expressed this
problem very well in the title of her chapter, “When They Can’t Talk Back:
The Noninteractive Audience and the Theory of Argument.” She was very
skeptical about solving this problem using dialectical models of the kind
presented in chapter 2 when she wrote that envisioning a challenger
who fits one’s intended audience is virtually impossible when addressing
a mass audience, given that its views are likely to be “heterogeneous and
largely unknown” (p. 187).

Blair (1998) was the first to formulate this problem, when he com-
plained that in cases where the audience is unknown, cannot talk back,
cannot be responded to, and has unknown characteristics, the current
dialectical models of argumentation are stretched out of shape. Krabbe
(1998) replied to Blair’s complaint by suggesting that in such problem-
atic cases that differ from the primary model, the other party or parties in
the dialogue have to be envisioned as participants who are discrete and
hypothetically present, and thus able to ask questions or make objections.
Govier, however, remained highly skeptical about this sort of response.
She argued that when the views of the audience are not specifically known,
appealing to a hypothetical notion of audience to whom an argument was
directed is not generally useful to decide matters such as the acceptability
of premises, the acceptability of missing premises, the sufficiency of the
reasoning, or other matters like burden of proof that are important for
argument evaluation. This response seems to split dialectic and rhetoric
apart, because audience is a fundamental component in rhetorical argu-
mentation.

This difficulty of matching the dialogue model to cases of mass media
argumentation where the audience can’t talk back could be called the
respondent-to-dialogue, or RTD problem. The problem is that there
appears to be no real dialogue interaction, or only a partial one at best in
such cases. A dialogue has five basic components (Hamblin 1970, 1971).
It has two participants, usually called the proponent and the respondent.


140 Appeals to Fear and Pity


The two participants take turns making verbal moves (speech acts). And
the resulting pairs of moves produce an orderly sequence. There are rules
governing each move, telling us whether a move was appropriate or not,
as a response to the prior move. And finally, at each move, propositions
are inserted into or deleted from the commitment set of the participant
who made the move (and possibly from the commitment set of the other
participant as well). In the fear appeal ads cited above, for example, it
is unclear whether these five components are present. There certainly
was an initial move by the proponent, in the form of the argument put
forward in the ad. And therefore we can’t really evaluate the argument
using the conventional methods of the new dialectic. But it is doubtful
whether the other four components of a dialogue were present. There
was some target audience; that is presumed by the construction of the ad.
But the target audience was merely a device that the ad presenter used
to aim the argument in the ad. If the ad was broadcast in the media, then
of course there was a real audience, or group of viewers. But this was a
diffuse group that changed each time the ad was aired. Could this set of
persons be the “respondent”? It seems hard to say. The problem is that
they can’t really continue the dialogue by asking the ad presenter critical
questions.

Because of the RTD problem, it is hard to see how the fear appeal ads
fit the dialogue model. And thus it is hard to see how they could ever
be analyzed as fallacious arguments on the dialectical model. The best
that could be done to try to get a match is to portray the mass media
argument as like the commercial ad in involving a hypothetical kind of
dialogue interaction. We can say that the proponent had a target audience
in mind when he designed the ad. The ad was intended to be persuasive.
It was aimed at getting a group of respondents to carry out a designated
action or to come to accept some particular proposition as true. Thus
it seems reasonable to say that the argument was used as a persuasion
attempt. Something like what might be called a speech act of persuasion
was central to the function of the argument. If the arguer was trying to
persuade the audience, he had to try to anticipate the audience’s response
to it. And presumably it was the anticipation that guided the construction
of the argumentation in the ad. This hypothetical dialogue interaction
can be better understood by bringing in the notion of an agent.

Suppose we look at the proponent and the respondent in a dialogue
as agents. Both have the capability to carry out actions. Both have the
capability for practical reasoning. Both have an ability to understand
how sequences of actions go in common situations. Thus, the one can


The RTD Problem 141


be seen as having the ability to anticipate how the other might normally
be expected to react in a situation familiar to them both. If one is fearful
of a dangerous situation, then perhaps the other is likely to be as well.
Agents are also familiar with common forms of argumentation. Thus an
agent can base his argument on anticipating how another agent is likely
to react to an argument. The ability to anticipate an objection or question
and to deal with it in advance in a dialogue is called prolepsis in classical
rhetoric. Using prolepsis, an agent can use advance strategy to deal with
objections he reasonably expects to be felt by his respondent or audience,
even before the respondent has voiced that objection. In other words, an
agent has the capability of making up a strategy of argumentation when
dealing with another agent. If this is right, then perhaps mass media
argumentation can be viewed usefully in dialectical terms. The strategic
interaction could at least be seen as based on a dialogue interaction
between agents. But what is an argument strategy, in the new dialectic?

The examples of the use of appeals to fear and pity in mass media in this
chapter show that the proponent who designs the mass media message
has a certain strategy in mind. Each example isa crafted argument used by
an argument presenter to try to persuade a mass audience. According to
the new dialectic, the argument should be analyzed by seeing its presenter
and the mass audience as two participants engaged in a dialogue. This
approach requires some way of formally representing the notions that
the participant is capable of carrying out a strategy of argumentation,
and also has the capability for deception. Such capabilities are based
on anticipation by one dialogue partner of the expected moves of the
other party, and also on the use of an organized attempt to exploit this
anticipation by making tactical moves in advance. The problem is to figure
out how the current systems of formal dialectic can be extended to take
these capabilities into account and to model them in a way that is useful
for analysis and evaluation of argumentation and fallacies.

An approach that could be considered would be to broaden the notion
of a participant in a persuasion dialogue, or other type of dialogue, by
thinking of each participant as having properties of an agent. An agent is
an entity that has the capability for action. An agent also has goals. He can
modify his actions when he sees their consequences. Using feedback and
the capability for practical reasoning, the agent can change his actions
and make the sequence of actions move closer to his goals. The same
properties can apply to verbal actions in a dialogue. In a deliberation
dialogue, for example, an agent can alter his plan of action once certain
undesirable aspects of these actions are pointed out to him. An agent


142 Appeals to Fear and Pity


can also anticipate the expected plausible moves of another agent with
whom he is engaged in dialogue, and change plans to fit in with these
anticipated moves. In the current systems of formal dialogue recognized
in argumentation theory, a participant in a dialogue is seen as a simple
unanalyzed unit with a set of statements (commitment set) attached. A
participant makes moves according to the dialogue rules. But is such a
participant capable of carrying out strategies of argumentation based on
anticipation of the moves of the other participant?

Planning is a field of artificial intelligence in which strategies take the
form of sequences of actions (Wilensky 1983). There is also the notion
of a partial strategy used by Hamblin (1987) in his work on the logic
of imperatives. Can these notions of action strategies of agents be trans-
ferred to dialogue theory for argumentation? A strategy in a dialogue
could perhaps be seen as a device that a participant uses to anticipate the
plausible future moves of the other participant in the dialogue. Putting all
these components together could give us a way of modeling mass media
appeals to fear and pity as a form of argumentation fitting the dialogue
framework. But many aspects of the model are, so far, unclear and not
very plausible. The central point is that both the arguer and the audience
can be seen as agents engaged in a dialogue type of interaction in which
one anticipates the reaction of the other to an argument. The anticipa-
tion or prolepsis is an essential part of the argumentation strategy, and
the part that makes the argumentation possible to analyze in a dialectical
format. What makes the strategy possible, in turn, is the capability of both
agents to engage in practical reasoning.


5. Simulative Reasoning


Simulation theory is important in psychology, biology, and cognitive sci-
ence as a hypothesis to explain factors of human and animal behavior
that would otherwise be hard to understand. In an experiment (Premack
and Woodruff 1978), a chimpanzee was shown a film of an actor trying
unsuccessfully to reach for some bananas dangling overhead. The chimp
was then offered a choice among several pictures that showed what the
actor’s next move could be for getting the bananas. The chimp chose a
picture of the actor moving some crates underneath the bananas. The
experimenters took this choice to represent the best, or most practical
move, as a way of getting the bananas in the situation pictured. What
hypothesis could account for the outcome of this experiment? Simula-
tion theory explains the outcome by postulating an act of imagination


Simulative Reasoning 143


on the part of the chimp. On this explanation, the chimp imagines itself
trying to reach for the bananas. It is presumably familiar with this kind
of problem from its own experience. So the chimp, according to the
theory, sees itself dragging some crates under the bananas. Thus the
chimp can grasp the correct solution, even though it is the actor, not
the chimp, who is now seen as being in that kind of situation. If simu-
lation theory is a good hypothesis, it shows that animals as well as peo-
ple are capable of reasoning about the reasoning of another practical
agent.

Gordon (1986) used the example of strategic thinking in chess as
a dialogue model to show how simulative reasoning is used when one
person tries to anticipate the reactions of another person. He began by
observing that chess players report that they often visualize the chess-
board from the opponent’s point of view. In this act of empathy, a chess
player visualizes his pieces on the board as being his opponent’s pieces,
and the opponent’s pieces as his. Is a chess player, in performing this act of
simulative reasoning, trying to imaginatively duplicate the actual beliefs
or feelings of the other player, or only trying to put himself strategically
into the position of the other player? Probably, both kinds of simula-
tion are involved. Of course, strategic simulation is the more important
one. But the player should also take into account any patterns of play or
habits or special strategic preferences of the other player that he knows
about.

How should simulative reasoning be defined? In the definition of
Goldman (1995, p. 189), “simulation” means “pretending to have the
same initial desires, beliefs, or other mental states that the attributor’s
background information suggests the agent has.” Goldman’s definition
of simulative reasoning represents the belief-desire-intention approach.
But there is an alternative: the commitment-based approach based on
practical reasoning as a model. On this model, the secondary agent who
performs the simulation proceeds by understanding the problem faced
by the primary agent. The secondary agent can then use this shared prac-
tical knowledge to grasp the actions that he saw the primary agent take
in order to take steps to solve the problem.

Collingwood (1946) adopted a commitment-based approach in his
theory of historical explanation as reenactment. He gave the example
(p. 283) ofa historian studying the edict of a Roman emperor called the
Theodosian code. Collingwood posed the historian’s task as one in which
the historian tries to see this problem as the emperor saw it himself. Of
course, the historian cannot be in the emperor’s real situation. But what


144 Appeals to Fear and Pity


he can do is to study the details of the past era and try to put himself
in the mind of the other person in the distant past, and reconstruct the
problem faced by that other person. Collingwood described the process
as one of reenactment. To perform a reenactment, the historian must
go through roughly the same process of thinking the Roman emperor
did. Only thus can the historian come to understand the reasons why the
emperor came to the particular solution of the problem that he in fact
came to. Dray (1964, 1995) explained this process of simulative reason-
ing as one of problem solving based on the capability for goal-directed
deliberation. The secondary agent must “enter the practical delibera-
tions” of the primary agent by understanding the purposes the primary
agent had, and the means that he thought he had at his disposal as
he saw the facts at the time (1964, pp. 11-12). Collingwood’s theory of
history as reenactment was also shown by Martin (1977) to be based on
simulative practical reasoning. According to Martin’s interpretation of
Collingwood’s theory, the secondary agent can only reenact the actions
of the primary agent because both are agents, and therefore share the
capability of practical reasoning. Building on Collingwood’s insights into
historical explanations, it is possible to define simulative reasoning in a
commitment-based approach built on practical reasoning. This approach
is not based on a psychological notion of empathy in which the secondary
agent tries to recreate the primary agent’s actual beliefs or intentions. It
is based on the shared practical reasoning capabilities of the two agents.
The agents must be seen as rational agents.

According to the commitment-based definition, simulative reasoning
involves two rational agents. A rational agent is an entity that is capable of
reasoning, but also capable of collecting and using information, includ-
ing information about the actions of another agent. This information
can include feedback, when one agent sees the consequences of its own
action on another agent. Simulative reasoning is a form of dual agent rea-
soning in which one agent is reasoning about the reasoning of another
agent. In simulative reasoning the one agent used his own capability of
reasoning as the basis of his reasoning about another agent’s reasoning.
Simulative reasoning can also be reflexive, meaning that an agent can
reason about his own reasoning. Reflexive or single-agent simulative rea-
soning is called autoepistemic reasoning in artificial intelligence. Moore
(1985, pp. 78-79) illustrated autoepistemic reasoning with the example
of an agent giving his reasons for his belief that he does not have an
older brother. The simulative reasoning in this example can be displayed
as follows.


The Dual Process Model of Persuasion 145


If I did have an older brother, I would know about it.
I don’t know of any older brothers.
Therefore, I must not have any older brothers.


This example of autoepistemic reasoning has the form of argument tra-
ditionally known in logic as argument from ignorance (argumentum ad
ignorantiam). Although it was long thought to be a fallacy in logic, the
argument from ignorance is a common and often reasonable form of
argument in everyday thinking (Walton 1996).

Using simulative reasoning is required in successful persuasion dia-
logue. It is not unique to mass media persuasion. But here it has special
features, because the respondent is not a single individual but a mass
audience composed of many individuals who may think very differently
about any issue or problem. But recognizing the importance of simulative
reasoning is the key to solving the problem of coming to understand how
dialectical argumentation and rhetorical argumentation are related.


6. The Dual Process Model of Persuasion


The problem in many of the cases cited above is that the decision to be
made involves a complex deliberation in which there is a large mass of
evidence on both sides. But then when the emotional appeal to fear or
pity is made, it is so powerful that it suggests simply disregarding all the
other evidence and following an impulse. The impulse is to give in to the
powerful emotional appeal of the moment. That is why, in some of these
cases, the appeal to emotion is so compelling. In the student’s appeal to
pity case, for example, the professor is supposed to judge and evaluate
the student’s performance by the evidence of his work in the course. But
when the student tearfully appeals to pity, she suggests that he forget all
that relevant but complex evidence. Instead, her appeal suggests that he
go by how he feels at the moment. As the Nayirah case shows, the strategy
is in the timing. Timing of an argument is especially important if the mass
of evidence on both sides is balanced. The emotional appeal, coming at
the right time just before the decision is to be made, may tilt the balance
one way or the other. Appeal to fear and pity function in this way as short-
cut arguments. There is a mass of evidence that needs to be weighed and
thoughtfully considered on both sides of an issue. When the appeal to
fear or pity comes along, it suggests, “Why bother?” Instead, the impulse
is to go for the short cut, the emotional appeal of the moment. This kind
of appeal is especially powerful to a respondent who doesn’t understand


146 Appeals to Fear and Pity


the larger body of relevant evidence in a case or who doesn’t care about
it. The option given is to just go with your emotions of the moment and
put all the other evidence aside.

The short-cut pattern can be explained by the dual process model of
persuasion of O’Keefe (1994, pp. 61-62). In this model, what is called
“elaboration” is systematic issue-relevant thinking about the matter in
hand. The model hypothesizes that in some cases, receivers of a persua-
sive message will engage in extensive elaboration, while in other cases,
receivers display relatively little elaboration. Part of the reason for the
disparity in cases might be that receivers don’t understand the message.
Another part might be that they just can’t bother to make the effort
required. Thus according to the dual process model, there are “two routes
to persuasion.” Central route persuasion involves careful examination of
the information and arguments in a message, and careful thinking about
them. Peripheral route persuasion is characterized by low elaboration,
and using instead a simple decision rule to come to a conclusion. An
example of peripheral route persuasion would be the kind of case where
the message receiver likes the message sender or finds him credible, and
simply accepts the message for this reason.

The dual process model of persuasion can help to explain how emo-
tional appeals work. The appeal to fear or pity is based on the simple
decision rule indicated by the argumentation scheme. The appeal to pity
follows this decision rule. If the respondent can supposedly help this
person who is in such a pitiable state by means of compassionate act X,
then compassionate act X is indicated as the right action to take. The
conclusion is to help this person by carrying out action X. The appeal to
fear follows this decision rule. If the respondent wants to avoid fearful
outcome X, he should comply by carrying out recommended action Y.
The conclusion is to carry out action Y Both decision rules are simple and
require little elaboration to act on. What makes these appeals so powerful
is that they are so inviting. They suggest that instead of worrying about all
the complex body of arguments and evidence that is required for direct
route persuasion, there is an option. The alternative is to take the route
of peripheral persuasion by giving in to the emotional appeal now before
you. Especially if the mass of relevant evidence requiring elaboration is
complex and difficult to understand or evaluate, or if it appears to be
balanced on two sides, making a decision difficult, the alternative being
offered may be very attractive.

Jackson (1994) has probed more deeply into the question of why fal-
lacies are persuasive than has most of the literature, which has tended to


The Structure of Appeals to Fear 147


concentrate on the question of why fallacies are incorrect arguments. To
explain why fallacious arguments can be persuasive, she has stressed the
importance of simplifying strategies called heuristics used by the receiver
of an argument (p. 105). For example, an audience might use a credi-
bility heuristic when the audience goes by characteristics of the source,
in judging an appeal to expert opinion, in place of examining the evi-
dence supporting what the source says. Why do people tend to use such
a heuristic? There may be many reasons. They may be unable to evaluate
the evidence. After all, if one is not an expert in the given field, it can be
very hard to understand what the expert is saying. Or they may be unmo-
tivated. It may in fact be a lot of work to try to probe critically into the
reasons given by the expert. Hence it is understandable why, in so many
cases, the heuristic offers a short cut that is easy to take. The alternatives
that are available may be very difficult. They may require a lot of elabora-
tion and work. They may even seem so difficult as to be impossible. And
following the heuristic, or short-cut rule, is not inherently unreasonable
as a mode of argument processing. In many cases, it might lead to the
right conclusion. Hence using the heuristic, and choosing the peripheral
route of persuasion over the direct route, can be very attractive.

These observations and theories suggest a basis for helping to explain
how appeals to fear and pity in mass media arguments are persuasive.
They put in place for the receiver a simple heuristic that can be very
attractive under the right conditions. Looking through a mass of evi-
dence on a complex issue can appear to be difficult, or even impossible
to the respondent. He may be confused or uncertain about the issue. The
issue may involve complex scientific knowledge that the respondent can’t
be confident about or even claim to understand very well. Furthermore,
the mass of arguments on both sides of the issue may appear to be dead-
locked. On the other hand, an appeal to fear or pity has immediate emo-
tional impact. It is a short cut, and perhaps a very attractive one at that. If
a decision has to be made right away, the appeal to fear or pity commands
attention right now. It can loom over complex matters of evidence that
may appear more remote.


7. The Structure of Appeals to Fear


On the subject of whether or when fear appeal arguments should be eval-
uated, the logic textbooks have fallen into a presumption that they gen-
erally are fallacious. But especially when we see examples of fear appeal
arguments used by governments for purposes of public health and safety,


148 Appeals to Fear and Pity


people do not see these arguments as fallacious. Because they are offered
for a good purpose, the presumption is that these arguments are legiti-
mate, and should not be judged to be fallacious (certainly not, in general,
at any rate). In many cases, this presumption appears to be quite reason-
able. So a problem is posed. Which criteria should we use to evaluate fear
appeal arguments, so that in particular instances, we can tell which are
fallacious and which are not? The first step in this endeavor is to analyze
the logical form of fear appeal arguments.

Once many cases of the fear appeal argument have been observed and
studied, it becomes apparent that certain basic properties of the struc-
ture of the argument are common to them all. The fear appeal argu-
ment has two basic premises. The first premise presents a state of affairs
that is dangerous to the respondent, and is often called “threatening.” It
represents a harm to the respondent, in the sense of something thatis very
much against the respondent’s personal goals and interests. Such goals,
in a fear appeal argument, typically have to do with the respondent’s bod-
ily preservation and safety. The outcome represented is something the
respondent (presumably) wants to avoid. The second premise cites a rec-
ommended course of action such that if the respondent takes it, he will
avoid the disastrous outcome stated in the first premise. The conclusion
is that the respondent should take the recommended course of action. To
judge whether such an argument is reasonable or not in a given case, the
multi-agent structure of the dialogue in the case needs to be considered.

In the fear appeal ads used by the NRA, cited above, the dangerous
situation portrayed is that of young women being killed by a serial mur-
derer because they had to wait to buy a gun and were unable to defend
themselves. The recommended course of action is not to vote for or sup-
port the Brady bill or other policies advocated by the “antigun lobby.”
The reason is that these policies delay the buying of a gun to be used for
self-defense. The emotional appeal of this argument is conveyed by visual
imagery. In McClurg’s words, it conjures up “the nightmarish image of
defenseless coeds being butchered by a mad killer.” But the basic structure
of the argument is practical in nature. To prevent this fearful outcome,
the audience is directed to follow a designated policy or course of action.
The issue is whether to support the Brady bill or not. The fear appeal
argument carries probative weight in shifting the burden of proof to the
one side on this issue.

The structure of the fear appeal argument is not deductive in nature.
Even if the respondent accepts the premises as true, it does not follow
that he would be inconsistent not to accept the conclusion. Instead, the


The Structure of Appeals to Fear 149


conclusion posits a recommended course of action, and to preserve his
goals of safety and preservation of life within the situation as presented by
the first premise, the respondent is urged to take the designated course
of action. But the respondent may have other goals that have priority. He
may think of possible alternatives to the recommended course of action.
He may doubt that the harmful outcome will affect him, or there may be
other reasons why he is not convinced he should take the recommended
course of action. The type of inference involved in the fear appeal argu-
ment leaves a respondent a number of escape routes. But if he does
accept the premises, it puts some pressure on him, facing him with the
unpleasant conclusion of the argument unless he can find a weakness in
it perhaps afforded by one of these escape routes. The logical problem is
to figure out what all the escape routes are, so that the cognitive structure
of how the fear appeal argument as a kind of logical inference can be
understood.

As can be verified by examining the cases cited above, fear appeal
arguments generally have a particular way of putting forward the two key
premises. One premise relates to the health or safety of the respondent.
It postulates a state of affairs that is harmful and potentially dangerous
to the health or safety of the respondent. It conveys that message not in
abstract way but by presenting a graphic picture of the disaster that might
occur to that respondent — the danger that threatens his health or safety.
The other premise cites a specific course of action presented as a way
of preventing this disaster state. The conclusion indicates to the respon-
dent that he should carry out the action cited in the second premise.
This type of argument has the basic structure of an Aristotelian practical
inference. Such an inference has a goal premise, and a second premise
citing an action that is supposedly the best, or the recommended way
of achieving the goal. The conclusion then states that the respondent
ought (practically speaking) to carry out the designated action. But the
way the premises and conclusion are presented to the respondent is typ-
ical of the fear appeal argument. Some state of affairs is indicated that
represents a real danger to the particular respondent, or is generally
thought to do so. This state of affairs must really represent a danger to
the respondent, in that it must undermine or defeat some goal that is
highly valuable to him. Then the argument presents a way out of the
danger.

The various ways the respondent can argue his way out of having to
accept the conclusion are represented by the five kinds of critical ques-
tions he can ask. He may have other goals that have priority over personal


150 Appeals to Fear and Pity


safety. He may know of more effective or less costly ways of averting the
danger. He may think there are harmful consequences of carrying out
the recommended course of action. He may think that the dangerous
outcome is inevitable anyway or that he can’t do anything about it. In
social science terms, he may not have a “coping mechanism.” If any of
these ways out seem plausible to the respondent, the proponent’s fear
appeal argument is defeated.

In cases of fear appeals on the gun control issue used by the NRA,
one should examine each case on its merits, and weigh the whole body
of evidence, asking critical questions. The fears that the NRA appeals to
by presenting scary ads may not be all that irrational. In fact, the basing
of the appeals in the ads on real events is a large part of what makes
them powerfully persuasive as arguments. But the danger is that a mass
audience will be strongly influenced by the emotional appeals in the
ads without really thinking about the complex issue of gun control in a
more practical way. According to the dual process model of persuasion,
receivers of a persuasive message may go for the short-cut solution instead
of engaging in the extensive elaboration required to think through the
problem. In this case, the solution is not all that easy. Making it easier
for everyone to have handguns so they can defend themselves personally
may not be the answer. Certainly, some critical questions should be asked
about that proposed solution to the problem. On the other hand, simply
declaring the ads fallacious because they appeal to fear is to go to the
other extreme. Instead of immediately either accepting or rejecting the
argument expressed in the ad, the rational approach would be to think
critically about the practical aspects of the proposal being advocated.
The basis for such a critical assessment should be the structure of the
practical reasoning in the case, along with an accompanying set of critical
questions. This is the framework that should define relevance and that
should determine the weight of the ad as an argument that is weak or
strong.


8. The Structure of Appeals to Pity


With respect to their underlying reasoning structure, appeals to pity are
very much like appeals to fear. The appeal to pity rests centrally on a
graphic display, often presented visually to the respondent. Baby seal
pups may be shown visually, or the proponent may cry and whimper
while presenting the verbal part of the plea. The tactic is to make an
empathetic link-up with the sympathy of the respondent by presenting


The Structure of Appeals to Pity 151


a state of affairs that is especially distressful to him. Then, as with the
fear appeal argument, a way out, in the form of some recommended
action, is offered. The conclusion is that the respondent should take this
recommended course of action. But the problem with many appeals to
pity is that the suggested way out may be an easy solution to a problem
that may be complex. Again, as shown by the dual process theory of
persuasion, a message receiver may opt for the short-cut solution instead
of going through the proper process of elaboration required to weigh all
the evidence in a case. Any problem of practical reasoning tends to be
complex, because all probable consequences, and all relevant practical
aspects of the case, need to be taken into account. One needs to take the
whole body of evidence into account. If much of that evidence is not yet
in, it may be better to wait before taking action.

In the student appeal kind of case, some actual hardship of the student
may be relevant, but it needs to be considered in light of the whole body
of evidence in the case. If the student has clearly failed the exam, the
professor may sympathize when the student says that his parents will be
unhappy or that he needs the course to graduate. But these factors by
themselves may not carry enough weight to justify giving the student a
passing grade, if the exam results do not justify such action, or even go
strongly against it. The student who puts on a tearful display to try to get
action anyway is engaging in a sophistical tactic.

In cases of visual appeals to pity in charitable pleas for funds, two
aspects need to be emphasized. One is that, in principle, the appeal to
the emotion of pity is not by itself fallacious. The tactic of showing a
picture of a starving child or presenting some comparable pity-inducing
display, surely should be (in general) regarded as a legitimate means of
trying to get action. The second factor, however, is that practical questions
about means and ends need to be asked by the critical thinker. One
question is whether the means recommended (sending money) will in
fact alleviate the pain or harmful situation depicted in the appeal. In the
case of starving children, for example, one needs to ask whether sending
the money to the relief agency, as requested in the plea, will actually get
food to the children.

Two other basic critical questions are whether the premises of the
practical inference in a given case are in fact true. Both questions involve
looking into the particulars of a case. Asking whether the conditional
(second) premise is true or is well supported in a given case is a fac-
tual question that involves seeing the particular situation and getting an
assessment of what is possible and practical in that situation. The problem


152 Appeals to Fear and Pity


with many charitable uses of the appeal to pity is that the respondent to
whom the appeal is presented is not in a position to observe the situation
for himself. It is hard for him to assess whether, if he sends the money,
the pitiable situation presented in the ad will actually be made better by
that money. The situation is in a far-off country that the respondent is not
familiar with. If he brings about state of affairs B, the sending of money,
will that action be sufficient or a necessary part of some sufficient condi-
tion for the outcome of alleviating the starvation (or other bad outcome
featured in the appeal)?

Increasingly, in recent years, empirical grounds for doubting the con-
ditional premise in the argumentation of many such appeals to pity
have been brought forward. According to Maren (1998), an aid worker
and journalist for twenty years in Africa, food solicited by aid appeals
frequently goes to the militia of the local warlord, who uses it to feed his
troops and to buy weapons and ammunition for them. The main benefi-
ciaries of the food aid are the very people who caused the problem in the
first place and who use it to continue fighting and creating new scenes
of starvation. According to Maren, in Zaire after the Rwanda genocide,
the relief food was commandeered by the very same people who planned
the massacres. Similar situations in the Sudan and Somalia are cited,
where warlords used the food aid to continue the fighting. According to
Maren, “Hunger is political, and fighting it requires moral commitment
on a higher level than writing a check” (p. 13). The problem is that the
images of hunger broadcast an emotional, visual appeal that is hard for
many to resist, because it is easy to write a check, and the respondent
hopes something will be done, even though he lacks information about
the specifics of the situation. Such appeals to pity have been very success-
ful in the past, and continue to be. But critical questions are appropriate,
especially when information comes in ofa sort that raises suspicions about
the probable consequences of actions.

The problem with many appeals to pity is that a short-cut solution is
offered that may make the respondent feel good when action is taken,
but may not be a realistic approach to doing anything effective about the
problem. The dual process theory explains how the short cut invited by
an appeal can look very attractive compared with the work of elaboration
required to collect all the evidence and think rationally through all that
evidence in a case. It is hard to resist such a short-cut appeal. To question
it, or to forbear in any way from taking immediate action, may present an
appearance of being insensitive or uncaring. The problem, once again,
tends to be that information about the specifics of the case may be lacking.


Multi-agent Structure of Both Types of Argument 153


The children may be alleged to be starving in a foreign country where
the viewer does not really know what is going on. In fact, information
on the situation may be carefully monitored and controlled by those
in power who have something to gain by the influx of foreign aid. As
with the fear appeal argument, the practical evaluation of the argument
should depend on asking relevant critical questions appropriate for the
case.

In the case of the debate on the Brady bill, in which the Gainesville
serial murders were cited as the basis of an appeal to pity and fear, the
problem is not that the argument is completely worthless or entirely
irrelevant. The real problem, as noted by McClurg (1992, p. 66), is that
from a practical point of view, it is implausible that a handgun waiting
period would have had any appreciable effect on the tragic events in
Gainesville. At any rate, this practical question is the critical question
that should be asked in evaluating the fear appeal argument used in the
speech.


g. Multi-agent Structure of Both Types of Argument


Having now revealed the practical reasoning structure that is common
to both fear appeal and pity appeal arguments, I proceed to the second
thesis. This thesis is that the evaluation of both types of argumentation
is inherently dialectical in nature. This is a second respect in which the
two types of argumentation have the same underlying structure. Both are
contextual, and to analyze either type of argument, you need to grasp
the purpose it is supposedly being used for, as part of some goal-directed
conversational exchange. In other words, the recommendation is that
the best way to evaluate appeals to fear and pity is within the multi-agent
framework of an orderly dialectical exchange between two agents, called
a proponent and a respondent. These arguments can be used for vari-
ous purposes in various types of conversation exchanges (dialogues). But
when they are reasonable arguments, the context is normally one where
the proponent is trying to persuade the respondent to carry out some
recommended action. The practical inference is put forward by the pro-
ponent in order to argue that some particular course of action is prudent
for the respondent. This means that the respondent ought to carry out
the cited course of action if he has the goal cited in the premise, and if
his situation is as described in the other premise. It means that the des-
ignated course of action is being said to be a practically wise one for the
respondent. He should do it if he wants to preserve his interests in the


154 Appeals to Fear and Pity


given situation, as both agents see it. It doesn’t mean that the respondent
actually will carry out the recommended action or that he must carry it
out, as a matter of logical necessity. It means only that the designated
course of action is being proposed by the proponent as the right or the
prudent thing for the respondent to do, if he wants to avoid the harm,
or make the gain cited in the major premise of the argument. All such
arguments depend on what is taken to be the actual situation the respon-
dent finds himself in, and of course, any estimate of such circumstances
of an agent is constantly subject to changes and revisions. Mistakes are
possible, and even quite likely, in any realistic case. So the conclusion
rests only on a tentative basis that is subject to corrections and updating
as new information comes in.

In such cases, the best way to evaluate the argumentation in a given
case is to look at the practical inference put forward by the proponent
as shifting a burden of proof, or burden of rebuttal, onto the side of the
respondent. If the respondent accepts the premises, he must either accept
the conclusion or raise one of the appropriate critical questions that cast
doubt on the proponent’s argument. Once the respondent has raised a
critical question, the burden shifts to the proponent’s side. Either she
must answer the question adequately or the original argument defaults.
If she does answer the question adequately, the burden shifts back. The
respondent must then accept the conclusion or ask another critical ques-
tion. Once the respondent runs out of critical questions in a dialogue,
he must then accept the practical inference as practically binding on
him. However, if the situation changes, and new information comes in to
the dialogue, the re-asking of a critical question may be prompted, and
the dialectical cycle begins once again. If the question is not properly
answered, the inference defaults.

In other words, the bindingness of the practical inference in a given
case depends on the so-called closed world assumption. The closed world
assumption means that the respondent’s goals are fixed, and the informa-
tion accounting for the respondent’s situation is regarded as complete,
meaning that all the facts are known, and no new facts will come in (Reiter
1987, pp. 158-162). In any real situation, the closed world assumption is
precisely that — an assumption. As such, it may have to be given up. And
that is why practical reasoning is best seen as being generally a defeasible
kind of reasoning that is subject to default. What we know about our cir-
cumstances is always changing, but we can artificially close the dialogue
for practical purposes. Otherwise, taking prudent action would not be
possible, in cases where it is wise to stop discussing or researching the


Multi-agent Structure of Both Types of Argument 155


problem and act now. So we can close off the multi-agent dialogue and
draw a conclusion on the basis of what we know now about the situation,
even though we realize that this conclusion may have to be altered. In
the future, new circumstances may crop up that call for a new plan ora
new decision on how to proceed.

Fear and pity appeal arguments need to be seen from this multi-agent
dialectical viewpoint, to fully understand how they work and how they
should be evaluated in particular cases. The first part of the argument
is the proponent’s putting forward of a practical inference, targeted to
the goals and the situation of the respondent. The proponent puts for-
ward an argument that describes a situation that evokes (a) the pity of
the respondent for some third individual or group or (b) the fear of the
respondent for his own safety, health, or well-being, and/or that of those
near to him. Mass media is tailor-made for this kind of appeal, because
of the emotional impact of an audiovisual presentation. Suffering seal
pups that look to viewers like babies can be shown being clubbed to
death with baseball bats. A horrific automobile crash can be presented,
in which a car full of happy teenagers smashes into another vehicle and its
occupants are shown dying, mutilated, and covered with blood. Such pre-
sentations, especially when targeted to specific audiences, have a much
greater effect than any purely verbal argumentation would have. Then,
following up the visual presentation, a message may be broadcast citing
the recommended action to avoid the state of affairs so forcefully pre-
sented. The viewer is advised to send money to the animal welfare fund
or to give the car keys to someone else before going to a party. The
message is (presumably) clear: this is what you should do to avoid or
stop the horrible situation pictured in the ad. The NRA fear appeal ads
use graphic images that evoke the horror of women being murdered or
raped. Then they, somewhat implausibly, cite “anti-gun” policies as the
problem.

The next part of the argument to be assessed is the reaction of the
respondent. The argument will be unpersuasive unless certain conditions
are met. One is that the state of affairs presented must really evoke the
emotions of the respondent, by being tailored to the specific situation and
presumptions of the respondent. The fear appeal ad may be targeted to
the elderly, for example, who may have a fear of crime or a fear of being
in a medical emergency without being able to call for help. Or it may
be targeted to women, who have a fear of stalking or rape. Second, the
action recommended must be seen as relatively easy to carry out, so that
the harmful situation presented is thought of as greatly overwhelming the


156 Appeals to Fear and Pity


cost or effort of carrying out the designated action. For example, when
presented with the horrific sight of baby seals being clubbed to death, the
designated response is relatively easy for many viewers — all you have to do
is to write a check and send it to the address indicated. Once again, on the
dual process model of persuasion, the solution offered by the argument
is attractive because it offers a short cut. It looks easy compared with
the work that would be required to deal with the whole mass of relevant
evidence in a complex case. To engage in elaboration of the practical
reasoning in a case, other critical questions may need to be considered.
No better, more effective, or easier way to correct the harm should be
evident. The harm must really be seen as a harm. It must be something
that the target audience really fears or that evokes a strong feeling of
pity in that audience. There should be no conflict with other goals of the
respondent audience. For example, if the viewers make their living from
seal hunting, the appeal to pity may not be persuasive.


10. When Are Appeals to Fear and Pity Fallacious?


Fear appeals, of the kind represented by the televised and newspaper
or magazine ads considered above, are based on the premise that the
fearful state presented really does represent a danger to the target audi-
ence. For example, it is assumed that AIDS or venereal disease really does
represent a danger to teens. Or it is assumed, to cite another case, that
drinking and driving really is a dangerous combination. Or it is assumed
that being brutally murdered or raped is a potential danger. One might
be tempted to argue that the appeals to fear or pity in such cases are
fallacious because the premise they are based on is false or unwarranted.
But in all these cases, the premise is in fact true, or at least represents an
assumption that is quite reasonable. There seems little reason to doubt
that the outcomes warned against are dangerous. In fact, these premises
are generally accepted as true by the general population and the experts,
and they are probably not in question for the teenagers who are the target
audience for the ads. Nor is there real reason to say that these assump-
tions themselves are unwarranted or are the basis for judging fear appeal
arguments to be fallacious. Indeed, it is one of the requirements for the
success of such an appeal that the danger not be perceived as being exag-
gerated, or “hyped,” by the respondent. For this reason, and because
many of the ads examined above are perceived as having a socially com-
mendable and worthy purpose, the use of the fear appeal arguments in
most of the cases examined above should not be seen as “fallacious.” In


When Are Appeals to Fear and Pity Fallacious ? 157


many cases, the arguments thus based on appeals to fear and pity can be
quite reasonable.

Of course, one could always critically question the fear appeal ad in
such cases, asking whether preventing the fearful outcome cited can really
be accomplished by the means advocated. But in many of the kinds of
cases examined above, there is little real doubt on that score. In other
words, in evaluating fear appeal arguments, a lot depends on the back-
ground knowledge or information that the audience, and even the gen-
eral population, is presumed to have. The same is true of appeals to pity
in the kinds of ads considered above, including the charitable type of
appeal for aid. Much depends on our knowledge or information of the
specifics of the case. The problem with many of these appeals, as has been
noted, is that such knowledge — for example, of the situation in a foreign
country — may be lacking. But even if this is true, it seems a stretch to
call the appeal to pity fallacious. What we should say, perhaps, is that it
is premature or weak, because it is based on insufficient evidence of the
kind that should properly be required to support this kind of practical
reasoning.

What about the cases of the NRA appeals cited by McClurg? He sees
them as fallacious, on the ground that they are irrelevant. Our diagnosis
was somewhat different. Looked at as arguments used by the pro-gun side
in the gun control debate, they can be seen as dialectically relevant argu-
ments used to give reasons not to support the Brady bill. But once criti-
cally examined, the arguments seem weak and implausible, on a practical
basis. Once the underlying structure of practical reasoning on which they
are based is made explicit, its weakness as a practical argument becomes
apparent. They are open to so many appropriate critical questions, that
as they stand, they are unconvincing. The reason McClurg judges these
arguments to be fallacious is that they evoke such strong emotions of pity
and fear, using graphic visual images that are irrelevant. But is the use
of graphic visual images to evoke strong emotions of pity and fear inher-
ently irrelevant or fallacious? I think not, where decisions about practical
actions or political policies are being deliberated, and I think the bulk of
the casework analyzed in this chapter supports that thesis.

What should be said about the conditions under which fear and pity
appeal arguments can properly be said to be fallacious? This question
depends on what is meant by the term “fallacy.” This issue has been dis-
cussed in relation to appeals to pity in Walton (1997b), but as noted
above, Jackson (1996) has added a new dimension to it by bringing
in the factor of argumentation heuristics. These discussions show how


158 Appeals to Fear and Pity


arguments that appeal to fear and pity typically offer a short-cut solution
to a complex problem. In light of these discussions, and of recent work
on the fallacies, a hypothesis may be ventured: the use of an appeal to
pity or fear should be judged to be fallacious or not on how open the
argument presentation is to critical questioning of the kind appropriate
for the practical reasoning used in the case. Consider the appeal to fear
and pity used by Barbara Vucanovich to argue against the Brady bill, cit-
ing the serial killings in Gainesville. As noted above, the argument that
these tragedies could have been prevented by not having a waiting period
to buy guns is somewhat implausible. It may be acceptable to advocates
of the pro-gun lobby, but those open to the opposed point of view could
ask many pointed critical questions about the practical reasoning basis of
the argument. But a weak argument is not necessarily a fallacious argu-
ment. Grounds come in for judging the argument in this particular case
to be fallacious when Vucanovich followed up by urging her fellow repre-
sentatives not to “let their judgments be clouded by the antigun lobby’s
emotional banter.” This added flourish is quite amusing because of its
inconsistency in condemning the very type of argument just used. But
it has a more serious function as well. It attacks the other side in a way
that is meant to be distracting and to cover up the faults of the emotional
appeal put forward just before. It is a way of sealing off the argument
and preventing the asking of appropriate critical questions by trying to
shift the burden to the opposing side. Thus we can see in this argument
the use of an argumentation strategy designed to get the mass audience
to opt for the short-cut solution and to shut their minds to engaging in
further practical reasoning.

The hypothesis I put forward now is that appeals to fear and pity should
be judged as fallacious or not in particular cases by analysis of the strategy
of persuasion used by the proponent. Such a strategy should be analyzed
by examining not only the proponent’s strategy, but also the expected
response of the respondent. The respondent should ask critical questions.
A fallacious argument is designed to prevent this possibility in advance.
Appeals to fear and pity should be judged to be fallacious only in cases
where the appeal has been put forward by the proponent in such a way
that the presentation of the argument gives evidence of a strategy used to
prevent the asking of the appropriate critical questions by the respondent.
The evidence for such a claim of fallaciousness is to be sought in the text
of discourse of the dialogue as far as information has been given in the
particular case at issue. What you have to look for is evidence that the
proponent has pressed ahead too strongly so that the respondent’s ability


When Are Appeals to Fear and Pity Fallacious? 159


to pose the relevant critical questions has been precluded in advance of
any actual response. There are some grounds for finding some evidence
of this sort in the Vucanovich case, and it is these grounds that should
be cited as the right evidence for the claim that the argument in this
case is fallacious. In the Nayirah case, the video portraying the appeal to
pity was part of a public relations campaign designed to get support for
a cause. That it was advocacy does not necessarily mean that it should be
judged to be fallacious. That it was based on a false premise also does
not, by itself, mean that the appeal to pity was fallacious. But how was
the argument used in context? It was used in deliberations in the United
Nations and in the U.S. Congress. Its timing as a presentation in both cases
was such that it probably had an influence on the vote on the question of
whether to take action. In that context and at that time, apparently it was
not questioned. It was seen as just another piece of evidence or another
consideration to take into account. Butit was highly successful asa strategy
of argumentation because of its timing. It was introduced at just the right
moment to be influential. It was only later that an investigator uncovered
its use as a deliberately crafted tactic of persuasion. By then, the ad had
done its work of influencing the deliberations.

The important thing is that a distinction should be made between
two kinds of evaluations of fear and pity appeal arguments. One kind
of evaluation is that the argument is critically weak, meaning that it is
not supported well enough by the evidence given. The other is that the
argument, as used in the given case, is more than just weak but is falla-
cious. This second sort of criticism should be regarded as a strong kind
of charge. It needs to be backed up by the right kind of evidence, and the
claim that a particular appeal to pity or fear is fallacious needs more than
just evidence to show that the given argument is open to critical ques-
tioning. It has a dialectical aspect, because it needs to reveal the strategy
of the proponent as a means of influencing the respondent.

Some would say that fear and pity appeal arguments are fallacious
because they are manipulative. The fear appeal ad is cleverly crafted by
public relations experts (“spin doctors”) to graphically portray a scene
that will move the target audience to action. For example, trying to get
teenagers to use condoms may cleverly portray some danger that really
is fearful to teens. It is true that this tactic is a kind of manipulation. But
many would defend it by pointing out that abstract rational argumenta-
tion may not work with teens, while certain kinds of graphic, emotional
appeals may change their behavior. Thus just evidence of being manipu-
lative should not be enough to support a claim that an appeal to fear or


160 Appeals to Fear and Pity


pity is fallacious. The manipulativeness has to be of the sort that is part of
a tactic to suppress the rightful asking of critical questions in a dialogue,
especially critical questions of a sort directed to the practical reasoning
basis of the argument. Fallaciousness, so conceived, is a dialectical matter,
relating to how an argument has been put forward in a dialogue. Open-
ness to critical questioning is vitally important in a persuasion dialogue.
The timing in the Nayirah case was the factor that delayed the asking of
critical questions.

We are supposed to live in a democracy where advertisers can use all
kinds of persuasive tactics in the media, and it is up to the consumer to
judge for herself whether to accept the argument or not. The question
here pertains to the context of dialogue in which such ads are used in
the media. The producer of the ad and the individual viewer are not
literally having a dialogue, because the viewer does not reply to the ad, in
a dialogue in which the producer of the ad gets that immediate feedback.
Thus the RTD problem is a constant in attempting to evaluate mass media
appeals to fear and pity. Nonetheless, there is a kind of dialogue involved
(in our abstract sense of the term), because the producer of the ad is
making an argument that is directed to a specific respondent audience.
The ad is meant to be persuasive, or at least to get action on the part
of the viewer. The viewer watches the ad, and then either accepts the
conclusion by taking the recommended course of action or does not.
It can be seen that the producer of the appeal is using a strategy of
persuasion. By examining the discourse ofa case, we can often reconstruct
that strategy, and evaluate it using the dual persuasion model. So there is a
kind of dialogue exchange in the process, even though it is an abbreviated
one. And it makes sense to evaluate the argument from the normative
perspective of its use in a context of dialogue, as advocated in thesis two
above.


5


Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


The ad hominem, or personal attack, argument is now highly familiar in
politics, especially in the use of negative campaign tactics in elections.
This form of argument has been studied previously in the argumenta-
tion literature, but it has some special features of interest as a mass media
argument strategy. In this chapter it is shown how it has some features
comparable to appeals to fear and pity when it is used in mass media as a
device of persuasion. This chapter brings out the multi-agent structure of
the ad hominemargumentas used in rhetorical argumentation, by showing
how the proponent mounts a successful strategy in this form of argumen-
tation. It is shown how he or she must use prolepsis by probing into the
commitments of the respondent and configuring them in a certain way
prior to the attack. These insights into the multi-agent structure of the
ad hominem reveal how the proponent must collect evidence proactively,
and then use this evidence to attribute a plan to the respondent. The aim
is not just to reveal how to use such a tactic of personal attack in the mass
media. The analysis is meant to be helpful to both voters and political
campaigners, giving them a better understanding of how to deal with
rhetorical ad hominem arguments by identifying, analyzing, and critically
evaluating them.

The ad hominemargument is nota new phenomenon in American polit-
ical discourse. A pamphlet was circulated telling of Andrew Jackson’s
“youthful indiscretions.” In the 1860s, Northern newspapers attacked
Lincoln’s policies by attacking his character, using the terms “drunk,”
“baboon,” “too slow,” “foolish,” and “dishonest.” Steadily on the increase
in political argumentation since then, the argumentum ad hominem has


161


162 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


been carefully refined as an instrument of “oppo tactics” and “going
negative” by the public relations experts who now craft political cam-
paigns at the national level. It has been so prominently used in the major
political campaigns, debates, and ads of the past few years that there has
even been a reaction against it — a feeling that we have gone too far in
this direction and that some kind of restraint is needed. But there has
been no evidence of such restraint in the argumentation used in recent
campaigns. The norm is even more visible use of negative campaign
tactics, and the acceptance of the character issue as relevant. Personal
matters that were once “off limits” for media reporting are now probed
into, using opposition research, and routinely drawn on in attack ads.
The abundance of these ad hominem arguments in current political dis-
course provides much interesting material for studying how to evaluate
the strengths and weaknesses of this type of argument. In this chapter,
two specimens that pose some interesting problems have been selected
for study. How does the ad hominem argument really work as a way of
molding public opinion, why is it so often so effective, and how can it be
defended against? How can it be evaluated as a clearly identifiable type
of argument, with some kind of objective standards, in a way that can be
applied to particular cases?

The best way to approach this problem is to study some actual cases
in a detailed analysis. The problem posed by one case studied in this
chapter is that the argument looks like an ad hominem argument, but on
closer inspection, it is arguable that it is not an ad hominem argument
at all. The case in question is a fairly short and relatively self-contained
segment of dialogue from the televised impeachment trial of President
Bill Clinton in February 1999. The other case is even more typical of so
many ad hominem arguments currently in use in political discourse. It is an
ad hominem attack on Al Gore in the “Election Notebook” article in Time
magazine in 1996. It also has some special features that turn out to be
quite interesting in advancing our knowledge of how the ad hominem type
of argument works in political argumentation in a democratic system
where mass media reporting is a big factor. The Gore case is simpler,
and more nicely illustrates key features of the circumstantial ad hominem
argument. So it is presented first.


' A range of cases, from ancient times to the present, is studied in Walton (1998a).


Classifying the Types of Ad Hominem Argument 163


1. Classifying the Types of Ad Hominem Argument


The ad hominem argument has a long history of being treated as a fal-
lacy in logic textbooks. Hardly anyone questioned the general assump-
tion that this type of argument can be routinely dismissed as fallacious
until Johnstone (1952, 1959) pointed out that many famous philosoph-
ical arguments are ad hominem arguments of a kind that do not appear
to be fallacious. Johnstone was the first to seriously question what had
become a generally accepted tradition in logic of taking for granted
that ad hominem arguments are fallacious. The assumption was that not
much care was needed in evaluating individual cases of the argumentum
ad hominem, because all instances of it are fallacious. Johnstone put this
assumption sharply into question by citing cases of what not only appear
to be ad hominem arguments in philosophical discussions, but that also
appear to be, on the whole, quite reasonable arguments. Certainly, these
cases could not any longer be brushed aside as fallacious just on the
grounds that they fit the form of argument described as ad hominem in
the logic textbooks. By showing that the ad hominem argument could be
reasonable in some cases, Johnstone opened up the real problem to be
solved: how can we tell on the basis of evidence in a given case whether a
specific ad hominem argument is reasonable or fallacious? This question
poses the problem of evaluation.

Prior to the evaluation problem in dealing with ad hominem arguments,
there is an identification or classification problem. The textbook accounts
indicated that there are different types of ad hominem arguments. The
problem was how to classify these different subtypes, and generally how
to define the ad hominem as a distinctive and identifiable form of argu-
ment. Many subtypes of ad hominem argument have been shown to have
distinctively different forms as arguments. In Walton (1998a), five main
types of ad hominemargumentare defined. These subtypes are the abusive
(direct) ad hominem, the circumstantial ad hominem, the bias ad hominem,
the poisoning the well subtype, and the tu quoque subtype. Each subtype
has a well-defined form as a recognizable type of argument. There are
also many other kinds of arguments associated with ad hominemarguments
that are not themselves ad hominem arguments. These arguments are eas-
ily confused with or misclassified as ad hominem arguments. The previous
lack of any standard system of classifying all these various forms of argu-
ments has stood in the way of any serious study of the ad hominem argu-
ment. Now that problem, at least to some encouraging extent, has been


164 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


solved. But the problem of refining and extending the systems of classifi-
cation (Lagerspetz 1995; Walton 1998a) still exists. Other resources for
identifying and evaluating personal attack (ad hominem) arguments have
been developed by Johnstone (1952), van Emeren and Grootendorst
(1984, 1995), Brinton (1985, 1995), Walton (198ga, chap. 6), and van
Eemeren, Grootendorst, and Snoeck Henkemans (1996), Krabbe and
Walton (1993). The method for identifying and evaluating ad hominem
arguments worked out in Walton (1g98a) uses a set of argumentation
schemes (forms of argument) for each distinctive subtype of ad hominem
argument recognized, and a set of appropriate critical questions match-
ing each scheme. Because each different type of ad hominem argument
needs to be evaluated differently, the question of how to identify the type
used, when confronting an argument in a given case, is highly significant.
But reality being what it is, there are borderline cases where it is very dif-
ficult or even impossible to tell whether a given argument presented in
a text of discourse is one type of ad hominem argument or another. Or it
may even be hard to tell whether it is an ad hominem argument or not.
This is the problem Hamblin (1970) called “pinning down” the fallacy
in a given case.

In the direct, or so-called abusive, type of ad hominem argument, the
proponent argues that the respondent is a bad person and that there-
fore his argument should not be accepted as being as plausible as it was
before. There are several background presumptions. One is that there
are two parties, called the proponent and the respondent. Another is that
the respondent has put forward some particular argument, that has some
initial degree of plausibility. Another is that the respondent is assumed to
have some ethical qualities of character, like honesty and integrity. When
the proponent says that the respondent is a bad person, he means that
the respondent has displayed some negative ethical quality of character,
like dishonesty or hypocrisy. At any rate, these are all the properties of the
direct ad hominemas a type of argument. The following is the argumenta-
tion scheme for the direct, or so-called abusive, form of the ad hominem
argument — called the ethotic type of ad hominem argument in Brinton
(1985) and Walton (1998a). The variable a stands for an arguer, and the
variable a stands for an argument.


Ethotic (Direct, Abusive) Ad Hominem Argument
ais a person of bad character.
Therefore, a’s argument a@ should not be accepted.


The Circumstantial and Other Types 165


An ad hominem argument in a particular case is evaluated in relation to, in
the first place, whether it meets the requirements for the scheme and, in
the second place, how it manages critical questions. The fallacious cases
are the ones where critical questioning in a further dialogue exchange
is suppressed. But in principle, both types of ad hominem arguments can
sometimes be reasonable.

The ad hominem argument can be a reasonable way of questioning
an arguer’s credibility by throwing doubt on his character (for veracity,
in particular), and using that allegation to throw doubt on whether his
argument has much weight in supporting its conclusion. But this type of
argument can be used wrongly if the claim is that the arguer’s conclusion
is absolutely wrong (or indefensible), as opposed to the weaker claim
that it is open to critical questioning. In other words, the ad hominem
argument is a relative one, but runs into difficulty as soon as it becomes
an absolute claim that the proposition advocated by the arguer is false.
In evaluating cases, the critical thinker must watch out for words such as
“certainly” and “must,” which rule out the possibility that a claim is true
(or false).


2. The Circumstantial and Other Types


Whatis important to notice when initially approaching any particular case
study is that the circumstantial type is different from, but also related to
the direct, or so-called abusive type. The circumstantial type essentially
involves an allegation that the party being attacked has committed a prac-
tical inconsistency, of a kind that can be characterized by the expression,
“You do not practice what you preach.” Then this allegation of inconsis-
tency is used as the basis for launching a direct, or personal, ad hominem
type of attack to the effect that the person attacked has a bad character
and that therefore her argument is bad or should not be taken seriously.
So the distinction is that the direct ad hominem does not require an alle-
gation of circumstantial inconsistency of the kind that the circumstantial
type does. The circumstantial ad hominem argument, unlike the direct
one, is always based on an allegation of inconsistency. The proponent
alleges that the respondent is committed to some kind of inconsistency,
and then uses that allegation as a springboard to argue that the respon-
dent’s argument is not plausible. Typically, as just noted, the allegation of
inconsistency takes the form of an argument to the effect that the respon-
dent “does not practice what he preaches.” The classic case is the smoking


166 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


example. In this case, the parent argues to her child that he should not
smoke, because smoking is unhealthy. The child replies, “What about
you? You smoke. So much for your argument against smoking!” What is
going on in this case is that the child observes an inconsistency — the
parent argues against smoking, but the parent herself smokes. Citing
this pragmatic inconsistency the child rejects the parent’s argument. The
smoking case is tricky to evaluate. On the one hand, the child is right to
note the pragmatic inconsistency, and to question the parent’s credibility
as a spokesperson for an anti-smoking argument. On the other hand, the
child may be over-reacting by rejecting what may be a good argument
against smoking.

The form of the circumstantial ad hominem argument has been pre-
sented as follows in Walton (1998a, p. 219). As above, the lowercase a
stands for an arguer, and the Greek @ stands for an argument; the upper-
case A stands for a proposition.


Circumstantial Ad Hominem Argument
1, aadvocates argument q@, which has proposition A as its conclusion.
2. ahas carried out an action or set of actions that imply that a is
personally committed to not-A (the opposite of A).
3. Therefore, ais a bad person.
4. Therefore, a’s argument a should not be accepted.


When this form is applied to the smoking case, it may not seem that the
subconclusion 3 really applies to the case. After all, is the child really
claiming or asserting that the parent is a bad person, as part of the
argument? Although no such assertion is explicitly made by the child,
it can be inferred as a non-explicit part of the argument. For, presum-
ably, the reason that the child is rejecting the parent’s argument against
smoking is that the child sees the parent is a smoker, and then draws the
inference that the parent is not sincere in what she advocates, based on
the perception of the inconsistency. For the argument to make sense,
there needs to be an implicit conclusion drawn by the child that the
parent lacks some kind of personal ethical quality, such as sincerity or
integrity. Whatever we might call it, the quality of character involves a
consistency between a person’s principles and her personal actions. At
any rate, assuming that the child’s argument in the smoking case has
this component, it can be classified as an instance of the circumstan-
tial ad hominem type of argument. If it lacks this component, it would
be classified in Walton (1998a, p. 251) as an argument from pragmatic


The Circumstantial and Other Types 167


inconsistency, but one that is not a genuine type of ad hominem argu-
ment (in the narrower sense in which ad hominem is a personal attack
argument).

The example below is a summary of a newspaper article that appeared
in the National Post (October 14, 2005, p. A10).


The Sealers Example


Rocco DiSpirito, a New York chef and best-selling food author, made famous as
the star of the NBC reality show The Restaurant, wrote a public letter supporting
a campaign by the U.S. Humane Society to end the Canadian seal hunt. The
article quoted Mr. DiSpirito as saying, “Most of the seal clubbers [in Canada/ are
also snow crabbers. By refusing to use Canadian or Canadian-sourced snow crab
in our restaurants, we can make a very vocal statement against the seal hunt.”
The Humane Society had been lobbying for an American boycott of Canadian
seafood, especially snow crab from Atlantic Canada, advocating the boycott as an
economic tactic to stop the seal hunt. Many American restaurants and seafood
wholesalers had joined the boycott, pledging not to buy Canadian seafood. New-
foundland fishermen in the sealing industry replied by arguing that DiSpirito was
a hypocrite for calling the seal hunt inhumane while serving foie gras made from
the engorged livers of force-fed geese in his restaurant. This practice was officially
banned in some European countries and California, where the humane society
condemned it. Frank Pinhorn, managing director of the Newfoundland-based
Canadian Sealers Association, was quoted as saying, “He’s an absolute hypocrite,
aman of double standards.” Earl McCurdy, president of the Fish, Food and Allied
Workers Union in St. John’s was quoted as saying, “I think somebody who lives in
a glass house shouldn’t throw stones. It shows the hypocrisy of these celebrities,
who know nothing about the seal hunt. . . . if he wants to serve foie gras in his
restaurants, that’s fine with me, but he shouldn’t pass judgment on us.” John
Grandy, senior vice-president of the Humane Society, defended the chef. He was
quoted as saying, “Absolutely the society is opposed to foie gras, but this issue is
about seals, and a man of his distinction and abilities, who is simply appalled at
the brutal destruction of these seals, well, 7f we can use him on the seals issue,
we’re happy to do so.”


The argument in this case is partly based on an implicit use of appeal to
popular opinion, because it argues that the practice of serving Canadian
snow crab should be condemned for the reason that several states have
already banned it. But the central argument in the example is a circum-
stantial ad hominem attack. The sealers argue that the chef is a hypocrite
for condemning sealing as inhumane, while his personal activities as a
chef support practices, that are just as inhumane. They argue that he
does not practice what he preaches. The basis of their argument is the
cited practical inconsistency between the position that the chef advocates
and his own actions. They use this argument as an attack on the chef’s


168 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


credibility as an arguer whose arguments should not be taken seriously
on the issue of humane treatment of animals. The argument suggests
that the chef is hypocrite when he is more interested in publicity, and
perhaps in promoting his career, than in the ethical issue.

The bias type of ad hominem argument is also an attack on an oppo-
nent’s credibility. In this type of attack, the proponent argues that the
respondent is biased, or has shown some sort of bias, and argues that the
respondent’s argument should therefore not be taken to be as plausible
as it might have appeared before. Bias of this sort can be shown by a
number of indicators, such as having something to gain or being strongly
committed to a viewpoint (Kienpointner and Kindt 1997). Bias is not
always a bad thing in argumentation. How bad a bias is, in a given case,
depends on the type of conversational context the argument was used in.
The same argument if used in an editorial column might be quite okay,
but when used in a news report could exhibit a kind of bias that rightly
opens it to criticism. At any rate, the bias type of ad hominem is different
from the direct and circumstantial types. It focuses not on character or
on an inconsistency but on the bias an arguer is alleged to have shown in
her argument.

The fourth type of ad hominem argument is the poisoning the well
type. In this type of attack, the proponent alleges that the opponent is
strongly committed to some position in a rigid and dogmatic way. It is
concluded that he can never be trusted to judge an argument on its
merits, in an open-minded way, and will always push instead for the side
of his preferred position. The classic case (Walton 1998a, p. 15) is the
attack on Cardinal Newman, in which it was alleged that as a Catholic, he
always reverted to the Catholic position on any political dispute on any
subject, and therefore could never be trusted to take an open-minded
view of a matter. Newman replied that such an attack, if taken seriously,
meant that he as a practicing Catholic could never really take part in any
political debate on any issue with any credibility.

The fifth type is the ¢w quoque, in which one party replies to an ad
hominem attack by attacking the attacker, using another ad hominem argu-
ment. There are strong elements of the tu quoquein the ad hominem attack
in the sealhunt example. However, there are general problems classifying
the (wu quoque as a type of argument. There is much confusion in the text-
books sorting out this type of argumentation from other types, such as
the two wrongs argument and the guilt by association argument (Walton
1998a, pp. 233-240). There are also other subtypes of ad hominem argu-
mentation, such as the situationally disqualifying subtype, that are hard


Argument from Commitment 169


to classify (Krabbe and Walton 1993). These problems can be bypassed
in the cases that follow, for the main concern will be with the ethotic and
circumstantial subtypes.

All five subtypes of ad hominem arguments are personal attack argu-
ments in which one party, called the proponent, attacks the person of
the second party (the respondent) in a dialogue in which both parties
are arguing about something. The basis of the argument is that the propo-
nentis attacking the credibility of the respondent, and then using this pro-
posed lowering of credibility to argue that the latter’s argument should
be reduced in plausibility value. One assumption is that the respondent
has put forward an argument and that this argument has only a certain
degree of plausibility or worth of acceptance as an argument. Another
assumption is that this plausibility value can be raised or lowered by con-
sideration of the person, or personal characteristics of the respondent, as
a participant in argumentation. Yet another assumption is that both par-
ties have something that could be called personal credibility that also can
be raised or lowered in the course of argumentation. The final assump-
tion is that a lowering of the personal credibility of an arguer can result
in a lowering of the plausibility value of the argument that the arguer
has put forward. All these interconnected assumptions are parts of the
structure needed to evaluate ad hominem arguments. So it is not difficult
to see that the ad hominem is a complex form of argument in its own right,
with many components that require an analysis that goes well beyond the
traditional structures of deductive and inductive logic.

What consideration of the ad hominem argument does is to bring the
notion of the person, or the arguer as person, into logic. Of course, this
intrusion has traditionally been resisted. Logic is seen as an abstract and
formal science of propositions and truth values. But to get any kind of use-
ful and workable way of analyzing and evaluating ad hominem arguments,
the notion of the arguer as a person, or as an entity with credibility and
properties of character, must be taken into account. Many in traditional
logic might be reluctant to take such a step, because it would broaden
the subject of logic into the whole area of persons, seeming to make logic
subjective in way that is inappropriate and even dangerous.


3. Argument from Commitment


Ad hominemarguments have become a special subject of concern in media
reporting political argumentation, as noted in the introductory section
of this chapter. One example is the revealing case study of an election


170 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


campaign in which the ad hominem argument was the decisive instrument
of victory for an underdog candidate (Cragan and Cutbirth 1984). But
since that time, ad hominem has been used even more effectively and com-
monly by politicians, raising much concern about negative campaigning
and attack ads. Although ad hominem arguments have been around for
a long time and are now used more than ever, the problem of how to
deal with them in a critically balanced way is a matter of concern for
public discourse in a democracy. What is needed is a method or norma-
tive framework that a consumer of political rhetoric can use to critically
evaluate these arguments.

In the case described and analyzed by Cragan and Cutbirth, Adlai
Stevenson, the son of the presidential candidate Adlai Stevenson, was
criticized in an election campaign for the governorship of Illinois on the
grounds that he belonged to an all-male Chicago club. Stevenson over-
reacted to the criticism by complaining that he had been treated as “some
kind of a wimp.” Once this comment appeared in print, his opponent,
who at that point was behind in the race, made much use of the so-called
wimp factor. He portrayed Stevenson as a kind of fussy patrician who
had claimed he only belonged to this club because he couldn’t find any
other decent place to eat lunch. Stevenson lost, and the perception was,
according to Cragan and Cutbirth, that the ad hominem “wimp factor”
argument was the instrument of his defeat.

The historical origin of the ad hominem argument has been something
of a mystery, and its beginning as a clearly identified type of argument
has generally been attributed to Locke or Galileo (Finocchiaro 1980).
However, recent historical research has traced its roots back through the
treatises of the middle ages to Aristotle. One root passage (Nuchelmans,
1993; P- 37) is the reference to peirastikoi logoi, or arguments designed
to test out or probe a respondent’s knowledge, by examining views held
by that respondent (On Sophistical Refutations, 165437). Another root of
the historical development of the “argument against the person” is the
more often cited passage 178b17, in which Aristotle contrasts directing a
refutation at an argument with directing a refutation against the person
who has put forward that argument. Because there are two roots, however,
the textbook treatments of the ad hominem have been ambiguous and
confusing.

The type of ad hominem argument that is the concern of this case study
is the personal attack type, defined above. The other type is portrayed by
Locke in his Essay, in a neglected passage fully quoted in Hamblin (1970,
p. 160). Locke describes this type of argument as pressing “a man with


Argument from Commitment 171


consequences drawn from his own principles or concessions.” This type of
argumentation is called “argument from commitment” (Walton 1998a).
Barth and Martens (1977) see the ad hominem fallacy as best analyzed
on this Lockean model, as being basically the same as argument from
commitment. But I have argued (1998a) that these are two distinct types
of arguments and that although argument from commitment is a subpart
of the personal attack type of ad hominem argument, it is not the whole
argument. At any rate, the reader should be aware that terminological
confusion about the ad hominem is, and continues to be, a serious prob-
lem. The circumstantial ad hominem argument is a subspecies of a more
general form of argument called argument from commitment. It is vitally
important to distinguish between the two. However, the whole history of
the subject has been terminologically clouded, especially since Locke’s
influential remarks (Hamblin 1970, p. 160), by the fact that ad hominem
argument has prominently been taken to be equivalent to argument from
commitment.

Argument from commitment has the following form, where a is an
arguer and A is a proposition (Walton 1996, p. 56).


Argument from Commitment
ais committed to proposition A (generally, or in virtue of what she
said in the past).
Therefore, in this case, ashould support A.


This is illustrated by the following example (Walton 1996, p. 55).


Bob: Ed, you are a communist, aren’t you?

Ed: Of course. You know that.

Bob: Well, then you should be on the side of the union in this recent
labor dispute.


In this particular case, it may be that Ed is on the management side. But
if so, he will have to offer some explanation why he is. Otherwise, given
his commitment to communism generally, there is a presumption that he
would normally tend to side with the union on labor disputes. So we see
that argument from commitment is defeasible. It creates a presumption
in favor of drawing a certain inference. But the inference is subject to
default in the face of new information that might come in regarding the
particulars of the case.

Now the big issue is whether the circumstantial ad hominem (or pos-
sibly the other forms as well) is the same thing as argument from


172 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


commitment, or whether they are two different types of argument. I have
argued at length (Walton igg8a) that the two types of argument are
different, basically for two reasons. One is that that all ad hominem argu-
ments are personal attack arguments, but because it is not the case that all
arguments from commitment are personal attack arguments, it follows
that some arguments from commitment are not ad hominem arguments.
To really understand the ad hominem, as a clearly defined type of argument
with a distinctive structure, you have to begin with analysis of character as
a moral concept that has a role to play in the dialogue structure of argu-
mentation. In any genuine ad hominem argument, including the circum-
stantial subtype, one party makes a personal attack on the moral character
of another in order to criticize the other party’s argument.* The other
reason is that circumstantial ad hominem arguments are always based on
an allegation of inconsistency, as indicated above. It is this alleged incon-
sistency that is the central characteristic separating them from the other
subtypes of ad hominem arguments. But not all cases of argument from
commitment make an allegation of inconsistency, as shown by the Bob
and Ed case above.

From a viewpoint of argumentation theory, it is vital to be clear about
the distinction between the circumstantial ad hominem argument and
argument from commitment. But it is very easy to confuse the two, from
a practical point of view. One reason is that the circumstantial ad hominem
is a subspecies of argument from commitment. Another is that argument
from commitment is very often a lead-in or prior argument to the use of
the circumstantial ad hominem argument. In individual cases, it may be
hard to tell exactly where the one form of argument changed into the
other. Before argumentation theory can advance much further as a field,
these problems of argument classification need to be sorted out. One of
the reasons there has been so little advance for so long must surely be
the conflicting definitions of the ad hominem argument and its various
subtypes in the logic textbooks.

As noted above, the argumentum ad hominem, or personal attack
argument, has been traditionally treated as a fallacy in logic. But
recent research in argumentation cited above shows that, in many
cases, as used in conversational arguments — including ones in political


° The best analysis we have of the role that character plays in reasoning goes back to the
account of Aristotle, through the concept of practical reasoning or practical wisdom
(phronesis), as shown in Garver (1994). So, in more ways than one, the genesis of the ad
hominem is to be found in Aristotle.


The Gore Case 173


argumentation — ad hominem arguments are not fallacious. This research
has shown that while some personal attack arguments can definitely be
judged fallacious, many others are quite reasonable (when evaluated in
the appropriate context), while still others should be evaluated as weak
(insufficiently supported) but not fallacious. As shown in this case study,
the real function of an ad hominem argument (when properly used) is
to attack an arguer’s credibility in order to criticize the argument she
advocates.

Before going any further, it is necessary to remind ourselves of some
considerations on multi-agent argumentation from chapters 1 and 2. A
multi-agent structure of argumentation always involves two parties (in
the minimum case) in a dialogue. An ad hominem argument is the use of
personal attack in a dialogue exchange between two parties, where the
one party attacks the character of the other party as bad in some respect,
and then uses this attack as a basis for criticizing the other party’s argu-
ment. An argument is fallacious if it is a special baptizable (Johnson 1987)
type of argument that is used in such a way by one party in a dialogue
exchange that it blocks or interferes with the collaborative realization of
the goal of the type of dialogue that the two participants are supposed to
be engaged in (Walton 1995). Thus, there is a difference between a weak
argument that is open to critical questioning and a fallacious argument.
The general point is that a fallacious argument has to be worse than just
weak, or unsuccessful in fulfilling a burden of proof. A fallacious argu-
mentis a tricky, deceptive sophistical tactic, used to try to get the best ofa
speech partner in a way that is inappropriate as a collaborative contribu-
tion to the dialogue exchange. At any rate, let us now go on to examine
two cases. The first one is a classic case of the use of the circumstantial
ad hominem argument in political discourse. The second appears to be
somewhere on the borderline between argument from commitment and
circumstantial ad hominem argument.


4. The Gore Case


This case comes from Time magazine’s “Election Notebook” of November
18, 1996 (p. 16), where Time gave out “Campaign 96 Awards” to “recog-
nize outstanding achievements by politicians, their relatives and their
hecklers.” Two of the awards are directly quoted below.


THE SLIGHT-INCONSISTENCY MEDAL: To Al Gore, who left not a dry eye in
the house at the Democratic Convention as he described his sister’s death from


174 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


smoking-induced lung cancer. Gore failed to mention that for some years follow-
ing her death, his family continued to grow tobacco and that he continued to
accept campaign money from tobacco interests.


THE MOST NAUSEATING SPIN: Gore explained the above by saying, “I felt the
numbness that prevented me from integrating into all aspects of my life the
implications of what that tragedy really meant.”


No author of the “Election Notebook” was given. The page simply appears
as an editorial column, with accompanying pictures (including one of
Gore, in a speech-making pose).

To classify the type of dialogue that the argument of this case belongs
to, one would have to say that it is an editorial page of a sort, as opposed to
a news story. The intent of the entries on the page could be described as
ironic and satirical in nature, but each of the entries definitely has polit-
ical content, in the sense that it is an argument expressing a particular
political viewpoint. Each entry is an editorial comment with a particular
“spin,” or opinion, expressed. So the function of the discourse can be
classified as one of political commentary, which is partisan in nature, as
opposed to an information-seeking or news-reporting type of dialogue.
In the case above, for example, a point of view is expressed in an argu-
ment for only one side of an issue. It is different in type from a newspaper
report on politics, where there would be an expectation that the views of
both sides would be represented or, at any rate, that the reporting would
not be exclusively one-sided.

The argument used in this case is an instance of the argumentation
scheme for the circumstantial type of ad hominem argument, as can be
shown by examining its components and how they are put together to
support the conclusion. First, Gore’s speech about the death of his sister
from lung cancer is cited as showing that he has advocated the proposition
that smoking is a very bad thing — something he is strongly against —- in a
way that expresses his emotional stand against it in the strongest possible
terms. But then the argument goes on to say that Gore “failed to mention”
two key facts. One is that his family continued to grow tobacco after
the death of his sister. The other is that he continued to accept money
from “tobacco interests.” The actions cited in these two statements clash
with what Gore is reported to have said in his speech. This clash takes
the form of a pragmatic inconsistency, from which the reader draws the
conclusion by implicature that Gore could not have sincerely meant what
he (so tearfully) said in his speech. The conclusion suggested is that he
must be a hypocrite, in the sense that he does not really mean what he
says. He passionately pours out his personal emotions against something,
but then, in his actions (which he “failed to mention” in his speech), he


The Gore Case 175


actually supports and contributes to the production of this very thing he
condemned so strongly.

Could there be an explanation for such a contradiction? The editorial
actually gives one, but it makes Gore sound even more insincere. So the
third part of the argumentation scheme for the circumstantial ad hominem
is set into place. The reader draws the conclusion that Gore must be a
“bad person” — that is, in this case, a hypocrite who recommends values
and policies in his political speeches that are the direct opposite of his per-
sonal policies, as revealed by his own actions. This kind of inconsistency
can be explained away, in many cases. But in this case, the implied argu-
ment seems to be air-tight. To seal it up even further, Gore’s (presumed)
reply offers even further evidence of his insincerity. The ultimate con-
clusion, the fourth stage indicated in the argumentation scheme for the
circumstantial ad hominem, can then be drawn by the reader of the edito-
rial. What is suggested is that Gore’s tearful speech was a mere rhetorical
flourish and that, because he is such an insincere man, you can’t really
trust or accept anything he says in politics.

To analyze the argument in this case, the first step is to confirm the
classification above of the argument in the case as an instance of the cir
cumstantial type of ad hominem. The allegation made is that Gore’s actions
and his arguments are pragmatically inconsistent — the two things clash,
one being the opposite of the other. Also suggested by Gricean impli-
cature from this inconsistency, as noted above, is that Gore’s arguments
against the use of tobacco products are not sincerely meant. The idea is
that he says one thing but does another, so “actions speak louder than
words.” The personal attack element of the argument is the suggestion
that Gore is hypocritical - that his argument is only political posturing
and is not expressing a conclusion he really accepts personally. In this
sense the circumstantial ad hominem leads into, and is built on, a personal
attack of the ethotic type.

But exactly how is the personal attack drawn by Gricean implicature
from the circumstantial contradiction that is posed by the argument?
The alleged practical inconsistency arises from the clash between the
following two propositions.


1. Gore, in a speech, tearfully described his sister’s death from
smoking-induced lung cancer.

2. Forsome years following his sister’s death, Gore’s family continued
to grow tobacco and he continued to accept money from tobacco
interests.


176 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


From proposition 1, the implication is drawn that Gore is strongly against
smoking. The fact that his tearful description of his sister’s death was part
of a political speech implies that this description was relevant politically.
In other words, presumably Gore included it in such a public speech
because he was sending a message to the American public that smoking
is a bad habit, that he is against smoking, and that the public generally
ought to be against smoking. But then proposition 2 says that Gore, after
his sister died of smoking-induced lung cancer (and the timing is very
important to the ad hominemargument), personally accepted money from
tobacco interests and his family profited from growing tobacco. But how
exactly does this connection imply a contradiction that reveals hypocrisy?

Now there is, of course, a well-known connection between the grow-
ing of tobacco and the habit of smoking. Growing tobacco is a neces-
sary means for smoking. We all know that cigarettes are produced from
tobacco and that the normal way of manufacturing cigarettes has the
growing of tobacco as one of its most important parts. So if anyone is sin-
cerely against smoking, it would be highly questionable for that person
not to be against the growing of tobacco. The close connection between
smoking and tobacco makes the advocating of both propositions 1 and 2
by the same person highly questionable. It cries out for an explanation.
And in the absence of one, the conclusion implied (by implicature) is that
this person is the worst sort of hypocrite, even going so far as to exploit
the death of his sister to move an audience for political gain. The implica-
tions of the inconsistency make Gore out to be not only a scoundrel, but
ridiculous as well. So as an ad hominem attack, the argument is a powerful
one indeed.

The picture presented of Gore, where he appears in a rhetorical pose
with a visibly caring and passionate look on his face, adds to the ridicule
invited by the argument. The idea of a speaker looking this sincere and
acting in such a hypocritical way, suggesting a scurrilous opportunism
and absurdly insincere posturing, is an irony that is funny, in just the way
that the ironies satirized by Voltaire and Moliére were funny. They depict
a rogue who can sell things to gullible and unsuspecting buyers of his
products or ideas by saying all sorts of ridiculous things that he does not
believe at all. And yet he says them with the greatest apparent sincerity. It
is somehow very ironic and hence comical to people that the respondent
pays rapt attention to this absurd performance. The sincerity apparently
expressed by both parties makes for a highly amusing dialogue. Whatever
is at the bottom of it, the humor in this sort of ad hominem attack is a
powerful part of its effectiveness.


The Battalino Case 177


5. The Battalino Case


The Battalino case occurred on February 6, 1999, day 16 of the senate
impeachment trial of Bill Clinton, a day in which several important wit-
nesses were interviewed, including Monica Lewinsky and Vernon Jordan.
In the late stages of the hearing, manager Jim Rogan, with little time
left, made one last point, in response to two previous arguments that
had been used by the Democrats. One is a case of the idea of propor-
tionality of punishment. The other is the argument that everybody lies
about sex, therefore perjury should be minimized in a case of this sort.
To counter these arguments, Rogan cited a case in which attorney and
Veterans Administration doctor Linda Battalino admitted having sex with
a patient, Ed Arthur, in her office in June of 1991. Dr. Battalino had asked
Arthur — a veteran who had served two tours of duty in Vietnam and was
suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder — to come to her office. She
announced that she had “feelings” for him, and then performed oral sex
on him. She then began a four-month intimate relationship with him.
In 1992, Arthur sued her for sexual harassment, and Battalino denied
in court that anything of a sexual nature had taken place in her office.
But Arthur had tape-recorded about twenty-five hours of conversations
with her that proved she had lied under oath. Jonathan F. Mitchell, the
lawyer for the fraud section of the Justice Department’s Criminal Division,
prosecuted the case against Dr. Battalino. She lost her medical and legal
rights to practice, resigned her position, was fined, and was sentenced
to six months of imprisonment under electronic monitoring. The case
had been reported in The Boise Weekly in 1991, but was not widely known
until it was discovered by the media in 1998 in response to the question
of perjury in the Lewinsky case.

In questioning Battalino, Rogan drew explicit comparisons to the case
of Bill Clinton and Monica Lewinsky. In the following sequence of ques-
tions and replies, quoted from the CNN.com transcript, he showed that
the two cases are alike in central respects. The key difference he drew
out is that Battalino was not treated with leniency by the Clinton Justice
Department.


ROGAN: Dr. Batta —

BATTALINO: Battalino.

ROGAN: Battalino. Your case intrigues me. I want to make sure I understand the
factual circumstances. You lied about a one-time act of consensual sex with
someone on federal property.

BATTALINO: Yes.


178 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


ROGAN: Is that correct?

BATTALINO: Absolutely correct.

ROGAN: And this act of perjury was in a civil lawsuit, not in a criminal case.

BATTALINO: That’s also correct. And that —

ROGAN: In fact, the civil case eventually was dismissed.

BATTALINO: Correct.

ROGAN: Yet, despite the dismissal, you were prosecuted by the Clinton Justice
Department for this act of perjury, is that correct?

BATTALINO: That’s correct.

ROGAN: What! want to know, Dr. Battalino, during your ordeal, during your pros-
ecution, did anybody from the White House, from the Justice Department,
did any members of Congress, did any academics from respected universi-
ties, ever show up at your trial and suggest that you should be treated with
leniency because everybody lies about sex?

BATTALINO: No sir.

ROGAN: Did anybody ever come forward from the White House or from the
Justice Department and urge leniency for you because your perjury was only
in a civil case?

BATTALINO: No.

ROGAN: Did they argue for leniency because the civil case, at which you commit-
ted perjury, was ultimately dismissed?

BATTALINO: No.

ROGAN: Did anybody from the White House ever say that leniency should be
granted to you because you otherwise did your job very well?

BATTALINO: No.

ROGAN: Did anybody ever come forward from Congress to suggest that you were
the victim of an overzealous, sex-obsessed prosecutor?

BATTALINO: No.

ROGAN: Now, according to the New York Times they report that you lied when
your lawyer asked you at a deposition whether “Anything of a sexual nature”
occurred. Is that correct?

BATTALINO: Yes, that’s correct.

ROGAN: Did anybody from Congress or from the White House come forward to
defend you saying that that phrase was ambiguous or it all depended what
the word “anything” meant?

BATTALINO: No sir. May I just — I’m not sure if it was my lawyer that asked the
question, but that is the exact question that I was asked.

ROGAN: The question that you were asked that caused your prosecution for per-
jury?

BATTALINO: That’s correct.

ROGAN: No one ever asked if that phrase itself was ambiguous, did they?

BATTALINO: No.

UNIDENTIFIED JUDGE: Does the gentleman yield?

ROGAN: Regrettably, my time is limited and I will not yield for that purpose. Now
Doctor, you lost two licenses, you lost a law license. . .

BATTALINO: Well I have a law degree, I was not a member of any bar.

ROGAN: Your conviction precludes you from practicing law?


The Battalino Case 179


BATTALINO: That’s correct, sir.

ROGAN: You also had a medical degree?

BATTALINO: That’s correct.

ROGAN: You lost your medical degree?

BATTALINO: Yes. Iam no longer permitted to practice medicine either.

ROGAN: Did anybody from the White House or from Congress come forward
during your prosecution or during your sentencing and suggest that rather
than you suffer the incredibly difficult punishment of no longer being able
to practice your profession, perhaps you should simply just receive some sort
of rebuke or censure?

BATTALINO: No one came to my aid or defense, no.

ROGAN: Nobody from the Justice Department suggested that during your sen-
tencing hearing?

BATTALINO: No.

ROGAN: Has anybody come forward from the White House to suggest to you that
in light of circumstances as we now appear to see them unfolding, you should
be pardoned for your offense?

BATTALINO: Nobody has come, no.

(END VIDEO CLIP)

ROGAN: That’s how the Clinton administration defines proportionality and pun-

ishment. Mr. Chief Justice, we reserve the balance of our time.


Toward the end of the sequence of dialogue quoted above, Battalino
replied, in answer to Rogan’s questions, that because of her conviction,
she was no longer allowed to practice either medicine or law. Driving
his point home, Rogan also had her admit that nobody from the White
House or Congress came forward to suggest that she should only “receive
some sort of rebuke or censure” instead of the harsher punishment she
received. The intended parallel to the Lewinsky case is highly evident at
this point.

Rogan’s argument is clearly an argument from analogy. He is compar-
ing the earlier case of Battalino’s perjury about an act of consensual sex
on federal property with the Lewinsky case. But the argument is more
than just an argument from analogy. It would appear that it can also be
classified as an instance of the circumstantial ad hominem argument. What
has been shown above is that it is characteristic of this form of argument
that one party attacks another party by arguing that the first party “does
not practice what he preaches,” and then uses this allegation of inconsis-
tency to undermine the first party’s prior argument. Rogan’s argument
can be so classified, provided it can be analyzed as putting forward the
following premises and conclusions.


Premise 1: Clinton lied under oath about an act of consensual sex in
his workplace, but argued that he ought to be treated with leniency.


180 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


Premise 2: In an earlier case where a woman lied under oath about
an act of consensual sex in her workplace, Clinton [in the form of
his justice department] prosecuted the case, and did not treat the
woman with leniency.

Conclusion: Clinton did not practice (in the earlier case) what he now
preaches (in this case).


The secondary conclusion Rogan’s argument leads to, based on the first
conclusion above, is that Clinton’s argument for leniency in his own case
is not worth much. Clinton, according to Rogan, has argued that he
ought to be treated with leniency on various grounds. One is the idea of
proportionality. The other is that everybody lies about sex, and that min-
imizes the perjury. But the fact is that the Clinton Justice Department,
when faced with a similar case, did not show leniency when prosecut-
ing the case. The ultimate conclusion that Rogan’s argument implies is
that Clinton’s own actions belie the sincerity of his argument. He wants
leniency for himself, but did not give it to someone else in the same situ-
ation. It would seem then that, at least on the basis of this brief outline of
what is taken to be its main structure, Rogan’s argument fits into the form
of argument identified above as that of the circumstantial ad hominem. But
is this circumstantial ad hominem argument really the one that Rogan is
putting forward in the impeachment trial? The first problem is to identify
the argument, before going on to attempt to analyze or evaluate it.


6. Classifying the Argument in the Battalino Case


In attempting to identify, analyze, or evaluate any real argument, there
are always many uncertainties, questions of interpretation, and rough
edges. And so it is with this case. Some may be inclined to doubt, for
example, that Rogan really meant to make a circumstantial ad hominem
type of argument. There are four interrelated grounds for doubt that call
for discussion. These are all based on considerations that have a basis in
the text and context of discourse of the case.

The first consideration is that Rogan is arguing against prior arguments
for leniency and for the principle of proportionality. Citing the Battalino
case could be directed just at attacking these arguments rather than at
attacking Clinton personally. After all, Rogan was only citing a precedent —
a similar case. Citing of precedent is not an ad hominem form of argument,
at least not necessarily. And the case was from a trial that took place
six years before Clinton’s impeachment trial. It’s not like the smoking


Classifying the Argument in the Battalino Case 181


case, where the problem was a conflict between what was argued and
what was presently being done. Maybe Rogan was just arguing that there
was no leniency in this other case. And if the ruling in that case can be
defended as reasonable, there should be no leniency in this case. This
argument is not an ad hominem argument, but just an argument from
precedent.

Another ground for doubt concerns the person who is the subject of
the argument. The point is that the Battalino case was prosecuted by “the
Clinton Justice Department,” to use Rogan’s terms. It was not prosecuted
by Clinton himself, as the prosecuting attorney in the case. Nor is it
Clinton himself who is making the plea for leniency in the impeachment
trial. It is his attorneys who are pleading for leniency on his behalf. So it is
not the same person who put forward the arguments in the two allegedly
similar cases. So Rogan’s argument is therefore not really a circumstantial
ad hominem after all. The main problem here is that Clinton was governor
at the time, so it was “his” justice system that prosecuted the Battalino
case. But he may have had nothing to do with it, directly. He may even
have strongly disagreed with the judgment in the case, but may not have
been able to intervene, or thought it inappropriate to do so. Maybe he
didn’t even know about the case.

The third ground for doubt is that if Rogan’s argument is a personal
attack (ad hominem) argument on Clinton, this aspect of it is not stated
explicitly. On the surface, the argument seems to be an argument from
commitment of the following form.


Premise 1: Nobody from the White House, the Congress, or the Clinton
Justice Department argued for leniency in the Battalino case.

Premise 2: The Battalino case was an instance of perjury relating to an
act of consensual sex in the workplace.

Conclusion: All those indicated are committed to non-leniency in cases
of perjury relating to acts of consensual sex in the workplace.


The upshot of this argument from commitment is that these people
should be committed to non-leniency in this case too. Therefore, they
should prosecute Clinton without leniency — they should be on the side
of impeachment. But this argument from commitment is not, by itself,
an ad hominem argument. The doubt then is whether Rogan is making an
ad hominem attack on Clinton at all. Maybe he is just putting forward an
argument from commitment, and we are just reading into the text that
there is an ad hominem argument there.


182 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


There is a form of argument called argument from pragmatic incon-
sistency (or say one thing, do another) identified in Walton (igg98a, p.
218).


Argument from Pragmatic Inconsistency
aadvocates argument @, which has proposition A as its conclusion.
ahas carried out an action or set of actions that imply that ais person-
ally committed to not-A (the opposite, or negation of A).
Therefore a’s argument @ should not be accepted.


I argue that this type of argument should not be classified as a species of
ad hominem argument. The reason is that it lacks the premise to the effect
that ais a bad person. But if the implication that ais bad person is there,
the argument then becomes an ad hominem argument. For example, if
in using argument from pragmatic inconsistency, the arguer says that a’s
actions represent his true commitments, and the conclusion is drawn that
ais deceiving us, or that ais a hypocrite, or something of that sort, then
the argument is a genuine ad hominem. In short, the general problem
posed by the third ground for doubt is whether Rogan’s argument is
really an ad hominem, or whether it is only an argument from pragmatic
inconsistency (but not one of the ad hominem type).

The fourth ground for doubt relates to Rogan’s intentions. We, as crit-
ics in this case, do not really know what Rogan’s intentions were in citing
the prior Battalino case. Rogan never uses the expression ad hominem,
or any equivalent expression. And he does not appear to come right
out anywhere and claim that Clinton is bad person, or that Clinton is a
hypocrite, or anything of that sort. Maybe, then, he didn’t really intend
to attack Clinton with an ad hominem argument at all. Maybe he merely
meant to cite the difference between the two cases, and leave it at that.
Or maybe, as suggested above, he was only using argumentation from
commitment, but stopping short of a full ad hominem argument of the
kind that essentially involves personal attack. After all, if Rogan didn’t
really intend to attack Clinton personally, how can we fairly classify his
argument as a circumstantial ad hominem, a personal attack argument?

I believe that each of these four grounds for doubt has some evidence
to support it and that each argument merits discussion. But I also think
that all four can be adequately replied to, based on the textual and contex-
tual evidence given in the Battalino case text of discourse quoted above.
Let’s start with the fourth one. The basic point to be made here is that
when we evaluate an argument in a given case, we don’t need to prove


Evaluating the Argument in the Battalino Case 183


what the arguer’s intentions really were in that case. For example, it has
been held that because a fallacy is an intentional deception, in order to
prove that fallacy was committed in a particular case, it has to be shown
that the arguer had an intent to deceive. But Govier (1987) has rejected
this view as a form of psychologism. To show that an argumentis fallacious
in a given case, according to Govier, you do not need to prove intent. But
you do have to show that a kind of strategy was involved. What you need
to prove is that it is an instance of one of the types of argument that can
be used fallaciously and that in this case it has been used in a way that falls
into a certain pattern as an argumentation strategy. Carrying out such a
task of evaluation does not require proof that the arguer actually had
guilty motives or an intent to deceive.


7. Evaluating the Argument in the Battalino Case


After the passage quoted above, the impeachment hearing went on to
discuss Monica Lewinsky’s prior testimony. No reply to Rogan’s argument
on the Battalino case was made, nor was the case discussed any further.
So we don’t really know what impact it had on the trial, if any. Nor do
we know how Clinton’s defenders replied to it. Rather than speculate on
such matters, the more interesting dialectical task is to try to analyze and
evaluate the Battalino case as an argument. In particular, it is interesting
to try to evaluate the ad hominem argument that is apparently contained
in it. Should it be judged to be a reasonable ad hominem argument or a
fallacious one? Or does it lie somewhere between these extremes?

One reply to the argument is that it is not relevant, because the Bat-
talino case took place over twenty years before the impeachment trial.
Clinton could have changed his views since then. And anyway, he was
only remotely related to the case and was not himself the prosecutor.
Therefore, it could be argued, the relevance of the Battalino case to the
impeachment case is tangential and minimal. Against this argument is
the argument for relevance. The two cases are quite similar. Both involve
prosecution of a case of consensual sexual relations in a federal gov-
ernment workplace between a powerful person and someone who was
dependent on or in a subordinate position to the offender. The Clinton
policy has been strongly against sexual harassment in all forms, both then
and now, and presumably this policy has not changed. So the Battalino
case would seem to be quite relevant to the one under consideration in
the impeachment trial. It seems to be possible at least to make a strong
case for relevance.


184 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


An ad hominem argument should be evaluated in light of how it can
respond to critical questioning in the type of dialogue to which it was
put forward as a contribution. I have presented (1998a, pp. 224-225) six
critical questions corresponding to the circumstantial type of ad hominem
argument.


1. What are the propositions alleged to be practically inconsistent,
and are they practically inconsistent?

2. If the identified propositions are not practically inconsistent as
things stand, are there at least some grounds for a claim of practical
inconsistency in the textual evidence of the discourse?

3. Even if there is not an explicit practical inconsistency, what is the
connection between the pair of propositions alleged to be incon-
sistent?

4. If there is a practical inconsistency that can be identified as the
focus of the attack, how serious a flaw is it? Could the apparent
conflict be resolved or explained without destroying the consis-
tency of the commitment in the dialogue?

5. Does it follow from a’s inconsistent commitment that a is a bad
person?

6. Should the conclusion be the weaker claim, that a’s credibility is
open to question, or the stronger claim, that the conclusion of a
is false?


The analysis above shows which two propositions are alleged to be prac-
tically inconsistent. So the first critical question, and with it the second
and third, can be answered. Of all six critical questions, the one that is
hardest to answer affirmatively is question 5. The main problem in this
case is that Rogan never explicitly states, in so many words, that Clin-
ton is a bad person or that the Clinton administration is unethical — for
example, that they are liars. The best we can say is that the implication
that the Clinton administration has been less than forthright is suggested
by what Rogan says. The best evidence that the latter is drawing such a
conclusion, or trying to get the audience to draw it, is his last statement:
“That’s how the Clinton administration defines proportionality and pun-
ishment.” This remark has an edge of irony to it, suggesting that the
Clinton administration has not been forthright about how they define
proportionality and punishment. Hence there is evidence that Rogan’s
argument is ad hominem, but it is not conclusive. So here we are back to
the classification problem again. Evaluation of the argument as weak or
strong must depend on how it should be classified. Is it ad hominem or
merely an argument from pragmatic inconsistency?


Implicature and Innuendo 185


Judged as an argument from pragmatic inconsistency, Rogan’s argu-
ment is reasonable, and not fallacious. It is quite a strong argument,
because of the close similarity of the two cases. But it is subject to criti-
cal questioning. If the opposing side had wished to reply to it, it could
have found several weak points in it to question. It could have shown, for
example, that the people who prosecuted that case may be people differ-
ent from those who now argue for leniency. They could have argued that
the earlier case took place twenty years ago, and used that to question its
relevance or to argue that the situation has somehow changed. There are
various avenues of critical questioning open. But as things stand, Rogan’s
argument looks persuasive. It simply asserts that the Clinton administra-
tion prosecuted without leniency then, but is all for leniency now. This
apparent inconsistency by itself, even without using it as the basis of an ad
hominemattack, is a fairly persuasive. It indicates that the Clinton adminis-
tration’s argument for leniency is somehow dubious, because it conflicts
with what was advocated in a previous case, where the administration
prosecuted without leniency. This argument by itself is sufficient to sow
legitimate doubts in the minds of an audience.


8. Implicature and Innuendo


Rogan’s argument, when judged to be ad hominem argument, is a gen-
teel and indirect one. He does not come right out and call the Clinton
administration names, saying they are liars or hypocrites. His pointing
out the inconsistency on how they have treated the two cases is used only
to suggest that the administration’s argument for leniency and propor-
tionality is not very credible. With respect to critical question 6, then, the
answer is that Rogan is claiming only that the credibility of the Clinton
administration is open to question. He is not making the stronger claim
that the conclusion of the Clinton administration’s argument is false. He
is arguing that the administration’s stance on prosecuting for perjury in
the Battalino case has shifted to the opposite in the Lewinsky case. What
he is saying is that they may argue for leniency now, but when their inter-
ests were not at stake, in the earlier case, they did not prosecute with
leniency. This argument suggests that the Clinton administration is just
arguing this way because it is in their interests to do so. They are not argu-
ing that way because they really believe the argument or are committed
to it.

But now notice we have come to the point where we are discussing an
argument that was only suggested by the text of discourse in the Batta-
lino case, not explicitly stated. We are getting into the area of suggestion,


186 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


implicature, and innuendo. Is that legitimate? Can we attribute argu-
ments on the basis of what was suggested in a case, as opposed to what
was explicitly stated? The answer is yes. If we are to understand and eval-
uate fallacies, we must deal with innuendo and suggestion. For it is the
very factor of innuendo that makes many an ad hominem argument so
powerful and so difficult to refute.

To analyze arguments based on implicature, innuendo, and indirect
speech acts, contextual assumptions about collaborative conversation in
the form of so-called conversational postulates or ethical rules of polite
discourse (Grice 1975;Johnstone 1981) are very important. In many cases
of rhetorical arguments of the kind studied in this book, the speaker or
writer sets up suggestions in the form of inferences that will be drawn
by a mass audience when the message is broadcast to them. In the most
persuasive kind of commercial ad or political message, the speaker does
not come right out and say what he means. Instead, he draws a picture
in the form of a sketch with missing parts and lets the audience fill in
the missing parts. This way, the members of the audience have a creative
role. They use their own initiative to draw the invited conclusion. And
the speaker has plausible deniability. If confronted with having made a
damaging or controversial allegation, he can deny that he meant to say
anything like that at all. Plausible deniability works because the speaker
does not state the conclusion himself. The audience generally draws this
conclusion not by deductive or inductive reasoning but by a process of
suggestion or innuendo.

Dascal and Gross (1999) have shown how the Aristotelian framework
of rhetoric in Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca (1969) and the Gricean
pragmatic theory of conversational interaction can work together well
as tools to study forms of argumentation, such as ad misericordiam and
ad hominem. They showed how such forms of argument, even though
traditionally viewed as fallacies, can be modeled as reasonable forms of
rhetorical persuasion based on pathos and ethos. When such arguments
are used, typically a speaker suggests a conclusion that the hearer then
draws by implicature within the Gricean framework of a collaborative talk
exchange. A Gricean conversational implicature is an inference drawn by
one party in a conversation based on what another party has previously
said in the conversation, using rules governing how both parties should
contribute collaboratively to the conversation.

Grice (1975, p. 65) used the following example to illustrate how a
conversational implicature is drawn. The participants in the conversation
are represented by variables, A, B, and C, after Grice’s notation.


Implicature and Innuendo 187


Suppose that A and Bare talking about a mutual friend C, who is
now working in a bank. A asks B how Cis getting on in his job, and
B replies, “Oh quite well, I think; he likes his colleagues, and he
hasn’t been to prison yet.” At this point A might well inquire what
Bwas implying, what he was suggesting, or even what he meant by
saying that Chad not yet been to prison. The answer might be any
one of such things as that C is the sort of person likely to yield to
the temptation provided by his occupation, that C’s colleagues are
really very unpleasant and treacherous people, and so forth.


In this case, A draws the conclusion that Cis a not a very honest or trust-
worthy person. By what process does the speaker set up the message so
that A draws this inference? Grice’s explanation is that when the speaker
is seen to violate a conversational rule, the hearer will recognize that the
violation is intentional. The hearer will then draw an inference that the
speaker is indirectly trying to convey a message. Of course, the message
has been conveyed covertly without the speaker actually asserting that Cis
dishonest. Thus, as Grice noted, the hearer may actually ask the speaker
what he was suggesting.

How is the conclusion communicated by the speaker drawn by the
hearer in cases of Gricean implicature? As noted above, it is not by deduc-
tive reasoning or by inductive reasoning based on probability and statis-
tics. Itis based on expectations set in place by the speaker’s actual message
and by the conversational context in which the speaker put forward the
message and the hearer received and understood it. Calling on a term
used in artificial intelligence, the process of reasoning could be described
as an inference to the best explanation. The best explanation the hearer
could give of what the speaker said, and why he said it (his goals or inten-
tions), is that he was intentionally violating a conversational rule. Thus, to
grasp how implicatures work, we need to understand more about conver-
sational rules. Grice calls these rules conversational maxims, formulating
the following four conversational maxims (1975, p. 68).


Maxim of Quantity: Make your contribution as informative as is required
for the current purposes of the talk exchange.

Maxim of Quality: Try to make your contribution one that is true.

Maxim of Relation: Be relevant.

Maxim of Manner. Be perspicuous.


The first two maxims are self-explanatory, but the other two need to
be explained a bit. The maxim of manner, although about clarity, may


188 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


not seem clear at first. Grice explained this maxim by means of four
injunctions: (1) avoid obscurity of expression, (2) avoid ambiguity, (3) be
brief, and (4) be orderly. He explained relevance by stating the rule that
one should expect a speech partner’s contribution to be appropriate to
immediate needs at each stage of a conversation (p. 68). Thus, for exam-
ple, ifa question has been asked by one speech partner at the last move in
a conversation, the next move made by the other speech partner should
be relevant. It should be a reply to the question, or at least a response that
addresses the question. Making an unrelated remark, like “It’s a nice day,”
would be irrelevant. Thus relevance has to do with fitting into the con-
nected sequence of proper moves in a dialogue. The maxims all need
to be understood in light of a more general principle that governs all
conversations or collaborative goal-directed dialogues: “Make your con-
versational contribution such as is required, at the stage at which it occurs,
by the accepted purpose of the talk exchange in which you are engaged”
(p. 67). Grice called this principle the cooperative principle (CP).

Grice (p. 69) showed how the CP is used, along with conversational
maxims, in explaining how the implicature is drawn in the case about A,
B, and C above. First, it is apparent to A that B’s statement that C hasn’t
been to prison yet is not relevant to the rest of the conversation. What
could explain this irrelevance? A plausible explanation is that B may be
intentionally violating the CP by “flouting” (Grice’s term) the maxim of
relevance. Does this mean that B is opting out of the conversation by
being intentionally uncooperative? That is one explanation, but A has
no further evidence that B is really opting out of the conversation, as B
appears to be cooperative in other respects. As an alternative explanation
of what has occurred, A can try to make what Bsays relevant. How could A
do that? Well, the fact known to both speech partners is that Cis working
at a bank. The expected or normal outcome of some dishonest practice
in that situation would be C’s going to jail. From B’s remark that C has
not gone to jail yet, A can draw the conclusion that what B is suggesting
is that Cis not entirely honest or trustworthy. One can see already how
imputations of this sort are the standard tools of innuendo and so-called
smear tactics of the kind used in negative campaign tactics.

Another example from Grice (p. 71) can be cited. Asked to write a
letter of reference for a student who is applying for a job in philosophy,
a professor writes, “Dear Sir, Mr. X’s command of English is excellent,
and his attendance at tutorials has been regular, Yours, etc.” As we all
know, this kind of letter would be interpreted by the reader as conveying
the message that Mr X is not a strong candidate. The writer of the letter


Implicature and Innuendo 189


has not gone on record as saying so explicitly, but that message can be
inferred indirectly from what he wrote. Grice explains this phenomenon
by appeal to a conversational postulate he calls the Maxim of Quantity
(p. 68), which states that a contribution to a conversation should be
neither more nor less than is required. Because the writer of the letter
is saying too little, we search around for an explanation. He knows that
more information is wanted, and because X is his student, he must have
that information. The only plausible explanation that seems to be left is
that he thinks that Mr. X is not a strong candidate.

What this case shows is that when a message is conveyed indirectly by
innuendo, the receiver gets the message because of background assump-
tions that are not stated but are known to the speaker and hearer. In this
case, the two parties are engaged in an information-seeking dialogue,
and both understand that there are conversational postulates governing
this collaborative kind of dialogue. What is not said, taken together with
the conversational postulate, suggests a particular conclusion or message
that the receiver draws by inference.

Many of the most powerfully effective ad hominem arguments are cases
where the proponent does not come right out and assert that the respon-
dent has done something bad or has exhibited some character flaw.
Instead, the proponent only says that she has heard rumors to this effect
and that although she does not believe these rumors herself, neverthe-
less that is the word going around. Another way of mounting the attack
is to say that the allegations were “leaked” by a source who is close to the
proponent but who does not want to be identified. These ways of putting
forward an ad hominem argument remove the requirement of burden
of proof and leave room for plausible deniability. This type of ad hominem
argument is often much more effective, because it can raise suspicions
and doubts that can be highly damaging, and impossible or extremely
hard to disprove. It does not really need to be proved in order to be
effective. For example, if put forward just before an election, the respon-
dent may have no time to effectively rebut this form of argument.

Rogan’s argument is one of these tricky ones used as a tactic to evade
burden of proof. It is an ad hominem argument, but one based on sugges-
tion. That should not be taken as meaning that it is a bad argument or
a fallacious one. For many of the most persuasive arguments work that
way. For example, some facts may be cited, or a story told, or an inconsis-
tency pointed out, but the ultimate conclusion to be drawn may never be
explicitly stated. Even so, the audience may be quite capable of drawing
it themselves. And when they do so, they may find it acceptable.


190 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


g. Evaluating the Argument in the Gore Case


Having given an analysis of the ad hominem argument used in the Gore
case above, and having revealed why and how the argument is persuasive,
the next step is to evaluate the argument as weak or strong, from a critical
point of view. The weakest part of the argument relates to one aspect of
proposition 2. This proposition is a conjunction of two propositions. One
of them is the allegation that Gore’s family continued to grow tobacco
for some years following his sister’s death. What has to be questioned
here is why Gore is being held responsible for things done by his family.
For example, it could be possible that Gore didn’t like other people in
his family growing tobacco, or that he protested about it, or even that he
didn’t know about it. Personal control over what one’s family members
do may be very minimal or even non-existent. Who were these family
members, and how were they related to Gore? What economic stake did
Gore have in the family tobacco-growing enterprise? Until these questions
are answered, we don’t know what sort of connection Gore had with
tobacco growing, and whether such connections can be taken to indicate
that he somehow supported or advocated tobacco growing.

So this particular subpart of the ad hominem is very weak, at best, and,
as it stands, could be misleading and fallacious. Allied to the other part of
the conjunction in proposition 2, that Gore accepted campaign money
from tobacco interests, this allegation about his family does give the ad
hominem argument an additional push, because it cites another connec-
tion between Gore and tobacco. But on closer examination, it is a weak
part of the overall argument that should be scrutinized and questioned
carefully.

What about the allegation that Gore accepted campaign funds from
tobacco interests? Here the connection is firmer, because these days we
expect politicians to at least make reasonable efforts to know whether
their campaign funds are coming from special interests. The big ques-
tion is whether Gore knew that these funds came from tobacco interests.
If he did, then it does seem questionable that he accepted the funds, with-
out further inquiry into their source, in light of his passionate speech on
the evils of smoking. The presumption arising from this apparent con-
flict is that Gore did not really mean what he said in his speech. And
the implicature suggested by this presumption is that he is a “phony” or
hypocrite, who exploited his family tragedy to add pathos to a political
speech, no doubt with great effect. So the circumstantial ad hominemargu-
ment is the vehicle used to pose direct (abusive) ad hominem argument,


Evaluating the Argument in the Gore Case 191


by implication, to the effect that Gore is not a sincere person who can be
trusted to “speak from the heart” and tell us what he truly believes in his
political speeches. As is characteristically the case with the circumstantial
attack, the allegation of pragmatic inconsistency leads to the implication
that the arguer attacked is a person of bad character. By attacking a per-
son’s credibility, his argument is attacked.

A circumstantial ad hominem argument works in a dialogue by shifting
a weight of presumption onto the respondent, by denying the allegation
or by otherwise appropriately replying to the argument. In the absence
of such a reply, or in the absence of critical questions raised about the
ad hominem argument, it has a sticking power in virtue of the weight of
presumption in favor of it. But if an inadequate, failed, or implausible
reply is given, that will make the ad hominem argument much stronger.
One interesting feature of this case is that the Time editorial actually
printed a reply attributed to Gore, which was described in the editorial as
“the most nauseating spin.” But the reply, expressed in a kind of political
psychobabble that is all too familiar to readers, and widely felt to be
ridiculous, is a kind of clincher that has the effect of adding weight to the
ad hominem argument, rather than disarming it. The effect of the reply
is to give more support to the original ad hominem allegations that Gore
is carried away by his own emotional rhetoric and that he is not only
dishonest but deeply confused, and cannot be trusted to give a straight
answer. Instead of replying to the ad hominem argument by questioning
it, the quote seals the argument in place, making any further reply to
it much more difficult and much less plausible. The trendiness of the
phrasing of the speech makes it seem insincere. And this evidence of
insincerity gives just that much more support to the original ad hominem
argument.

Another interesting aspect of this particular case is its compactness.
Very little is said in the given text of discourse, but a lot is implied.
Repeated use of Gricean implicature to suggest propositions is a clever
aspect of the argument, showing how easy it can be to mount an ad
hominem argument on the basis of very little evidence, and yet how the
attack can have a powerful “smearing” effect. Thus it is extremely difficult
to defend oneself against this type of argument. If the victim attacks the
argument too vigorously, he appears guilty. But if no reply at all is made,
or only a weak one, damage can be just as bad or worse. The usual strategy
of challenging the support of the premise seems to be of limited use in
such a case.


192 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


The tricky, and therefore especially interesting, tactic exhibited by
this case is the conjunction of the two propositions used as a dual basis
for supporting the one side of the alleged pragmatic inconsistency. The
conjunction is composed of the following two propositions.


P1: For some years following his sister’s death, Gore’s family continued
to grow tobacco.
P2: Gore continued to accept money from tobacco interests.


As shown above, the allegation made in P1 is quite a weak and question-
able basis for an ad hominem argument. We don’t blame people for things
that members of their families do. So unless there is some further link to
be established here, P1 is not much of a basis for an ad hominem argument
that shows that Gore is a bad person. The real basis of the ad hominem
argument is Pg. While a lot of other politicians probably also accepted
money from “tobacco interests” at the time Gore was alleged to have done
so, still, his having done this does clash with his speech about his sister in
a way that strongly supports the ad hominem argument used against him.

So the trick in this case is to combine a weak but persuasive basis for
an ad hominem argument with a stronger basis. The stronger basis, by
itself, does not seem all that impressive (probably because all politicians
were engaged in pretty much the same practice at the time). But when
combined with the weaker one (that somehow looks more impressive
when combined with the stronger one), the effect is considerable. The
argument, as a whole, succeeds in making Gore look quite ridiculous.
This ad hominem argument is revealed as quite weak from a critical point
of view, once it is analyzed as above. But it is highly persuasive when you
first encounter it, without really thinking about it too much. At least, it
would certainly be persuasive to those who are cynical about politicians
to begin with or to those who already suspect that Gore is selling a kind
of superficial rhetoric to support his own interests and those of his allies.
To the extent that a reader has these cynical attitudes, she is likely to find
the ad hominem argument used in this case easy to accept.


10. Evaluating the Arguments Rhetorically and Dialectically


In the Battalino case, there was a question about whether the argument
really was ad hominem as opposed to a mere attempt to smear a person by
attacking his character, instead of his argument. The same question also
needs to be raised in the Gore case. Is the argument really ad hominem,
or is it just a slur against Gore’s character? For it is a requirement of


Evaluating Arguments Rhetorically and Dialectically 193


an argument being an ad hominem argument that it be a personal attack
used to detract from the argument of the party being attacked (Walton
1998a). Calling someone a bad name, for example, is not necessarily an
ad hominem argument. An ad hominem is not just any slur on someone’s
character. It must be one used to try to refute or attack that person’s
argument by attacking the credibility of the arguer for that purpose. It
is a matter not of the actual intention of the attacker but of how the
argument is being used in a given case.

In this case, then, we need to ask what argument of Gore’s was the attack
on his character, by way of the alleged circumstantial conflict, being used
to refute? Presumably, it was his passionate speech. This speech, if relevant
to politics at all, was a message to people against smoking. Was the Time
segment (as quoted above) then meant to be an attack against smoking?
Could you say it sent a kind of pro-smoking message? Presumably not.
That does not seem to be what the editorial was about. And if not, the
question is whether the editorial really contains an ad hominem argument
at all.

I believe there is something more in this question than many com-
mentators might initially be inclined to think. In a way, the editorial is,
I believe, a kind of pseudo ad hominem argument that is being played as
much for its entertainment value as for its serious political content as
an argument. But on the other hand, there is enough of an element of
counter-argument there to serve as a basis for classifying the editorial
as containing a circumstantial ad hominem argument. The basis for this
classification is that Gore’s speech as a whole is being attacked by the
argument in the editorial, even though no details of the speech are given
in the editorial itself. But the speech is recent news, and readers of the
editorial are presumably aware of the contents of the speech. And there-
fore there is some basis for classifying the Timesegment as an ad hominem
argument. Yet that basis only allows such a classification as conditional
and partial. A subtler analysis of the argument would be that it is used to
attack Gore’s personal ethos in a way that makes amusing material for an
editorial comment, while posing as an ad hominem argument, and thereby
making the editorial seem more legitimate as political commentary. So
the interesting point is that the argument is a borderline ad hominem, one
that has all the elements of this type of argument except (arguably) one.
In this respect it is comparable to the Battalino case.

The Gore case looks like a pretty typical example of the circumstan-
tial ad hominem argument as used in political discourse. And in certain
respects it is. The allegation of pragmatic inconsistency is there, and use is


194 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


made of it to mounta personal attack on the character of a politician. But
some factors of the context of dialogue in which the argument was used
need to be observed. It is not the more typical kind of case of one politi-
cian attacking the policy or argument of another in a political debate, for
example, with a negative ad in an election campaign, of the kind studied
by Pfau and Burgoon (198Q). Instead, the argument in this case is an
ironic commentary on an editorial page of a major national news maga-
zine by an anonymous author. The purpose is somewhat unclear. It may
be more of an attempt to stir up controversy or to amuse readers who are
cynical about politicians, than it is an attempt to attack Gore’s political
position or some specific argument he has advanced. But it very definitely
has a strong ad hominem component. It has been argued above that this
case should, on balance, be classified as an instance of a circumstantial
ad hominem argument.

Looking at the Battalino case as a media message, it is hard to judge
what real impact it had on the impeachment proceedings or on the tele-
vision audience that it also reached. There appeared to be no further
discussion of this particular argument in the subsequent proceedings of
the impeachment trial. Searching through Newspaper Abstracts on March
1, 1999, I could not find any further media commentary on the case.
However, there was media commentary before the impeachment trial on
how the Battalino case had originally come to public attention. Clinton’s
lawyers had complained that nobody had ever been criminally investi-
gated for perjury in a civil case about sexual conduct. Monica Lewinsky’s
lawyer had said on NBC Today in February 1998, “I challenge you or any
of the pundits on the air to find me a case of civil perjury that has been
pursued criminally at the federal level in the last 100 years.” A search
for legal cases then turned up the Battalino case, among others. So by
February 1999 when the impeachment trial was under way, the Battalino
case was known to the public. Rogan simply took advantage of it as the
basis for one of the arguments he used in the trial.

Looking at the argument dialectically, in the context of the impeach-
ment proceedings, what thrust did it appear to have in the debate? From
a narrow perspective, its thrust seems to be against leniency. If the Clin-
ton justice system was not lenient in the Battalino case, then on the basis
of argument from commitment, that would seem to be a good reason to
be against leniency in this case.

But maybe the argument had a much broader import. The Clin-
ton position, on the whole, is open to circumstantial ad hominem
attack, because of the strong stand taken in the past by the Clinton


Evaluating Arguments Rhetorically and Dialectically 195


administration on a case of a sexual relationship between someone in
a position of power and someone in a position of dependency on that
power. They have tended, in general, to support the strong prosecution
of such cases. Citing the Battalino case not only reminds us of that com-
mitment, but also excludes possible ways out by stressing the similarity
between the Battalino and the Lewinsky cases. Both were consensual,
both took place in a government workplace, and both involved a subordi-
nate relationship in the hierarchy. By citing the Battalino case, therefore,
Rogan mounted quite a broad sort of attack on the whole Clinton admin-
istration, as well as on the president in particular. Rogan argued that,
on fundamental principles, the Clinton administration had always been
strongly in favor of prosecuting such cases. But then, when it affected one
of their own, they turned around and used arguments like the principle
of proportionality to argue against prosecuting the case strongly. This
argument, then, is a form of circumstantial ad hominem argument that
has a broad sweep. It attacked Clinton, his administration, and even the
Democratic party as a whole, arguing that they don’t follow their own
principles. This was an attack on alleged hypocrisy that was potentially
very powerful, not only in the impeachment trial, but as addressed to
public opinion by way of television.

One way to evaluate Rogan’s argument is as an argument from analogy
between the situation of Battalino and that of Clinton. The comparison
between the two cases holds up persuasively in many relevant respects, as
argued by Rogan. You could counter this argument by pointing out other
relevant respects in which the two are dissimilar. For example, Battalino
was a physician and Arthur was a patient in her care, whereas Clinton
was president and Monica Lewinsky was an intern in his office. Using
this kind of comparison, you could argue that Rogan’s argument from
commitment is weak. So just because the Clinton administration was not
in favor of leniency in the Battalino case, it does not follow (according to
this way of evaluating the argument) that they have to be against leniency
in the present case. This is one way to evaluate the argument, but it
misses the point, in certain important respects, because its real thrust
is not just an argument from commitment. The real thrust is found in
Rogan’s closing remark, “That’s how the Clinton administration defines
proportionality and punishment.” The thrust of the argument is that the
Clinton administration’s real view of proportionality and punishment in
a case of perjury to conceal an improper sexual relationship is revealed
or defined by its actions in the Battalino case. Contrasting their actions in
that case with their argument for proportionality and leniency in this case


196 Ad Hominem Arguments in Political Discourse


suggests that their argument is not sincerely meant. What is suggested is
that they do not really believe or support his argument themselves and
that they use it not because they really accept it, but only because it
supports their interests.

So the real thrust of Rogan’s argument is missed if it is just seen as an
argument from analogy or an argument from commitment. It is both,
but its strongest impact is as a circumstantial ad hominem argument that is
used to suggest that the supporters of the argument do not themselves sin-
cerely believe it, as is revealed by their own actions. Assuming that Rogan
has gotten the details of the Battalino case right, this circumstantial ad
hominem argument is a reasonable one. Its weak points have already been
noted. The weakest part of the ad hominem argument is that “the Clinton
administration” is treated as a single stable group that is the arguer in
both cases. But on the whole, as a circumstantial ad hominem argument,
Rogan’s argument is a reasonably good one. It is weak in certain respects,
but it is not one that should be judged fallacious.

From a dialectical and rhetorical perspective, comparing the two cases
is interesting. In the Battalino case, there was an actual dialogue between
the two leading participants. In the Gore case, there was little real dia-
logue. Although Gore’s reply to the argument was printed, the way it
was done made his case look even worse. The Gore case was typical of
what we so often see in argumentation in political and commercial ads.
The argument is a short message in the print or broadcast media with
some visual material. What is visible is mainly the proponent’s side of
the argument in the form of an ad hominem or other type of argument,
such as an appeal to fear or pity. The problem, as noted in chapter 2,
is that we don’t see the dialogue because we see little evidence of the
respondent’s argument or point of view. The ad seems to be a one-shot
message sent out by the proponent or presenter to the mass audience.
Where is the dialogue? But if you compare the Battalino and Gore cases,
it is evident that there is the same kind of multi-agent dialogue implicit
in the Gore case that was more visible in the Battalino case. In both cases,
the same type of circumstantial ad hominem was used. The structural and
dialectical similarities are highly evident, once both cases have been ana-
lyzed. Thus these cases bring out very well how even the short political
or commercial ad of the kind so typically used in rhetorical persuasion
attempts has a multi-agent dialectical structure. The key is to be found
in the proponent’s argument strategy. The strategy builds on the antici-
pated reaction of the mass audience, and the argument is directed to this
reaction. Such an argument is thus devised as a response to anticipated


Evaluating Arguments Rhetorically and Dialectically 197


critical questioning by a respondent. Or at least an argument in an ad
can be analyzed in this dialectical fashion. And when it is so analyzed, a
lot of interesting features come out. One can get a much better idea of
how the rhetorical argumentation works as a persuasion attempt. One
can also get a good idea of how to react to such an argument or counter
it in a reply. Of course, each case is unique. But in this chapter it has
been shown how the ad hominem argument has a distinctive dialectical
structure.


Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


In the kinds of media arguments examined so far, including those clas-
sified as appeals to fear and pity and as ad hominem arguments, the argu-
ment is partly based on and directed to popular opinion. In the type
of argument called argumentum ad populum, as defined in chapter 3, the
proponent tries to get the respondent to accept an opinion or perform
an action because that opinion is accepted by the popular majority. Of
course, much of what we do we learn by watching or following others.
And there is a powerful urge not to be singled out or left out of the
group. Thus, as already shown in the analysis of propaganda in chapter
3, this form of argument can psychologically be very powerful. But from
an evidential point of view, it would appear to be extremely weak. For just
because a large number of people accept some proposition, it does not
follow that the proposition is true. We have all long been taught that such
an inference is erroneous. We are all aware that science has proved many
popularly accepted beliefs to be false. How then should one evaluate
an appeal to popular opinion? Could there be some legitimate grounds
for accepting such an argument in some instances, or is the commonly
accepted view in logic right that this type of argument is fallacious?
There is a tendency to swing to extremes in evaluating arguments
based on appeal to popular opinion. As shown in chapter 3, traditional
logic textbooks have portrayed the argumentum ad populumas a fallacy. Yet
many arguments used in media ads are based on appeal to public opin-
ion as a means of marketing commercial products. If these arguments are
patently unreasonable, why do they appear to work so well as persuasive
strategies? This question poses a number of fundamental puzzles about
arguments used in mass media ads and appeals. To study the question


198


Influencing the Mass Audience 199


through actual examples, three cases of commercial ads are featured in
this chapter as focal points of the investigation. One part of the problem
is to identify the argumentation schemes (forms of argument) for the
various species of ad populum arguments involved. Another part of the
structure turns out to be dialectical, referring to the conversational con-
text in which a pair of speech partners reason together in a collaborative
goal-directed exchange. When both structures have been integrated, an
answer to the question of how to evaluate these arguments can be given.
The answer is furnished by building an objective structure for evaluat-
ing these arguments that does not swing, without any objective basis for
judging cases, to the one extreme or the other.

In this chapter a deeper insight into media arguments based on pop-
ular opinion is attained by studying the dialectical nature of these argu-
ments, something not well appreciated in the past and only now being
uncovered in the work of Freeman on argumentation containing pre-
sumptions and commonly accepted premises. According to Freeman
(2005, p. 311), there should be a presumption for common knowledge
for acceptance of a statement that is in accord with what is accepted as
normal, usual, or customary in public discourse. Use of such presump-
tions as premises in an argument based on common knowledge should be
acceptable dialectically under the appropriate dialectical and rhetorical
constraints, even though such arguments are fallible and can be fallacious
in some instances. The rationale behind the careful and balanced use of
such premises in argumentation, it will be argued in this chapter, lies in
the concession of them tentatively for purposes of rational persuasion
and deliberation.


1. Influencing the Mass Audience


Many of the appeal to pity and appeal to fear arguments studied in
chapter 4, as well as the ad hominem arguments studied in chapter 5, are
obviously attempts to influence a mass audience using rhetorical argu-
mentation. In the Nayirah case, for example, the argument was basically
a public relations strategy designed to win public sympathy for a cause.
The use of fear appeal arguments to try to get teenagers to stop smoking
or to engage in “safe sex” were clearly rhetorical strategies designed to
influence a particular target audience. Those who design such ads are
well aware that they are trying to reach a well-defined mass audience. The
targeting to a specific mass audience is a vital part of the strategy of the ad.
If you think of it, this aspect of such an argument is dialectically peculiar.


200 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


The intended respondent of the argument is not a single person but a
group of identifiable respondents who may be expected to have partic-
ular opinions about lots of things, including the issue that is the subject
of the ad. What these ads have in common is their being attempts to
influence public opinion, or what might be called popular opinion. An
ad might be targeted to a specific demographic group, or it might be just
an attempt to influence public opinion generally, to make the general
climate of opinion more accepting of a particular viewpoint or policy. In
some of the arguments we have examined, the directing of the argument
toward influencing public opinion is obvious. In other cases, this aspect
of it is concealed beneath appearances. The argument may look on the
surface as if it was directed to a single respondent, but beneath the sur-
face it may also be directed to a wider audience. Such observations led us
to the respondent-to-dialogue (RTD) problem in chapter 4. In this chap-
ter we examine arguments that in many instances are aimed to influence
popular opinion, but are also based on premises that appeal to popular
opinion.

In many of the cases examined so far there has been a split respondent
effect. From one point of view the argument appears to be directed to a
particular respondent. The message is directed toward the commitments
of a particular respondent. From this point of view, the argument can be
analyzed by dialectical methods. For example, in the Gore case studied
in chapter 5, the argument appears to be directed toward Al Gore as
respondent. And the argument was based on what were taken to be the
commitments of Gore expressed in his speech. However, it is also possi-
ble to look at such an argument from a different point of view. From a
rhetorical point of view, the argument is directed toward public opinion.
In the Gore case, the article was printed in Time as a kind of editorial
comment. The author of the article was not (of course) actually arguing
with Al Gore. He was writing a kind of ironic comment on Gore’s speech.
From this rhetorical point of view it is possible to see the argument as an
attempt to influence public opinion. Of course we all know that such an
article is highly political in nature. It’s not just an abstract critical discus-
sion about the issue. It’s really an ad hominemattack designed to influence
a mass readership in a political context. The split respondent effect rep-
resents this duality in the argument. On the one hand, dialectically, the
argument appears to be directed toward a specific respondent. On the
other hand, rhetorically, there is a strategy to influence public opinion.
Examined from a second point of view, the argument is a mass influence
attempt. Its real thrust is that it interacts politically with the readers of


Influencing the Mass Audience 201


Time. It assumes that these readers are already somewhat familiar with Al
Gore as a political figure and that they have certain opinions about the
tobacco issue.

The existence of the split respondent effect throws light on the RTD
problem explained in chapter 4. It shows that arguments used in the
mass media, although they are based on a kind of dialectical format, are
rarely as simple as they may appear when looked at from a dialectical
point of view. For mixed with that dialectical point of view, there is also a
rhetorical point of view. From the rhetorical point of view, the argument
is aimed at public opinion. It is also somehow based on public opinion.
There seems to be a feedback process at work. The argument assumes
that the audience will be somewhat informed about an issue and that they
will already have some opinions about it. On the other hand, while the
argument uses this input as premises, it also has a conclusion that is
directed toward the public audience.

The aiming of any argument at a mass audience raises many questions
about appeal to popular opinion as a type of argument. Evidently, the
proponent of the argument has to try to enter into the thinking of the
mass audience to judge what its views are and how the audience is likely
to think about a particular issue. How can this act of empathy be carried
out? In the case of a single respondent, as we have seen, the proponent
of an argument in a persuasion dialogue must base his argument on
the commitments of the respondent, or what he takes to be these com-
mitments. This act of empathy, as noted in chapter 1, seems to involve
something like a skill of examining how the respondent has argued in
the past to try to judge where he stands on a certain issue now. But how is
a comparable act of judgment to be carried out in a case of mass media
argumentation? Presumably, the proponent must have some knowledge
of where the public stands on a certain issue at some point in time, as a
situation has developed. Presumably, the proponent must also be able to
judge how the public would be likely to react to or to draw conclusions
from new developments that are reported in the mass media news. This
“news” in the form of incoming information is always changing.

What is involved in such mass media influence attempts is a feed-
back effect. The proponent bases his argument on what he takes popular
opinion to be at any given point. Then as developments change and new
information comes in, the proponent must also try to get some notion
of how public opinion has changed on the issue. There are all kinds
of ways of gathering this information. Some are sophisticated methods,
such as using public opinion polls or focus groups. Others are simpler,


202 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


such as reading newspaper reports or editorials that convey some sense
of the public mood or feeling about an issue. As this information comes
in, the proponent will need to change his argument to take the latest
developments into account. There is a parallel with the normal case of
a two-person persuasion dialogue. In this type of case, the proponent
will change his argumentation as he becomes more aware of how the
respondent is reacting in the dialogue. In the mass media case where the
argument is directed to popular opinion, the proponent will similarly
have to update and refashion his argumentation as the public reactions
to it become evident. Thus some aspects of the way persuasion dialogue
works dialectically in the normal kind of case will transfer over to cases
of mass media arguments directed to public opinion. But quite a bit will
change, because of the special nature of the mass audience. The mass
audience may be thought to have commitments, but they are not com-
mitments in the same sense as the commitments of a single respondent
with whom one is engaged in dialogue. The mass audience has what is
called public opinion or popular opinion. Appeal to popular opinion is
a special form of argument in its own right. It needs to be seen as having
special characteristics that make it unique as a type of argument. As I will
show, it has a distinctive argumentation scheme, or at least there are a
group of argumentation schemes that collectively represent its form as
an argument.


2. Appeal to Popular Opinion as an Argument


The argumentum ad populum, or appeal to popular opinion, can be roughly
expressed (subject to refinements below) as having the form, “Everybody
accepts proposition A, therefore A must be true.” We tend to be quite
suspicious of such arguments, saying, “Just because everyone believes it
doesn’t mean it’s right.” In traditional logic, the argumentum ad populum
is classified as a fallacy. But many arguments in both public and private
spheres of discourse are based on premises that express what is supposedly
public opinion (Childs 1965; Herbst 1993). Such arguments are often
assumed to be reasonable, or at least to have some standing, especially
in a democratic political system (Freeman 2005). As Hamblin (1970,
p- 44) noted, “it is not clear from the name (argumentum ad populum) that
it does not consist of the purest valid reasoning, and only an anti-democrat
could unhesitatingly assume the contrary.” Thus there is ambivalence
about appeal to popular opinion as a form of argument. Although our
logic books condemn it as fallacious, common examples of its use seem


Appeal to Popular Opinion as an Argument 203


to indicate that it can often be reasonable, especially in certain contexts,
such as political argumentation. According to the model of appeal to
popular opinion presented in my book (Walton 1999 a), this form of argu-
ment should be evaluated by using argumentation schemes that apply to
particular cases.

In mass media rhetorical arguments of the kind so commonly used in
democratic politics, public opinion is probably the most important factor
in the success of any argument. In a free market economy, rhetorical
argumentation in mass media ads to sell products must, of necessity, be
based on an appeal to popular opinion. If any such argument misreads
public opinion at any given point in time, it is quite likely to be a failure.
Of course, the conventional wisdom is that empirical techniques, such as
public opinion polling, can be used to determine what public opinion is
on an issue, at any given time. Although polls can be extremely useful,
especially in election campaigns, the poll by itself will not necessarily tell
a strategist how to craft a successful appeal to popular opinion. Chapter 7
takes up the question of drawing conclusions from public opinion polls.
Prior to approaching the question of polling as a method of judging
public opinion, it will be useful to examine some examples of mass media
arguments based on appeal to popular opinion as a form of argument.

The purpose of this chapter is to extend my analysis (Walton 1999a)
by applying it to cases of appeal to popular opinion of the kind found in
media argumentation, especially the kind used in commercial advertise-
ments of various kinds found in the media. Appeals to popular opinion
are frequently the argumentative basis of ads built on a claim that a prod-
uct is “number one” or is the best selling or most widely used product.
Uses of appeal to popular opinion in such ads not only are very common
in the media, but also are often featured as examples of fallacious argu-
ments in the logic textbooks and critical thinking manuals. When you
scan some of the most widely used logic textbooks treating the subject
of informal fallacies, you don’t have to go far to detect ambivalence. As
noted in chapter 3, Hurley (2000, p. 124) classifies the argumentum ad
populum as an informal fallacy, and cites examples like the following one:
“Of course you want to buy Zest toothpaste. Why, 90 percent of America
brushes with Zest.” But then, if you look on the back cover of Hurley’s
textbook, you see an ad beginning with the following sentence: “The
clearest and most accessible logic text available today, Hurley’s Concise
Introduction to Logic is used by more students and instructors than any
other throughout North America.” What is remarkably evident here is
this very ambivalence. In this chapter, a way of dealing with the basis


204 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


of this ambivalence is sought. It is argued that once its basis is analyzed
and clarified, arguments that appeal to popular opinion as used in com-
mercial ads can be evaluated in an objective way. It will be shown how
such arguments can vary from strong to weak to fallacious, depending on
various logical and contextual factors.


3. Cases in Point


Many common cases of arguments used in commercial ads fit into the
ad populum category. For example, consider the following advertisement
for Microsoft Office 97 Pro, found in the Wall Street Journal (January 15,
1999, p. Bg). This case could be called the Microsoft Office case.


Case 6.1
The world’s most popular office suite. . .
Microsoft Office 97 Pro with Bookshelf Basics
Get FREE Internet access through MSN for a full month!
Special Price for WSJ readers!
Limit of 5 per order!


This ad gives the reader several reasons to buy Microsoft Office 97 Pro.
One of these reasons is that it is said to be the world’s most popular office
suite. But why is that a reason to buy it? First, the inference is suggested
that ifso many people have boughtit, it must be a good product. But what
backing supports this inference? Just the fact that so many have bought
it doesn’t make it good. After all, these people could be mistaken. But
there is a further consideration. If all these people have bought it, and
are using it, presumably those who are using it must have found it to be
good, and recommended it to other people. Behind the brute fact of all
these people using the product is the assumption that if it is now the most
popular office suite, it got that way because more and more people who
used it (presumably) found it good, and that led to more and more people
using it. At least that is the usual way these things tend to work. So, in
other words, backing up the sheer appeal to popularity is the assumption
that so many are continuing to use the product because it is thought to be
avery good product, perhaps even the best product available. In this case,
then, we can see that while the appeal to popular opinion argument may
not carry much weight in its own right, it is bolstered by other supporting
argumentation that is not explicitly stated but is there in the background.


Cases in Point 205


Another example — it could be called the rave pants case — shows how
the ad populum argument is the basis of advertising and sales strategy in
the marketing of products.


Case 6.2

According to a report in the Wall Street Journal (Kravetz 1999,
p- B1), jeans with superwide legs that drag on the ground - called
“rave pants” — were a hot fad with teenagers in 1998. But in 1999,
the trend changed rapidly when teenagers moved to slimmer, non-
denim pants. Clothing manufacturers were left with warehouses
full of wide-leg denim inventory. Their marketing strategy is to try
to judge what is popular, and then manufacture a lot of that popu-
lar product. But sometimes they are wrong. And inevitably, because
trends among teenagers may change very fast, even a guess that was
right may become wrong at some point. According to one man-
ufacturer (Kravetz 1999, p. B10), the strategy is not to leave “too
much hanging on one style’s popularity” and to try to make a cer-
tain number of right marketing choices, even though not all styles
will be “winners.”


Media marketing is a process of intelligent guessing. In such cases, cor-
porations are drawing inferences from premises about popular opinion.
But the form of the argument is not the same as that of the pop scheme.’
They are not arguing that something is a good course of action because
it is accepted or adopted by a lot of people. They are not saying that the
popular practice in question is a good thing or a bad thing. They are draw-
ing a conclusion about how to act based on popular opinion, or popular
tastes, preferences, or actions — like buying a lot of wide-leg jeans. Thus
they are using argumentation based on popular opinion. But this appears
to be different from the kind of argumentation represented by the pop
scheme. The problem is, then, that this kind of case appears to be on the
borderline with respect to the usual form displayed by appeal to popular
opinion arguments. The question is whether this marketing strategy type
of argumentation is a species of appeal to popular opinion argument or
not. And if not, the question is how the two types of argumentare related.

One can easily see that the rave pants case is similar, in certain respects,
to the Microsoft Office case. For example, the producers of rave pants


* The usual form attributed to appeal to popular opinion arguments, called “the pop
scheme” is “Everybody believes proposition A, therefore A is true.”


206 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


may have used the argument in their 1998 ads that rave pants are the
most popular among teenagers who are supposedly the leaders regarding
what’s trendy. Such an advertising strategy would be comparable to the ad
used by Microsoft saying that their software is “the world’s most popular
office suite.” Both marketing strategies are based on an appeal to popular
opinion, although the one appeal is different from the other — the latter
being more of an appeal to fashion or trendiness than the former.

Commercial ads often sell a product by claiming that this product
is “number one,” or the best-selling product in the market. The prob-
lem is that two competing products in the same market may claim to be
“number one.” Bayer aspirin is “number one,” but so is Tylenol. Nobody is
“number two.” How can it be possible that two competing products in the
same market are both “number one”? According to a consumer’s report
(“The Microscope” 2000, p. 2), the situation is like the Grammy awards.
It depends on what category you are in. The Benylin ad reads: “Thank
you for making BENYLIN Children’s Cough Syrup the #1 pharmacist rec-
ommended brand in the Children’s Cough Medication Category.” The
Dimetapp ad reads: “Kids everywhere thank you from the bottom of their
taste buds. We thank you too for making us number one in the children’s
cold remedy category.” It may not be clear to consumers what the dif-
ference is between these two categories. Both cold remedies sound like
“number one.” But before a pharmacist recommends any cold remedy,
she would probably ask the consumer specific questions, and recommend
a different product for a different category of ailment, like a sore throat
or a cough. Thus both products could be “number one,” or the most
recommended product, each in a different category. The fallacy in such
a case is one of lack of proper qualifications. The consumer is likely to be
confused and draw the wrong conclusion. Seeing the expression “num-
ber one” in the ad, the conclusion may be drawn that the product is
the most popular (best selling) cold remedy. But that conclusion may be
erroneous.

In the first two cases, the argumentum ad populum seems to have a basis
as a reasonable argument, when placed in context. If you are advertising
a product, then one way to do it is to argue that your product is “number
one.” If a lot of people are using the product, then that finding does not
seem to be a bad reason for recommending it. Of course, the premise
could be false. The ad could simply be lying. But if it is not, then why
shouldn’t you be allowed to use the popularity of the product as the
basis of an argumentum ad populum in an ad? The third case, in contrast,
clearly does involve some sort of fallacy or tricky deceptive tactic used to


The Form of the Argument 207


confuse the consumer. What then is the difference between the appar-
ently reasonable cases (or ones that seem reasonable, even though there
can be doubts and reservations about exactly how to analyze them), and
the apparently fallacious cases?


4. The Form of the Argument


What really is the logical basis of arguments based on appeal to popular
opinion as used in commercial ads? Why is it that in judging such argu-
ments we tend to swing to extremes, either just accepting them without
thinking there are further questions to be asked or treating them with
suspicion as superficial or even fallacious? To answer these questions, the
form of the argumentum ad populum needs to be more carefully identified.
Then it needs to be shown how to evaluate arguments of this form in a
specific context like that of commercial advertising. Both problems can
be solved by a dialectical method of analysis. What is required is a dialec-
tical structure that can accommodate this form of argumentation, as well
as the appropriate responses to its use in specific cases.

The analysis presented in this inquiry is based on the kind of structure
of argumentation now called dialectical (Rescher 1977; van Eemeren and
Grootendorst 1984, 1987, 1992, 1995, Blair and Johnson 1987; Walton
1998b, 1999a; Freeman 2005). This term refers to a structure in which
two speech partners reason together in a goal-directed collaborative con-
versational exchange (Grice 1975). The two parties take turns making
contributions to a goal-directed conversation (Walton 1998b) that has
rules determining how it is appropriate to reply to each type of move
made by the preceding speaker (Hamblin 1971). Each argument in a
given case is evaluated, not only as having a specific form, but also with
respect to how the argument was used as a contribution to the type of
dialogue. The participants have to agree at the outset on what type of
dialogue they are supposed to be taking part in. Once this agreement
has been reached, the argument can be evaluated as correct or incorrect
on the basis of whether it contributes to moving the dialogue forward or
not.

Part of the problem with analyzing and evaluating arguments based on
popular opinion is that they don’t fit the usual structures of formal logic.
They don’t seem to be deductive, and although they are often based on
polling techniques that use statistical methodology, they don’t seem to
be any straightforward kind of inductive argument either. They fall more
into a third category of argument now called abductive, or inference to


208 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


the best explanation, a type of argument that works by presumption but
that defaults in some cases. Part of the problem, then, is to identify the
logical form of arguments based on public opinion.

Part of the problem is also to define this type of argument as a class
of arguments that has various subspecies and variants. Appeal to pop-
ular opinion seems to be a subclass of arguments based on generally
accepted opinions, which could include appeals to generally accepted
scientific opinions as well as to public opinions of the kind estimated by
polls. Polling itselfis another whole area of interest and controversy within
argumentation theory. Polls look precise, but they are based on shifting
sands of wording that often contains suggestions and implicatures that are
hard to quantify and that change over time, or with different audiences
(Yankelovich 1991; Crossen 1994). Much in polling also depends on the
exact structure of the question — whether it is an open or closed question,
and so forth (Campbell 1974; Moore 1992). Social scientists have even
measured how subtle variances in the wording of the question in a poll
can have highly significant outcomes on the response gotten when the
poll is run to a respondent group (Schuman and Presser 1981).

Another problem is that the term “popular opinion” is equated with
or confused with the term “public opinion.” But the latter term is highly
ambiguous and is used in different fields to mean different things (Herbst
1993). Sometimes this term is used to refer more strictly to the outcome
of a poll. Other times it has more of an ethical meaning, suggesting that if
something is the generally accepted thing to do, it represents a standard
of what you should do, or otherwise you are somehow in the wrong. The
term “popular opinion,” widely used in logic textbooks, is more negative,
suggesting a certain trendiness that might be superficial (Walton 1999a),
automatically indicating an argument that is fallacious.

The form of the argument most commonly cited by the logic textbooks
under the heading of appeal to popular opinion bases the conclusion that
a proposition is true on universal acceptance of that proposition. This
form of argument is really one special type of appeal to popular opinion
argument, which is called in my book (iggga) the “pop scheme.”


Pop Scheme
Everybody believes proposition A.
Therefore A is true.


Variants on the pop scheme have even been identified by the textbooks.
Nolt (1984, p. 289) distinguished between a “factual version” and a “pre-
scriptive version,” where A is a proposition and x is an action.


The Form of the Argument 209


Factual Version
Believing that A is popular.
Therefore A is true.


Prescriptive Version
Doing x is popular.
Therefore x is permissible (or should be done).


All three forms of argument are clearly of the abductive and defeasible
type. Just because everybody believes A to be true, it doesn’t necessarily
(or perhaps even probably) follow that A is true. The proposition A might
be false even though the premise is true and the argument has the above
structure. Or just because x is popular, it doesn’t necessarily follow that x
should be done. Such arguments are abductive because they single out
one proposition or action by inference to a preferred explanation of a
situation, but do not categorically rule out other competing explanations
beyond all doubt. Because the pop scheme type of argument is abductive
in nature and is subject to defeat in some cases, it might be better to
rephrase its logical form in terms of acceptance rather than truth, as
follows.


Abductive Pop Scheme
Everybody accepts A.
Therefore A is acceptable tentatively (but subject to default).


This version of the argument begins to look fairly reasonable, depending
on what theory of abductive inference might be used to give it a structure.
But even so, the argument looks pretty weak.

Case studies of the appeal to popular opinion type of argumentation
(Walton 19994) have shown that in most cases where this type of argument
is used, it is not in the simple form outlined above. In many cases, for
example, it has the following form.


Group Pop Scheme
Everybody in group Gaccepts proposition A.
Therefore A is true (or acceptable).


Much here depends on which group is referred to. For example, if the
group referred to is a group of scientific experts in a domain of knowl-
edge into which proposition A falls, the argument may be quite strong.
This observation leads to a general hypothesis called the bolster thesis:
appeals to popular opinion, while fairly weak on their own, are frequently


210 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


strengthened by combining them with another supportive form of argu-
ment, like an appeal to expert opinion.

Some cases are notas strong as those bolstered with an appeal to expert
opinion, but not as weak as an appeal to popular opinion that stands on
its own. For example, cases of the following form of argument are rela-
tively common: “All civilized countries view torture as an unacceptable
method of interrogation. Therefore torture is an unacceptable method
of interrogation.” This argument is more than just an unbolstered appeal
to popular opinion, but is quite as strong as an appeal to expert opin-
ion. Presumably, the basis of it is that people in these countries have
themselves deliberated about torture, and their consensus is based on
the outcomes of this intelligent deliberation.

An important aspect of the argumentation used in the commercial
ads cited in the cold remedy case is the combination of appeal to pop-
ular opinion with appeal to expert opinion. Physicians and pharmacists
have expertise in health care products, such as cold remedies. Thus, for
example, if it is claimed in an ad that most doctors recommend this prod-
uct, the argument used is appeal to expert opinion. Appeal to popular
opinion is often combined with, and supported by, appeal to expert opin-
ion. In my 1999 book (p. 2293), the bolster thesis was put forward. Appeal
to popular opinion is generally a weak type of argument that gets most
of its plausibility from being bolstered up through support from other
arguments it is combined with in practice. Ifa cold remedy, for example,
is said to be “number one,” this expression may be taken to mean that
it is the most popular product with consumers. By itself, this argument
only gives a consumer a weak, but possibly persuasive reason for buying
this product. If most people use the product, then that may be some
indication that the product is well established and that many people find
it satisfactory. Of course, these people could be wrong. They could just
be buying it because of brand recognition, or even because the ads for
it have been persuasive. But if the expression “number one” is taken to
indicate that the product is the one most recommended by experts, such
as physicians, that aspect would bolster up the reasons that a consumer
might have for selecting that product over competing ones.

The Microsoft Office case seems to fit the prescriptive version of the
pop scheme best, rather than the factual version. The buying and using
of Microsoft Office is cited as the reason why you (the reader of the ad)
should buy Microsoft Office. But notice that the case does not quite fit
the prescriptive version. What the ad is presumably trying to do is simply
to get action — to get readers to buy the product. This appeal is different


Fallacious Appeals to Popular Opinion 211


from arguing to the conclusion that action x is permissible or should be
done. The ad is perhaps arguing that the reader should (in some sense)
buy Microsoft Office, but not in the sense that buying Microsoft Office
is permissible. What is the ad really arguing in a case like this? This is a
perplexing question that has never really been resolved. Further analysis
below throws some light on it.


5. Fallacious Appeals to Popular Opinion


Traditional logic textbooks have worried about the potentially fallacious
exploitation of arguments that appeal to popular opinion on various
grounds. So-called mob appeal rhetoric can be exploited by a skilled
speaker to whip up the emotions of a mass audience to win consent for a
cause or a proposed course of action (Engel 1976). Such an appeal might
be extremely effective in persuading the audience rhetorically even if it
presents little or no real evidence to support the conclusion advocated,
or even if it is one-sided, biased, and propagandistic. An appeal to emo-
tion can be rhetorically strong even if it is logically very weak, in the
sense of presenting relevant evidence that supports the conclusion that
is supposed to be proved. It is presumably for this reason that appeals to
emotion have been treated with distrust and skepticism in logic.
Another reason for distrusting appeals to popular opinion as argu-
ments is that popular opinion seems so often to favor the trendy and
superficial. What’s “in” seems to exert powerful pressures to conform.
Often when something is currently accepted as the new way to do things,
it can be hard to be against it. Going against what is currently accepted as
the “politically correct” mode of conduct may be found offensive. What is
important about public opinion, or popular opinion, in argumentation
is that if you can appear to have it on your side, a presumption in favor
of your side is lodged in place. And it may be hard for the other side to
dislodge it. In North America, and probably in other cultural settings as
well, having public opinion on your side performs an important legiti-
mating function in argumentation. It doesn’t just mean that most agree
with your view. It also means that your view is the right one, because it is
the accepted one right now. How is this kind of argumentation, in turn,
legitimated or justified? The idea seems to be justified on the basis of an
assumption that could be called “progress.” It is the idea that morality
is constantly improving and becoming more enlightened. What appears
to follow from this assumption is that the latest moral viewpoint must
be more enlightened than any previous one. If you do not follow the


212 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


dictates of this viewpoint, negative language may be used to describe
your conduct or viewpoint, like “racist” or “sexist.”

An example would be attitudes about war, the military, and self-
defense. During the Vietnam era, any kind of military action was pop-
ularly held to be very bad. It was identified with “violence” and seen as an
unnecessary event caused by the military-industrial complex for its own
profit and advancement. Probably, the same view was representative of
popular opinion between the two world wars. During these periods, in
any argument, the premise that military engagement of any sort is bad
and unnecessary was easy to accept and hard to oppose. The assumption
appeared to be that now that “peace” and “non-violence” were recognized
to be such important values, anyone could see how barbaric and uncivi-
lized past generations had been when they went to war. Anyone who tried
to go against this popular opinion by arguing that there have been just
wars that were necessary to fight, for a good purpose, would find this a
very hard line of argumentation to make headway with. Indeed, anyone
who tried to argue along such lines would quite likely be demonized as a
bad person and labeled with a pejorative term. In the public opinion cli-
mate of this time, any argument of such a person could be easily dismissed
as “wrong-headed” or even uncivilized.

The thing to notice about this kind of public opinion is that it changes
with changed circumstances, and with how these circumstances are per-
ceived. For example, look at some old newspapers and magazine articles
written during World War II or World War I. The language makes clear
that the enemy is demonized, even dehumanized, and that our own sol-
diers are heroes. The assumption is that the war is necessary and that
all steps must be taken to support those engaged in fighting it. It is
very difficult to be a pacifist, as Bertrand Russell found. Your freedom
of speech will be highly limited. You find yourself in jail or under careful
supervision. Such a climate of opinion is not too surprising, when you
consider that lives are at stake. Any intellectual who speaks out for the
enemy cause, or appears to, will find his words exploited by that enemy
for propaganda purposes. Morale is very important in war, as Napoleon
said. Loss of morale leads to loss of life. So public opinion not only does
change, but is constantly changing. In some circumstances, it can change
very fast.

What these various grounds for doubt about arguments based on pop-
ular opinion suggest is that it is best to see such arguments as abductive
and open to critical questioning. While they can have their right uses,
they can also have their wrong uses, or abuses. In some cases, they carry


Endoxa in Greek Dialectic 213


a lot more weight than they really should, and it is good to be somewhat
suspicious about them. This viewpoint on arguments based on public
opinion fits in well with the analysis of their logical form given above. As
abductive arguments, they can be reasonable in some cases when used to
support a conclusion. But that support should not be regarded as final
and complete — as closing the issue beyond further questioning. Instead,
it should be seen as tentative and subject to challenge. It may nevertheless
carry some weight of evidence in support of a conclusion.

The best approach to evaluating arguments based on premises that
claim to express public or popular opinion is to see them in a dialogue
structure. A proponent puts forward such an argument as presump-
tively acceptable, subject to possible objections by the respondent. If the
respondent can make no relevant objection, or cannot propose appro-
priate critical questions, the argument is tentatively lodged in place in
the dialogue as acceptable. If the respondent poses an appropriate criti-
cal question, the argument defaults until the proponent can adequately
answer the question. Such arguments are best seen as dialectical, in the
sense that they need to be evaluated in a dialogue framework. The idea
of systematically criticizing arguments based on popular opinion in a dia-
logue format may come as a novelty to many people today. But it was quite
familiar to ancient Greek philosophers, such as Plato and Aristotle.


6. Endoxa in Greek Dialectic


As shown in chapter 1, Aristotle’s notion of dialectic was built around
the concept of the endoxon, or reputable opinion, accepted by the many
and the wise. What is characteristic of dialectical argument, according
to Aristotle, is that it is based on premises that are endoxa, statements
that are generally accepted, by both the many and the wise. Jonathan
Barnes (1980) translated endoxaas “reputable” statements, meaning that
they have a certain standing among both the general public and the
experts. Aristotle‘s view on this matter is very interesting, for two reasons
especially. One is that his view is quite contrary to the one that was so
widely accepted for so many years afterward. This is the view that appeal
to popular opinion is a fallacious argument. Another, as indicated in
chapter 1, is that Aristotle had done something remarkable by tying in
the appeal to popular opinion with dialectic. You could even say that
Aristotle’s doctrine of the endoxon is revolutionary in logic. It shows that
appeals to popular opinion, far from being always fallacious as arguments,
are essential to dialectic, as well as to rhetoric.


214 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


What was essential to Greek dialectic was the notion of using popular
opinion as premises in a sequence of inferences that led to contradictions
and other absurd propositions that are either problematic or known to
not be true (Evans 1977). The form of logical reasoning used is that of
reductio ad absurdum, which has the following form. First, you start with
a set of premises that act as assumptions. Then, using a chain of valid
inferences, you derive a conclusion that you know to be false. You could
know this because it is a contradiction, or for a variety of other reasons. For
example, the proposition might be so problematic or seem so absurd that
you think it could not possibly be true. But now, by deductive reasoning,
it follows that at least one of the original premises must be false. This
principle of reasoning was relied on in the Socratic elenchus, the technique
of question and answer examination used by Socrates in the Platonic
dialogues (Robinson 1962). Socrates begins by asking a respondent a
question. The answer assented to by the respondent may represent some
widely accepted popular opinion. But then, by asking a series of further
questions, Socrates shows that the original answer leads to some absurdity
or contradiction. The outcome is that the respondent is revealed not to
have been as knowledgeable as he initially appeared to be. So Greek
dialectic was based on an initial premise of popular opinion, or widely
accepted opinion. But its aim was destructive. It reduced such widely
accepted opinions to absurdity, showing them to be problematic or even
contradictory.

Nevertheless, both Plato and Aristotle felt that dialectic was a valuable
art and that it had positive, beneficial consequences (Barnes 1980). How-
ever, what exactly the purpose of dialectic was supposed to be, and what
were seen as beneficial consequences, is problematic (Devereux 1990). It
appears that the Greeks thought it was very valuable to discover the limi-
tations of what you know or think you know. They seemed to think that
knowing you do not know something is itself a valuable kind of knowl-
edge in some cases. Socrates made a great point of disclaiming that he
himself had knowledge. His wisdom, he often maintained, was that he
knew his own ignorance, unlike the experts he often questioned using
the techniques of dialectical argumentation (Kennedy 1963). Thus any
art that could show a person how and why many of the popular opinions
he uncritically accepted are open to doubt could be extremely valuable.
It may not be possible to have knowledge, at least scientifically proven
knowledge, about many of the ethical, political, and other accepted opin-
ions we have. But if we can come to understand our lack of knowledge
about such things, we may be in a much better position to deal with
them rationally. We don’t need to become complete skeptics, but a little


Public Opinion as Informed Deliberation 215


skepticism can be healthy. It can show us how to make a rational deci-
sion between two opposed opinions on a balance of evidence without
being dogmatic. Even though we realize we may be wrong and are in a
sense ignorant, we can still choose an intelligent opinion, even though
we realize it may, in the end, turn out to be wrong.

In other words, the Greeks were ambivalent about public or popular
opinion. They seemed to think it was not altogether worthless and that it
could act as a legitimate kind of premise to assume for purposes of logical
reasoning. On the other hand, it is clear that they thought it fallible, or
apt to be wrong in some cases. They even thought that, in many cases, it
could be proven to be false, although it initially appeared to have been
true. But note that even though the process of dialectic is one of refu-
tation of public opinion, the Greek view still presumed its worthiness.
For after all, why bother to take such elaborate steps to demonstrate that
public opinion is dubious or problematic, unless it seemed to be true in
the first place? In other words, by making public opinion a worthy target
of dialectical argumentation, the Greek view implied that public opinion
does have a certain standing as a viewpoint to be taken seriously. It may
not have the same standing as a proposition that has been proved scien-
tifically to be true. But it is something that can be presumed to be true for
purposes of discussion, or possibly for purposes of tentatively adopting
a policy or course of action under uncertainty. This level of acceptance
is indicated by Barnes’s use of the term “reputable” to translate endoxon.
An endoxon is a proposition that can be tentatively accepted as true in
a discussion or deliberation, as long as there is awareness that it might
be false. It has a dual aspect. It can temporarily be accepted in order
to move matters ahead, but it should also be seen as open to doubt. It
should be seen as possibly subject to legitimate criticism in the discus-
sion that follows, and therefore as something that might have to be given
up later in the discussion. The most celebrated practitioner of the criti-
cism of generally accepted opinions was, of course, Socrates, the gadfly
of Athens. He freely criticized many beliefs held dear by the public of
the time and, interestingly, paid the ultimate penalty for engaging in this
kind of philosophical activity.


7. Public Opinion as Informed Deliberation


An abductive argument is an inference to the best explanation. If the
public accepts some particular proposition as true at some given time, it
does not necessarily follow that this proposition is true. The public could
be wrong. But if the public accepts this proposition as true, we can ask


216 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


why they accept it as true. It could be that the best explanation is that the
proposition really is true. Of course, there could also be other explana-
tions. The public might have strong interests in thinking this proposition
is true, for example. Thus public opinion can provide a premise to sup-
portan abductive inference. On the other hand, such an inference should
be seen as subject to challenge and criticism. And yet it may have a cer-
tain standing as a reasonable inference. It seems it is possible to engage
in a critical kind of dialogue with a public opinion, and challenge the
thinking on which that opinion is based. This dialectical view of appeal
to popular opinion as a kind of argumentation is holistic. It suggests that
public opinion is not just an isolated proposition of the form “The pub-
lic opinion is such and such an opinion” that stands or falls on its own.
Instead, public opinion is better seen as representing a kind of thinking,
or as the outcome of that thinking, in a process of argumentation.

The pollster Daniel Yankelovich (1991) has advocated such a holistic
view of public opinion as representing a kind of train of thought. His
criticism of public opinion polling is that it represents only a snapshot of
a single instant of public thinking that is dynamic and evolves over time,
as an issue develops and more becomes known to the public about it.
Yankelovich saw public opinion as a process of deliberation, in which a
problem is posed or an issue formulated, and then various solutions to the
problem are tried out, as more and more information becomes known
to the public about the issue. Yankelovich sees this process as one of
intelligent deliberation, in which the public becomes more informed and
educated about an issue, as reporting on it and discussion of it proceeds in
the media. To really understand public opinion, according to this view,
you need to see how it evolves over time as the process of intelligent
deliberation on an issue progresses. The public can be seen as an agent,
confronting a problem. As new information is presented to the public
through the mass media, a process of deliberation is under way. Solutions
to the problem are considered and weighed.

The way of viewing public opinion proposed by Yankelovich makes
public opinion appear to be the outcome of a process of intelligent
thinking. But that outcome changes over time, as an opinion is retracted
and qualified or a new opinion is formed. What kind of reasoning is
used in this thinking, and what kind of thinking is it? If we could answer
these questions, and find out what kind of logical structure is the basis of
this thinking, it would give us a new way of evaluating appeals to public
opinion as a kind of argument that can be weak or strong. The answers
proposed here follow the typology of dialogues set out in chapter 1. The


Public Opinion as Informed Deliberation 217


kind of thinking that very often occurs can take various forms, but two are
very common. One is that of deliberation on some problem (Hitchcock
et al. 2001). The other is the persuasion dialogue, or critical discussion
of some issue in which there is a conflict of opinions (van Eemeren and
Grootendorst 1992). In deliberation, the most common thread of rea-
soning is goal-directed reasoning that seeks to find some course of action
that is a prudent way to solve a problem, as outlined in chapter 2. In the
persuasion dialogue or critical discussion, there is a conflict of opinions,
and all kinds of relevant arguments on both sides are expressed, listened
to, and weighed against each other.

Yankelovich was surely right that in many cases, public opinion arises
as important on issues where some sort of practical problem is posed
that affects a lot of people in some way and that requires action of some
sort. For example, suppose there is a huge flood one year, and many
homes and businesses are destroyed. In the aftermath, the citizens who
live in the area discuss what measures should be taken to prevent such
an event from having such bad consequences in the future. One school
of thought proposes building a huge dike around the city. Critics of this
proposal argue that building such a dike would be too expensive and
that it is dubious whether it would really be very effective anyway. Another
school of thought proposes moving the city center to a different location.
Critics of this proposal argue that the new location is almost as likely to
be flooded, that it would cost much more to rebuild in this area, and
that it would be a less convenient location for traffic and for proximity to
the river. In such a case, engineers and many other experts will be asked
to give their opinions, and these opinions will be made known to the
public. The most important form of argument in such cases is the appeal
to expert opinion, identified as an argumentation scheme in chapter 1.

What form of reasoning is used in such deliberations, and how does it
take the form of a dialogue? It is Aristotelian practical reasoning of the
form described in chapter 2. When public opinion is embedded in the
kind of dialogue called the deliberation (Hitchcock et al. 2001), the form
of reasoning used is that of practical reasoning. As shown in chapter 2, in
each case a chain of practical inferences can be identified. Matching each
practical inference is a set of five critical questions. Using the practical
reasoning model, answers can be given to the questions posed above.
Practical reasoning is goal-directed, and it moves toward a conclusion
that states an action. On this model, the public is seen as a group of
agents trying to solve some practical problem, or trying to judge how
best to proceed in a situation that requires some decision on a form of


218 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


action or inaction. Practical inferences are put forward as arguments, and
critical questions are asked about them. Hence the deliberation takes the
form of a dialogue in which arguments are put forward and then critically
questioned.

Dynamic information-based argumentation is a key feature of practical
reasoning. As new information comes in, the agent can be aware of this
incoming data, and that will change his or her reasoning. Agents need
to be seen as entities that can perceive the consequences of their actions,
and then modify their conclusions based on what they have seen. This
aspect of agent reasoning is called feedback. Through trial and error,
agents can improve their skills by seeing both the positive and negative
consequences of their actions, and modifying their output accordingly.
Thus practical reasoning is contextual. Agents, over time, receive more
and more information about what is happening in a situation, and will
be constantly modifying their conclusion — or changing their minds, you
might say — as this new information comes in. What was the right conclu-
sion in one situation gets rejected in favor of a different conclusion as the
situation changes. This input of information can be seen as a form of dia-
logue between the agent and sources of information. The agent receives
this information passively, but also needs to be constantly evaluating it,
judging how to take it into account as a basis for action.

The dialectical framework for evaluating an appeal to popular opin-
ion, or any of the types of mass media argumentation so far considered,
is more complex than might have been initially thought. There is an
embedding of a persuasion dialogue into a deliberation dialogue. The
attempt to persuade, and the strategy behind it, need to be considered
at the point that they enter into the sequence of public deliberation in a
given case. The public must be presumed to have knowledge about the
domain of the problem being considered. This knowledge must be seen
as changing as new information comes in and as the process of delibera-
tion proceeds through its various stages. But, as shown below, there are
still more questions about mass appeal ads as arguments.


8. A More Careful Basis for Evaluating Cases


Evaluating these three cases requires making an assessment of what the
context of dialogue is supposed to be in each case. It is one thing to eval-
uate an appeal to popular opinion in a critical discussion of an issue. For
example, the use of an appeal to popular opinion in an ethical discus-
sion on euthanasia could be criticized on various grounds. But it is quite


A More Careful Basis for Evaluating Cases 219


another thing to judge an appeal to popular opinion in a commercial ad
for a product like jeans, computer software packages, or cold remedies.
Clearly, it would be a mistake to hold the argumentation in a commercial
ad to the standards required in a philosophical argument. But then an
important question arises. Exactly what type of dialogue is a commercial
ad? Is the purpose of an ad to present information? Some would argue
that, but it seems a naive view. A more realistic view is that the purpose of
an ad is to get the viewers to buy the product. But what kind of dialogue is
that? What is its appropriate mode of argumentation? Is the goal to per-
suade the viewer to think that the product is good? Or is the goal simply
to get action? Is the dialogue a kind of deliberation exchange in which
the ad is designed to use the viewer’s presumed goals to get him or her
to think a particular course of action well advised? Maybe none of these
interpretations is accurate. Some ads seem designed to gain brand recog-
nition. The aim is to associate the brand with something the consumer
knows or feels warmly about.

I do not believe that any of these questions have been answered or
that the literature on fallacies has even addressed them much or consid-
ered them deeply. Until they are answered, a full and objective evaluation
of appeals to popular opinion arguments in commercial ads is not pos-
sible. But even before getting to this stage of evaluation, many more
questions about the form of appeal to popular opinion arguments need
to be addressed. Studying these questions of logical form, in relation to
the kinds of cases cited above, can prepare the way for the analysis of
commercial speech in ads.

The argument in the Microsoft Office case is an appeal to popular
opinion, but it does not appear to fit any of the argumentation schemes
cited above. The argument has the form, “Microsoft Office is the world’s
most popular office suite, therefore it is the one you should buy.” Or at
least, that is a rough first approximation to its form. As noted above, this
argument derives most of its strength from being bolstered by implicit
supporting argumentation. The assumption is that Microsoft Office is the
most popular product in its category because the people who have bought
the product have found it useful. What should be said about evaluating
this kind of argument? In the main, used in the context of a commercial
ad, the argument is reasonable. Of course, the premise that most peo-
ple are using Microsoft Office could be false. And the assumption that
people continue to use it because it is a useful product or the best in its
category could also be false. The argument could be weakly supported
or have other faults. But there appears to be no good reason to judge


220 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


the argument as fallacious. After all, it simply says that this product is
the most popular, and then leaves the consumer to draw his or her own
opinion from that assertion. Presumably, the purpose of the ad is to get
people to buy the product, or at least to give them some reason to do so.
This kind of argument comes close to fitting the prescriptive version of
the pop scheme. The premise is that buying this product is popular. The
conclusion is that the consumer should buy this product. Or, at least, the
conclusion is that the consumer has a reason for buying the product. It
is a weak reason, but one that is bolstered.

Does the “rave pants” type of case fit the form of the prescriptive
version of the pop scheme? It appears that it does not. The reason is
that the conclusion of the prescriptive version of the pop scheme is that
the action in question is permissible or should be done. But in the rave
pants case, that does not seem to be the conclusion of the inference drawn
by the clothing manufacturers when they attempt to devise a marketing
strategy. The conclusion they draw is not that buying rave pants should be
done or is permissible. It is that teenagers will probably continue buying
rave pants. Or maybe it is the conclusion that we, the manufacturers,
should increase production of these pants. The conclusion is an action,
a proposition about what is permissible or what should be done.

In my opinion, this type of case is problematic, and the problem is
not easily solved. It is on the borderline of being an argument based on
appeal to popular opinion. So you can argue one way or the other, that
it fits the scheme for this type of argument or it does not. It fits in certain
respects, but not in all. My opinion is that the argument used in the rave
pants case does not fit the pop scheme exactly. All kinds of conclusions
may be drawn from a premise that expresses popular opinion. Politicians,
for example, may take actions based on what they assume to be popular
opinion. Business organizations may take actions on the basis of what
their marketing analysts tell them about popular practices, beliefs, or
trends at any given time. That does not mean, in such cases, that those
who take the actions are making any claim about such beliefs being true or
about whether such actions should be done. Part of the problem resides
in the meaning of the term “should” in this context. Does it have ethical
connotations or does it only express the so-called prudential ought? This
inherent ambiguity is an important aspect of the problem.

If we interpret the conclusion of the prescriptive version of the pop
scheme as expressing any kind of ethical “should” or “ought,” then clearly
the rave pants case does not fit the pop scheme. But even if we can inter-
pret the conclusion of the pop scheme as representing a more narrowly


A More Careful Basis for Evaluating Cases 221


prudential “should,” it would still appear that the rave pants case does
not exactly fit the pop scheme. The reason is that in the rave pants case,
the action in the premise is not the same as the action in the conclusion.
The rave pants case has something like the following form.


Wearing (or buying) rave pants is popular.
Therefore, we should make lots of rave pants.


The conclusion here is not an ethical “should.” And the action cited in
the premise is quite different from the action cited in the conclusion.
The line of argument here appears to be complex, and to run roughly as
follows.


Wearing (or buying) rave pants is popular.

Therefore, there is a strong market for rave pants.

We can profit from this market by making more rave pants.
Therefore we ought to make more rave pants.


This argument is a sequence of practical reasoning. The third proposi-
tion in the sequence expresses a goal, namely, making profits from man-
ufacturing a type of product the company is equipped to produce. The
conclusion expresses a prudential “ought” to carry out a specific course
of action.

Once this kind of argumentation is spelled out in more detail, we
can see how, even though it is based on appeal to popular opinion (or
actions), it is different from the kind of argument represented by the
pop scheme. The question then is whether it should be classified under
the heading of appeal to popular (or perhaps public) opinion. On this
question, there is room for argument. But whatever the outcome, what
is important to recognize is that the argument in the rave pants case
does not fit what is often taken to be the form of the appeal to popular
opinion type of argument, the pop scheme. The more general lesson is
that a premise expressing popular opinion or popular action can be used
to draw all sorts of different kinds of conclusions. Not all such arguments
necessarily fit the mold of the pop scheme.

An ad populum argument can be fallacious in many ways (Walton
1999a). There is no single error or tactic of deception characteristic of
this fallacy. The basic form of the argument can be bolstered in various
ways, resulting in various related forms of argument. Each of these forms
can be exploited or abused in various ways. In the cold remedy case, one
of these argumentation tactics is revealed. The illusion of being “number
one” in a broad product category can be fostered by using questionable


222 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


polling methods, as shown in more detail in the next chapter. Such meth-
ods apply only to a more specific category, not to the wider category. For
example, the product appears to be “number one” as a cold remedy, but
in reality, the claim made is that it is the most popular product in some
special category, such as sore throat medications for children. The fallacy
here can be classified as one of neglect of qualifications (secundum quid).
Butit is used in conjunction with an appeal to popular opinion, bolstered
by the use of appeal to expert opinion. Aspects of the fallacy could be
classified in various ways. But the prominence of the use of the expression
“number one” in the ad indicates that it is a species of appeal to popular
opinion that is centrally involved. Such phenomena of crossovers and
bolstering among different argumentation schemes are common in the
fallacy world. In this case, then, even though appeal to popular opinion
is, in principle, a reasonable form of argument as used in commercial
ads, there are specific reasons why this instance of its use is fallacious.


g. Viewing the Public as an Agent


What have these ads shown us about the dialectical nature of mass media
appeals to popular opinion? When there is a split respondent effect, how
can the public audience be seen as a respondent? The answers to these
questions require a realization that the structure of dialogue in typical
mass media arguments is complex. On the one hand, the proponent
of the argument is engaged in a persuasion dialogue. He is trying to
persuade the public, or some mass audience designated as part of the
public, to change opinion on an issue or to come to accept some policy
for action. Persuasion dialogue is involved. But at the same time, the mass
audience or the public needs to be seen as a group that is engaged in
deliberation on how to solve a problem or take action on some issue. So
deliberation dialogue is involved. At the same time, the public, presum-
ably informed by the media, is changing its deliberations as the situation
develops and as more becomes known about the particulars of the prob-
lem. So information-seeking dialogue is involved. It is in fact typical of
practical reasoning in deliberation that it is based on incoming informa-
tion that the agent collects and then applies to the problem. The mass
audience or the public, informed by the mass media, can thus be seen
as an agent engaged in deliberation, but also influenced by persuasion
and by incoming information that can change the perception of the prob-
lem. Several types of dialogue are therefore involved, one type of dialogue
being embedded in the others.


Viewing the Public as an Agent 223


There can be multiple contexts of use in which appeals to popular
opinion should be evaluated, depending on the particulars of the case.
Commercial speech is not a basic type of dialogue in its own right. It
can involve different kinds of dialogue. But deliberation, as noted above,
has turned out to be one extremely important context. The best way to
judge appeals to public opinion used in the context of deliberation is,
as Yankelovich has advocated, to see the public as an agent thinking in a
way comparable to that of a single individual.* As shown by the practical
reasoning model in chapter 1, an individual called an agent is said to have
goals, and to carry out actions based on those goals. An agent is any entity
that has goals and that can autonomously carry out actions based on these
goals and on information. An agent can be a human being or a machine.
As shown in chapters 1 and 2, one agent communicates with another
agent in deliberation dialogue. Or in a case where a person deliberates
in solitary fashion, he or she may be viewed as two agents taking part in
a dialogue. First, he or she proposes a plan of action, and then he or
she plays the role of devil’s advocate by criticizing the weak point in the
plan or even attacking the plan and proposing an alternative. According
to Yankelovich, the public, or a whole group of people designated as a
“public” of voters or citizens, may be seen as thinking as an agent. In
other words, the public is presumed to have certain goals, and the public
is also taken to have certain information on a particular issue at any given
time. This information is constantly changing as a news story breaks.
Consequently, as Yankelovich pointed out, public opinion will change
over time, in accord with how the public sees the situation developing at
any given time. The model is to see the public as one big agent that is
deliberating on what to do and what to think in relation to some problem
or issue currently regarded as newsworthy. This view of the public as agent
in a deliberation dialogue shows how dialectical methods can be applied
to appeals to popular opinion.

But is viewing the public (or a mass audience) as an agent a
simplification? Surely, the public, or a mass audience, is a heterogeneous
collection of individual agents who have all kinds of different views on


® The philosophical question here is whether deliberation represents the way of thinking of
a single individual or whether deliberation is better represented by seeing two parties (or
a group) deliberating together. Current opinion in multi-agent technology is that both
views need to be represented. In the literature on argumentation theory (Walton 19992),
the group model is primary, but the single agent model can be accommodated by seeing
the agent as adopting the pro and then the contra viewpoint concerning a decision on
what to do.


224 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


any given issue. Subsets of these individuals will almost always disagree
about an issue. So, yes, viewing the mass audience as an agent is a kind of
hypothetical construct or dialectical device that will generally not match
the reality of the actual beliefs of the individuals in the group. Never-
theless, it is a useful construct for the purposes of understanding mass
media argumentation. For a mass media argument must be built on what
van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1984) called “common starting points”
in a discussion. These represent propositions that are not at issue in a
given discussion. They may not be provable, but neither party disputes
them. Thus both parties are willing to accept them, or at least not to chal-
lenge them, in order to focus on the issue that they really disagree about
and want to resolve. Thus the proponent of the successful mass media
argument is the speaker or writer who can grasp what the mass audi-
ence is plausibly thinking about the issue, given that he shares a common
understanding with them and has the same information as they possess
on what is happening in relation to current developments on the issue.
By these means, the successful mass media arguer can base his appeal to
popular opinion on what he takes to be the commitments of the mass
audience to whom he directs the argument. Of course, he can be wrong
about these commitments. But because both he and the mass audience
can be thought of as agents, both have the capability for practical rea-
soning. Both can be expected to draw similar conclusions from the same
set of facts. It is this shared capability for practical reasoning, based on
shared information about what is happening and a shared perception of
the problem to be solved, that provides the dialectical foundations of an
appeal to popular opinion.


10. Evaluating Appeal to Popular Opinion


Logic textbooks in the past have routinely denounced appeal to popular
opinion as a fallacious type of argument. From a viewpoint of someone
teaching skills of critical thinking, one can easily appreciate this nega-
tive attitude. The importance of public opinion polls tends to be over-
estimated by many who take for granted that polls are a scientific and reli-
able method of judging what public opinion is on an issue. Polls appear
to be scientifically exact, and in some ways they are. But they are biased
by nuances in question wording and structure that are not measured by
the numerical figures typically given when reporting the poll outcome
in the media (Crossen 1994). Therefore the results of a poll purport-
ing to convey public opinion on an issue should be subject to critical


Evaluating Appeal to Popular Opinion 225


questioning. Too often such polls are highly questionable. As shown in
the cold remedy case, claiming a product is “number one” may seem to
be based on a poll. But the poll may have been conducted by the com-
pany trying to sell the product. If no information is given about the real
basis of the poll, consumers have no way of evaluating whether the poll
was accurate and unbiased. If you don’t know the actual wording of the
question used, you have no basis for accepting (or criticizing) the appeal
to popular opinion based on that poll. Where there is a simple choice to
be made, and no slipperiness about the wording of the question, as tends
to be the case in U.S. presidential election polls, the polls have proved
to be accurate. But it appears to be widely taken for granted that public
opinion polls on all kinds of social issues and commercial products are
equally accurate. This faith in the accuracy of public opinion polls is now
shaken by the use of political push polls, in which the question asked is
loaded to support (or attack) a particular platform or candidate. Some
push polls even use loaded questions to attack a political opponent with
innuendo and false rumors. Looking at the wording of the actual ques-
tion used in a poll, and critically examining the language of the question,
should become a required part of judging the worth of a public opinion
poll. But in commercial ads, the bare claim that one’s product is “num-
ber one,” despite its lack of backing, may still be effective in getting the
consumer to pick one brand over another in a fast decision made in the
supermarket.

These quite legitimate reservations about polling as a method of deter-
mining public opinion will be given many more grounds in chapter 7.
But there is also an opposite tendency, once one has adopted a critical
attitude, to throw all appeals to popular opinion out as worthless. This
reaction is a mistake. What has been shown above is that many appeals to
popular opinion that are useful arguments that are rational in guiding
an agent toward prudent action in a situation of imperfect knowledge.
The argument, though it should be subject to critical questioning, may
perform a legitimate and important role in an intelligent deliberation
about what to do or which product to buy. In many cases, it seems that
the model of deliberation is most helpful to understanding how appeals
to popular opinion are used as arguments, and how they should be eval-
uated. In the case of commercial ads, such the Microsoft Office case, the
cold remedy case, and the “rave pants” case, the purpose of the argumen-
tation is evidently to get consumers, or significant numbers of them, to
take action of a certain sort. The most useful way to evaluate such cases is
to see consumers as engaged in deliberation on what to do. The argument


226 Arguments Based on Popular Opinion


used in the commercial speech is designed to influence this deliberation
and guide it toward a particular, recommended course of action.

In other cases, the goal may be simply to find out what public opin-
ion is on some issue. For example, a poll may be designed to find out
which candidate the voters prefer, and to what extent. In this kind of
case, no argument is (necessarily) presented. The goal may be only to
find information. However, even here, argumentation may be involved.
For example, in a push poll, the attempt is to influence voters for or
against a candidate, and not merely to find voter preference. Also, even
in legitimate polls, the finding of the poll may be used in argumentation.
For example, polls are often used in campaigning to make the other
candidate appear to be losing ground.

What lessons can be drawn from the above analysis of the reasoning
structure of arguments based on public opinion? The main lesson is that
we need to steer between the extremes of condemning such arguments as
fallacious and seeing them as somehow sacrosanct. They are highly fallible
arguments that change quickly with the advent of new information. No
wonder then that they often appear to be superficial. As Yankelovich
(1991) rightly pointed out, they are commonly based on a poll that picks
out one instant in a changing sequence of deliberations. The media are
no doubt partly responsible for this superficiality. A problem is posed,
it becomes a public issue, the media have a feeding frenzy on it, and
then public discussion ceases as the media move on to the next hot issue.
Intelligent public deliberation on the issue never really has a chance to get
started. However, the media are not the only culprits. The public attention
span seems to prefer “sound bites” and short commercial-type coverage
of issues. That does not allow for much depth of intelligent deliberation
based on gathering and assessing of information, including practical and
realistic consideration of the consequences of actions. Emotional appeals
have a powerful impact on public opinion when pictures of baby seals
being clubbed to death are shown. But the longer term consequences of
banning the seal hunt may not be considered by public opinion, once
the issue is no longer hot. Public relations experts know how to exploit
the opportune moment to champion a cause, to swing public opinion
one way or the other. Once a conclusion to take some form of legal or
government action is lodged into place, it will tend to stay in place for
some time. Once the issue disappears from the media spotlight, further
intelligent deliberations, that take new information into account, simply
fail to take place. Experts in manipulating public opinion know very well
how to exploit this bureaucratic inertia effect.


Evaluating Appeal to Popular Opinion 227


For all these reasons, appeal to popular opinion should be seen as a
weak and fallible form of argumentation. Nevertheless, it should have
some standing as a basis for intelligent action, especially in a demo-
cratic system of government. The word “intelligent” is the key, however. A
lot should depend on how informed public opinion is on an issue, and
what stage the deliberations are at. Appeal to popular opinion is best
seen as a shaky form of argument that is strongest when bolstered by
allied forms of argument. If an appeal to popular opinion is based on
good information — for example, on appeal to expert opinion — it can be
a much stronger form of argument. Even when it is based simply on intel-
ligent deliberation on an issue, it can be quite a strong form of argument.
In the absence of such supportive forms of argument, it tends to be weak,
but can still be a premise that is some part of an argument that is a basis for
taking prudent action. Much should depend on the specifics of the form
of the argument and the context of how it was used in a dialogue. Thus,
once again, in order to grasp the structure of media argumentation in any
depth, we are brought back to analyzing the dialectical argumentation
structure it is based on.


Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


Social statistics are needed to conduct intelligent public deliberations
and set social policies in a democracy. But activists, the media, and private
agencies can and often do use “mutant statistics” as tactics to manipulate
public opinion. They can and often do convince people that even the
most implausible claims are true by twisting the question wording in a
poll (Best 2001, p. 4). But if such polls are based on scientific statistical
methods, how is it that their results can be deceptive, misleading, and
even deployed fallaciously to support bad arguments? One of the main
problems is the use of natural language questions in the polls, contain-
ing words and phrases that have emotive connotations that subtly lead
respondents toward one answer or away from another (Campbell 1974).
This spin factor introduced by the wording of a question is not measured
by any indicator of the numerical reliability of the poll typically published
alongside the poll findings (Clark and Schober 1992). It is widely recog-
nized that there are biases in scientifically accurate poll results due to the
wording of questions used, and that inferences drawn from these biased
polls can often be fallacious (Pinto, Blair, and Parr 1993). Critics such
as Warnke (1990) and Crossen (1994) have pointed out that exploiting
biased language deceptively to twist poll results in a desired direction
has become a widely used technique in advertising, cause advocacy, and
political push polls.* Polling is based on the respect of the public for the


Feld (2001) remarked that there is little consensus in the political community on what a
push poll is. However, he quoted (p. 37) a definition proposed by the National Council
on Public Polls in 1995. According to this definition, a push poll is “a telemarketing
technique in which telephone calls are used to canvass vast numbers of potential voters,


228


Definitions and Sampling Surveys 2209


accuracy of a poll that has been carried out using statistical methods of
sampling. But as polls have been more visibly abused, it has become more
obvious that the outcomes of polls are also based on unmeasured factors
and that these factors can easily be manipulated to deceptively puff up
an argument based on a poll. The result is that the public has begun to
lose faith in the polls (Witt 2001), and it is necessary for us to critically
question media polls to judge their reliability.

Using eleven paradigm examples, this chapter analyzes fallacies that
arise from question wording in polls. Included are the fallacies of inap-
propriate and concealed use of persuasive definitions, the fallacy of use of
a broad definition to inflate a statistical result, the fallacy of meaningless
statistics, the fallacy of using an atypical example in place of a definition,
the fallacy of question structure bias, the fallacy of dichotomous ques-
tions, and the fallacy of a double negative in question wording. Fallacies
are especially deceptive in polls because of the misleading appearance of
objectivity encouraged by the ways polls are typically presented. The per-
suasive spin on the question is concealed by the objective appearance of
the announced poll result, especially when it is presented with a numeri-
cal calculation of the probability of error. These fallacies point to a deeper
problem in evaluating bias in the questioning used in polls. How can it be
measured, or determined exactly, whether a question in a poll is biased
or to what degree it is biased? It is argued that the best approach to the
problem should combine dialectical methods of argumentation theory
with empirical methods of measuring response effects.


1. Definitions and Sampling Surveys


Many of the most common inferences from sampling to statistical con-
clusions encountered in everyday media arguments are based on polls.
Polling is a type of sampling procedure that Young describes as having
five steps.


Polling involves five basic procedures — usually carried out in the following
sequence: first, questions are written and organized into questionnaires; second,
a sample is selected to represent the population to be surveyed; third, designated
respondents are interviewed; fourth, answers given are statistically analyzed; and,
fifth, results are interpreted and conclusions reached. (Young 1999, p. 47)


feeding them false and damaging ‘information’ about a candidate under the guise of
taking a poll to see how this ‘information’ affects voter preferences.” The real intent of a
push poll is not to provide information but to “push” the voter away from voting for one
candidate and toward voting for the other candidate.


230 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


In many polls, the sequence is straightforward. In the simple cases of
survey sampling methodology so often cited in statistics textbooks, there
may seem to be no real controversy about how the key terms should be
defined. When making a sampling estimate of the proportion of black
and white balls in an urn, there is normally no real problem of saying
clearly whether a given ball is black or white, or of trying to determine
clearly what counts as a black ball or a white ball. But when drawing
a generalization about marital compatibility or sexual abuse or mental
health, it is a lot more problematic to determine what exactly counts as
a positive or negative instance of these concepts. The problem in these
cases is one of definition. Not only are concepts such as these vague, but
any attempt to offer a precise definition becomes arbitrary, conveying a
spurious impression of accuracy. Moreover, terms like these are highly
controversial, and any definition is at risk of taking up one side of a
controversial issue.

Asa result, the definition used in a statistical survey on such an issue is
inevitably what Campbell (1974, p. 15) calls a “friendly definition,” one
of several contending definitions that the pollster can choose to accept.
A friendly definition is often stipulated by introducing some precise cri-
terion, so that it is clear what counts as fitting the defined term. But the
use of a stipulated definition inevitably introduces arbitrariness. “Marital
compatibility,” for example, may be defined by a married couple who
do not divorce over a period of ten years. Such a stipulated definition
need not intentionally be a persuasive definition of the kind that uses
emotive terms to incline to one side or another on some controversial
issue (Stevenson 1944). But still, it might have implications that would
induce some to see it as persuasive. Some might say that the definition
is too wide in certain respects, while others might say it is too narrow.
Either way, the result of the poll could be misleading, because if the term
“marital compatibility” is used in announcing the results of the survey,
anyone reading the results will interpret this term in its ordinary, conven-
tional meaning. Thus inevitably, the survey result will have a bias, and its
apparent precision is misleading. The following example of a persuasive
definition is given by Hurley (2000, p. 98).


“Football” means a sport in which modern day gladiators brutalize one another
while trying to move a ridiculously shaped “ball” from one end of the playing
field to the other.


This example may not be typical of a persuasive definition, but it conveys
the idea of how such a definition works. In this case, the definition puts
a negative persuasive spin on the term “football” by its use of negative


Definitions and Sampling Surveys 231


emotive terms. Persuasive definitions are not always wrong, because terms
in natural language often have an argumentative spin. But where the def-
inition is part of a concealed tactic of persuasion used to manipulate the
users of a poll, it is appropriate to speak of the fallacy of the inappropriate
persuasive definition in polling. As will be shown in chapter 8, persuasive
definition (Stevenson 1938) isa complex notion, however, posing a prob-
lem that has never really been solved in logic. Logic textbooks tend to
be very suspicious of persuasive definitions, but they generally stop short
of declaring them to be fallacious per se. A fallacy can arise, though,
when the outcome of a poll is treated as a precise statistical result based
on a persuasive definition. While drawing an inference from sampling
is an exact method of reasoning in certain respects, once friendly (per-
suasive) definitions enter the picture, the methodology of the inference
is no longer exact. It may appear exact, but an element of arbitrariness
and/or bias has entered that the appearance of statistical accuracy con-
ceals. The incorporation of a friendly definition will mean that the exact
conclusion drawn from a poll (using measures of statistical accuracy) is
not as well justified as it may seem to be.

Statistical surveys are routinely used to make all kinds of practical
decisions on government policy. For example, government agencies use
survey data on issues like poverty and unemployment to justify and pro-
mote political policies. One problem is that the generalizations drawn
from these surveys have an aura of scientific objectivity. So if any other
presumption conflicts with the findings of the survey, it will be discounted
as wrong. The fact that the poll itself is an inference based on untested,
nonnumerical, and non-objective assumptions built into the definitions
of the properties being surveyed tends to be concealed. The concealment
is even less visible when the poll result is announced with a numerical
confidence level giving an exact margin of error. When polls are used as
a basis for political deliberation, for example, their results are typically
announced by the media without giving any information about the defi-
nitions of key terms that were the basis of the questioning methodology.
The fallacy lies not in the use of a persuasive definition per se, but in the
concealment of the persuasive spin introduced into the poll results by the
use of a concealed persuasive definition. Here the fallacy of the concealed
persuasive definition is a very real danger.

Statistical figures that measure the unemployment rate are con-
stantly being used in political deliberations and media discussions on
issues of whether to cut the deficit. But how do the statisticians define
“unemployed person”? How actively does a person without a job have to
be in looking for one, to count as unemployed? A puzzle for years has


232 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


been why the unemploymentrate is so much higher in Canada than in the
United States. One factor that may be significant is the different way Cana-
dian and U.S. officials define “unemployed person.” If people say they are
looking for work, but do nothing more than read job ads, Canada counts
them as “unemployed,” whereas in the U.S. such people are classified as
being “out of the labor force altogether” (Little 1996, p. Bl). The differ-
ence in definitions could be quite significant for a reported outcome of
employment. But media reports of unemployment figures typically give
no information about how “unemployed person” was defined in the sur-
vey. Such figures can make it appear superficially that unemployment is
much higher in Canada than in the United States, but any real basis for
comparison would have to take definitions into account.

Campbell (1974, pp. 18-19) has outlined the “bewildering and contra-
dictory” estimates of unemployment in the United States that have been
tabled by many agencies over the years. According to his account, esti-
mates differ primarily because of differences in the definition of “unem-
ployed person” used by the various agencies (p. 19). By introducing an
all-embracing official definition, the Bureau of Labor Statistics has sup-
posedly put an end to all such differences of opinion. But as noted above,
there is no reason to think that their definition is any more justifiable
than the different (and conflicting) definitions used by other countries.
In such cases, the definition chosen could be wider or narrower, depend-
ing on what the polling agency chooses. This latitude leaves plenty of
room for advocacy. Advocates of a cause will tend to go for a broader
definition. This common tactic in cause advocacy could be called the fal-
lacy of broadening a definition to dramatize a problem (Best 2001). The
idea is to broaden the definition in order to include more cases under it,
and thereby to get bigger statistical outcomes that appear to support the
cause. The following example was presented by Best (2001, p. 39).


Case 7.1

Suppose we want to define sexual violence. Certainly our definition
should include rapes. But what about attempted rapes — should they
be included? Does being groped or fondled count? What about
seeing a stranger briefly expose himself? A narrow definition — say,
“sexual violence is forcible sexual contact involving penetration” —
will include fewer cases than a broad definition - for example, “sex-
ual violence is any uninvited sexual action.” This has obvious impli-
cations for social statistics because broad definitions support much
larger estimates of a problem size.


Definitions and Sampling Surveys 233


A comparable problem is posed by a definition that is either too broad
or too narrow. Either kind of definition, when used in a poll, will lead
to misleading result. But activists promoting a cause will generally try to
work with a definition that is as broad as possible, because this approach
will yield statistical figures that make the problem appear wider, and thus
more severe. And as we all know, statistics about the extent of a problem
are often used by activists to get public support for the cause. There are
two fallacies in such cases that need to be identified. One is the converse
of the other. The first could be called the use of a definition that is too broad
to inflate a statistical result. The other fallacy is the use of a definition that
is too narrow to deflate a statistical result. However, using a definition that
is too broad or too narrow in a statistical poll is not itself a fallacy, because
this sort of mistake is inevitable in nearly all cases.

Any income criterion of poverty inevitably fails to be accurate to cover
all cases. As Campbell (1974, pp. 17-18) showed, over the years differ-
ent agencies have used varying definitions to produce official counts of
persons living in poverty. These statistics have ranged from 30 million
(1964) to 40 to 50 million and to one zealous claim of 80 million. The
problem is that not only is the term “poverty” vague, but it is not possi-
ble to give a non-arbitrary definition of it, by a precise numerical crite-
rion, that would fit all situations, and circumstances in different locations.
Inevitably, then, any definition that is precise has a certain bias or spin
on it. Relief agencies and poverty advocates find it hard to resist using
broad definitions to inflate their statistics, feeling that the cause justifies
the means. The defense of this tactic is expressed in the rhetorical ques-
tion, “If it helps the poor, so what?” Here we have the danger of using a
precise definition that is promoted on the grounds of its precision but
is arbitrary and is far too broad. What is fallacious is the illusion pro-
duced by the use of a statistic that appears precise but has been inflated
through the tactic of defining a term too broadly. Part of the problem
here is concealment, because how to define “poverty” is highly controver-
sial. Persuasive arguments can be marshaled on both sides of a social and
political issue. Thus the concealment introduced by employing a defini-
tion implicitly is a highly misleading and deceptive tactic. Questioning is
suppressed.

On the other hand, the danger of not defining a vague term used
in a sampling survey can rightly be classified under what is called the
fallacy of meaningless statistics (Seligman 1961). This fallacy is the use
of a precise figure as the outcome of a statistical survey based on a
vague term for which no precise definition is provided and for which no


234 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


non-controversial definition could be provided. Seligman gave the fol-
lowing classic political case case as an example (p. 146).


Case 7.2
Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy stated, “Ninety percent of the
major racketeers would be out of business by the end of the year if
the ordinary citizen, the businessman, the union official, and the
public authority stood up to be counted and refused to be cor-
rupted.”


Without definitions of terms such as “major racketeer” and “stood up to
be counted,” the figure of go percent is meaningless. The fallacy here
arises not from using a definition that is persuasive, too broad, or too
narrow, but from not defining the terms at all. Of course, any attempt to
define such terms non-arbitrarily would be difficult at best.

Another typical example was given by Campbell (1974, p. 26).


Case 7.3

An author asserted that he had studied the food intake of more
than 50,000 men and women and found, to his own astonishment,
that in one group of 4,500 cases, 83 per cent were found to be
overweight while undereating. Moreover, only 17 per cent were
found to be overweight because they overeat. These facts might have
seemed astonishing to the reader as well as to the writer if the latter
had only been more clear about what he was calling “overweight,”
“undereating,” and “overeating.” If the actual criteria used were no
more precise than the description given in this article, then the 17
and 83 per cent figures are worthless. Either way, the reader of this
particular article is left poorly informed.


Too often, no information is given about how key terms were defined
when statistical results of surveys are announced in the media. A persua-
sive definition, even if we don’t agree with it, can at least be questioned
or criticized. But if no definition at all is given, it would not be reason-
able to accept the claim at face value. All one can do is to ask the right
critical question. In this case, the right critical question is how to define
the terms the poll was based on. In the absence of an answer, the pre-
sumption should be that a precise statistical outcome based on a vague
term that has not been defined is a mismatch. Such a mismatch conveys
a spurious aura of scientific precision that justifies the allegation that the
argument commits the fallacy of meaningless statistics.


Question Wording and Emotive Bias in Polls 235


Crime figures are a constant source of disputable claims and statis-
tical fallacies used to manipulate public opinion. People are personally
affected by what appears to be a growing crime rate, but the statisticians
keep saying that crime is going down. Are the figures all that reliable,
given that there has been so much change over the years in how crimes
are reported, how they are defined as crimes, and how the areas in which
crimes are tabulated (like cities) have changed in size? For example, in
1991, arson offenses in Canada took an unusual 20 percent jump from
previous levels. But coincidentally, in July 1990, amendments to the Crim-
inal Code broadened the definition of “arson” to include such things as
mischief fires, instead of restricting it to cases of willfully setting fires to
specific types of property (“Changed Law Fuels Statistics” 1992, p. Ag).
Could it be that the sudden increase in arson statistics can be attributed to
the definition? It certainly is a possibility, suggesting how the unqualified
use of crime statistics can be misleading. “Stats wars” in which compet-
ing definitions are evaluated and criticized by both sides on an issue can
actually be beneficial. The reason is that they bring out these concealed
problems and controversies about definitions of key notions that are vital
in forming public policies in a democracy. Fallacies arise when the prob-
lems about definitions of these terms are concealed by advocates, who
present the finding as a scientific poll that is objective and cannot be crit-
ically questioned. The fallacy is employing the definitions in a deceptive
way by trying to conceal its persuasive aspect.


2. Question Wording and Emotive Bias in Polls


Polling, like all statistical generalization procedures based on sampling,
looks objective and precise. Indeed, it is, in certain respects, provided the
sequence of the five steps of polling shown in section 1 above is followed.
But the definitions of key terms used to generate the conclusion are sub-
ject to the problems and fallacies covered in this section. These problems
arise at the first stage of the sequence. As noted above, one of the most
problematic stages in the construction of a poll is the phrasing of the
question. The question is typically phrased using natural language words
or phrases that are not defined but have a meaning to the respondents.
And the emotive terms in natural language not only import a bias, they
can lead to the various fallacies cited above. The problem of question
wording effect is much more significant than it appears to be. An appar-
ently small or insignificant variation in the words chosen to appear in a
question can have a large effect on the statistical outcome of the poll.


236 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


Some of the fallacies of polling cited in the preceding section arose from
faulty definitions that were too broad, too narrow, or had other faults.
But fallacies and problems of bias can also arise where a term has not
been defined at all. Such a problem may arise because the term has a
hidden emotive impact that puts a spin on the outcome of the poll. But
the poll user or reader may not be aware of this hidden bias at all.
Stevenson warned about the emotive use of language and persuasive
definitions (1938, 1944). He distinguished between the descriptive (cog-
nitive) meaning of a term and the emotive meaning, which refers to how
people react emotionally to the use of the term. The problem is posed
by the fact that many words used in natural language discourse have
built-in positive and negative emotive connotations or spin. For example,
the terms “bureaucrat” and “public servant” have almost identical literal
meanings, but they have very different emotive meanings. “Bureaucrat”
expresses resentment and disapproval, while “public servant” expresses
respect and approval. This emotive difference between terms that appear
to be equivalent can conceal a persuasive element in many statements and
questions. Yet such persuasive elements often function as arguments sup-
porting one side or the other of an issue. The following simple example
of how emotive meaning can act as the basis of a persuasive argument
was presented by Stevenson (1944, p. 141) in the form of a dialogue.


A: He had no right to act without consulting us.
B: After all, he is the chairman.
A: Yes, but not the dictator. He violated democratic procedure.


The term “dictator” works as a negative emotive word in this dialogue,
while the term “democratic” works as a positive emotive term. Both terms
have emotive connotations. When the person in the dialogue is described
as a dictator, it implies that he did something wrong that we should con-
demn. When a procedure is described as democratic, it is implied that
it is good, a procedure we should approve. Many terms used in everyday
language have positive or negative emotive meaning, and words used in
polls are no exception. When such words appear in a question in a poll,
this will have a so-called question wording effect (response effect), mean-
ing that it will influence the statistical outcome of the poll one way or
the other. One question wording effect relates to the positive or negative
connotations of equivalent words chosen in a question. What may super-
ficially appear to be an equivalent word may have different connotations
for respondents. Hence an apparently slight rewording of a question may
result in a dramatic difference in a poll outcome. The reason is that the


Question Wording and Emotive Bias in Polls 237


two terms may have the same cognitive meaning, but have very different
emotive meanings.

You might think that public support for welfare would be equivalent to,
or roughly the same as, public support for the poor. But a national survey
in 1985 showed that only 19 percent of people said that too little was being
spent on welfare, while 63 percent said that too little was being spent on
assistance to the poor (Moore 1992, p. 344). The difference of 44 points
is a statistically significant one in the outcomes of the two polls, even
though they appeared to be asking pretty much the same question. The
researcher conjectured that the word “welfare” has negative connotations
of welfare fraud for many respondents, while the term “assistance to the
poor” has positive connotations of providing equal conditions and care
of the people (Moore 1992, p. 344). Because of this variance in the
connotations of words chosen, the variance in poll outcomes was huge.

Howard Schuman and Stanley Presser did an experiment in 1940 to
study the question wording effect of changing “forbid” to “allow” when
the question of whether the United States should forbid speeches against
democracy was put to a sample of respondents. For a detailed account
of their research on wording of questions in polling, see Schuman and
Presser (1981). The two questions in this particular experiment were the
following:


(Q1) Should the U.S. forbid public speeches against democracy?
(Q2) Should the U.S. allow public speeches against democracy?


Forty-six percent of respondents said “no” to Q1, but only 25 percent said
“yes” to Qg, according to the account of this experiment given in Moore
(1992, p. 334). This impressive outcome difference of 21 percent was
produced just by altering a single word in the question.

Schuman and Presser also tested the effect of a forbid/allow substi-
tution in the question of whether the government should forbid the
showing of X-rated movies, but the outcome here was only a 4 percent
difference in the responses of the two groups polled. The lack of con-
sistency between this outcome and the previous one Moore described
(p. 335) as “dismaying.” According to Wheeler (1990, p. 203), the Gallup
poll makes it a practice to include the specific wording of all questions
used in a poll, whereas Harris does not. Wheeler noted (p. 203) that,
according to Harris, including the wording of questions would take up
too much space. But the result of not including this information is that
a reader of the Harris survey has no real way of evaluating the reasoning
that the poll is based on. As Wheeler puts it (p. 203), a reader of the


238 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


poll in the media has to “take it on faith” that the pollster has evaluated
the results correctly. The reader lacks information necessary to evaluate
the inference made by the pollster when he reports a trend or opinion,
based on a question or a series of questions asked of a sample group of
respondents.

In other cases, the problem is not just due to the wording of a question,
but to emotive spin introduced into the poll precisely because of this
failure. This kind of fallacy occurs where a key term is not defined at
all but is represented in the argument by an example that serves as a
paradigm. But it is a paradigm that has an emotive impact on how the
poll outcome is taken, because the paradigm twists the meaning of a key
term in a certain emotive direction. Thus in this kind of case, there is
a bias relating to definitions in the argument, even though the term in
question has not been explicitly defined. Best (2001, p. 39) comments
on a television news story that tells about a child who was beaten to death.


Case 7.4

Relatively few cases of child abuse involve fatal beatings; compara-
tively mundane cases of neglect are far more common. But defining
child abuse through examples of fatal beatings can shape how we
think about the problem, and child-protection policies designed to
prevent fatalities may not be the best way to prevent children from
neglect. Whenever examples substitute for definitions, there is a
risk that our understanding of the problem will be distorted.


In this kind of case, the problem is not that the definition is biased or
misleading. The problem is that no definition has been given. The exam-
ple given presents to the reader or audience a paradigm that functions as
a definition, or functions in place of a definition. The problem is partly
a failure to give a definition, and partly using an example that acts as a
definition. This kind of case is very common, because the media like to
use emotionally dramatic and extreme examples to make a story more
exciting to viewers or readers. Also, advocates of a cause like to feature
such shocking and atypical examples because it makes the problem seem
more urgent. A shocking and disturbing example can be used as a call to
action, a call to rally the public to support the cause. This kind of fallacy
could be called the fallacy of using an atypical example in place of a definition.

These problems are exacerbated in media reports of polls. Commonly,
in media reports of polls, the exact statistical finding of the poll is stated,
but the questions used to generate the conclusion are not. Unless you can


The Structure of the Question 239


see the actual wording used in the conclusion drawn, however, accept-
ing the inductive inference used to get to this conclusion would not be
justifiable. If you don’t know the actual wording the poll question used,
you are not in a position to tell whether any of the above fallacies may
have been committed or not. You simply have no way of knowing. What
this implies is that many of the poll outcomes cited in the media to sup-
port arguments or claims are worthless as evidence until critical questions
about the wording of the question are asked and answered. In terms of
the five stages of polling cited above, these problems arise at the fifth
stage. The problem may not be with the poll itself, at any of the first four
stages. The sampling procedures, for example, may be impeccable. The
problem can arise at the stage where an inference is drawn from the poll
results. Polls are often used by advocates of a cause or by the media to
create an interesting story line. The poll outcome is used to draw a con-
clusion by means of an inference. But often this inference is drawn in a
distorted and biased way, because the exact wording of the question in
the poll, or the definition of a controversial term, is not even reported
to the readers. The problems here are not in polling itself but in the use
of polls by advocates, the media, or other parties. Even this distinction is
tricky, however. In some cases, the media or the advocates conduct the
polls themselves. Thus a key critical question to ask is, “Who conducted
the poll?” If the pollster is a reputable company, you can be assured that
some standards of proper sampling have been met. But if the poll was
conducted by the media or by an advocacy group, there are no guarantees
that any standards have been met.


3. The Structure of the Question


How can a method be provided that would detect these biases and fal-
lacies by objectively evaluating question wording in polls? There is a lit-
erature on the logic of questioning in logic (Harrah 1984), and there
has been some work on studying question methodology in cognitive sci-
ence (Graesser, Bommareddy, Swamer, and Golding 1996). There are
also resources in argumentation theory on the structure of asking ques-
tions in dialogue (van Eemeren et al. 1996). The solution to the problem
recommended in this chapter is based on all these resources.

In some polls, the problem is not just in the wording of the question
but in the structure of the question itself or in the order in which a
sequence of questions is presented. Pinto et al. (1993, p. 156) cite the
use of questions like, “Mayor Smith is running for re-election. Are you in


240 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


favor of her candidacy?” There are several problems here that could easily
be overlooked. One is that the question is posed in a positive direction.
It doesn’t ask, in a more balanced way, whether the respondent is for or
against the candidacy of Mayor Smith. Another problem is that the ques-
tion is prefaced with a statement, and this statement alludes to Smith’s
experience as mayor. So the placing of the question after a statement
puts the question in a context that gives it a certain spin. There is also
an imbalance, as Pinto et al. note, because the question does not men-
tion the other candidates. These subtle factors of the structure of the
question can produce effects that are difficult to measure in assessing
the worth of a poll. This fallacy is committed when the options offered
to the respondent are improperly limited or biased by the structure of
the question. It could be called the fallacy of question structure bias in
polling.

Roper (1990, pp. 230-231) cites what he calls a “yea-say effect” when
a question used in a poll is posed in one direction only. As an exam-
ple of such “unidirectional” phrasing, he contrasts the question “Do
you admire Ronald Reagan?” with the more balanced question, “Do you
admire Ronald Reagan, or don’t you think very highly of him?” There is
a tendency of respondents to agree with a statement rather than to dis-
agree with it, especially if the statement is one on which the respondent
lacks strong opinions. Hence the unidirectionally phrased question is
more likely to elicit a response in favor of Reagan than the bidirectional
question. According to Roper, the more a question involves a subject
“on which knowledge is hazy or about which people have not thought
widely,” the wider is the margin of agreement over disagreement. Thus
unless the pollster knows whether the respondents have knowledge about
a particular question, or have thought about it much, the response effect
of choosing a unidirectional versus a bidirectional question cannot be
known or calculated. And the effect of asking a unidirectional question
can be a bias or error due to the wording of the question. Here the poll-
ster needs to understand not only the structure of the question, but which
structure is appropriate for the respondents, given what the respondents
know or don’t know about the subject. In other words, there is a dialectical
aspect here that has to do with the communicative relationship between
the pollster and the polled. The pollster must know (or try to antici-
pate) what the respondents know or don’t know about the subject of the
poll.

The problem cited by Roper is similar to the problem of leading ques-
tions in law. Sometimes leading questions are admissible in law, but if a


The Structure of the Question 241


question is leading in a bad or problematic way, the judge is supposed
to not admit it. Similarly in polling, any question will have a tendency to
lead the respondents toward one answer or another. If the question is a
good fit, its bias may not be a big problem. On the other hand, if the
question is phrased in a wrong way for the respondents, it could lead to a
large bias in the outcome of the poll that may not be evident to the poll
users.

Another kind of response effect was discovered by Howard Schuman,
in a study done in 1950, commenting on a 1948 study of American atti-
tudes toward American and Soviet journalists. Schuman was interested
in the differences among ways of ordering a series of questions put to
a group of respondents in a poll. The following summary of Schuman’s
findings is from Moore (1992, pp. 337-338).


Case 7.5

Form A in the 1948 study asked respondents, “Do you think the
United States should let communist newspaper reporters from
other countries in here and send back to their papers the news
as they see it?” Form B reversed the situation, by asking, “Do you
think a communist country like Russia should let American news-
paper reporters come in and send back to America the news as
they see it?” When the question about communist reporters was
asked first, people’s great distrust of communism at the time led
to overwhelming rejection, with only 37 percent saying communist
reporters should be allowed to report news from America. But when
the communist reporter question was asked second, after the ques-
tion about whether American reporters should be able to report the
news from Russia (which people overwhelmingly supported), then
support for communist reporters to report from America went up
to 73 percent, a jump of 36 percentage points.


Schuman interpreted these results as showing two different sentiments
of the public (Moore 1992, p. 338). In Form A, a negative sentiment to
communism and communist reports is shown, in accord with the cold
war mentality of the time. In Form B, the sentiment shown is one of fair-
ness or reciprocity. When the American reporter’s question is asked first,
it puts a context in place in which the next question evokes the issue
of fairness or reciprocity. So it is not just the structure of a single ques-
tion itself that needs to be considered. The place of the question in the
series of questions in a questionnaire can be very important in judging


242 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


inferences based on polling. Part of the problem here is the use of emo-
tive terminology. The fallacies and biases associated with the persuasive
functions of natural language terms have already been discussed above.
What is new here is the bias introduced by the structure of the question.
These problems have to do with the logical form of the question. What is
needed to cope with these problems is some knowledge of the different
kinds of questions. Below it will be noted that there are various systems in
logic and cognitive science that classify different types of questions. Each
type of question has a different structure. But it is not just the structure of
the question itself that needs to be considered. The place of the question
in a context of dialogue also needs to be taken into account. It is for
this reason that it will be argued below that we need a dialectical analysis
of not only questions themselves, but how these questions function in a
context of dialogue.

In other cases, the problem is one of confusion of the respondents
because of an unclear question. Often this is due to the ambiguous word-
ing of the question. For example, in cases where a question is expressed
in a negative form, it may be hard to interpret what the answers “yes”
and “no” really mean. What one person thinks is the meaning of a “yes”
answer may be the same as what another person thinks is meant by a “no”
answer. Payne (1951, p. 22) gave the following example of this kind of
problem in a poll.


Case 7.6

Itcan happen that different people will read directly opposite mean-
ings into the same words. Let us imagine a community where feeling
runs very high on a proposed referendum to sell the city zoo to a
meat packer for use as a slaughterhouse. Then we ask the citizens,
Do you think that the sale of the zoo to the meat packer should
go through, or not? Both those who answer “No” and those who
answer “Yes” could mean the same thing. Those saying “No” would
probably mean that the zoo should not be sold, while those saying
“Yes” might mean that the sale should “fall through.”


Adler (1994, p. 56) cites the case of a 1992 Roper poll that phrased its
question with a confusing double negative, coming out with the result
that 22 percent of Americans say the Holocaust may not have happened.
When the question was re-worded in a 1994 poll, the result was that only
1 percent doubted the Holocaust. In cases like these, the structure of the
question is confusing, and though respondents may answer the question,


The Structure of the Question 243


they don’t really know what it means. Confusing polls of this kind are
based on an error that could be called the double negative fallacy of question
wording.

Roper (1990, 231) polled one half of a sample of respondents on
the double-negative statement, “It is not true that women don’t make as
good executives as men do”, and polled the other half on the positive
statement, “Women make as good executives as men do.” The results
(p. 231) were as follows.


Case 7.7
In the case of the double negative statement, 50 percent agreed,
42 percent disagreed, and 7 percent didn’t know. In the case of
the straightforward statement, a large 87 percent agreed, only
10 percent disagreed, and just 3 percent didn’t know.


The difference of outcomes here is a response effect that indicates confu-
sion of the respondents caused by unclear wording. This type of error is
different from a bias that artificially tilts the responses to one side rather
than the other. But even so, it can result in a response effect. Even if peo-
ple are confused or don’t know the answer to a question, the structure
of the question encourages them to guess or pick the answer that seems
most likely to be wanted or to represent something like their viewpoint,
as far as they can guess. Poll questions are typically designed to solicit
a yes or no answer. But for various reasons, giving a yes or no answer
may not be realistically possible, or may be simplistic or otherwise not
representative of the respondent’s real thinking. An answer is called for
anyway, and many people will give one. But the fallacy of false dichotomy
will be treated below as a special fallacy in its own right.

What is needed to cope with these fallacies arising from the structure
of questions used in polling is, to begin with, a classification of the dif-
ferent types of questions. Some attempts to construct such classifications
have been made in logic (Harrah 1984). But the effort has mainly been
directed toward syntax and semantics. To deal with the kinds of fallacies
cited above, the response of the respondent to the poll question, and also
the reactions of the users of the poll, need to be taken into account. It is
encouraging to see that some normative work of this kind is being done
using computational models of human question answering. Graesser,
et al. (1996) developed a computer program called QUEST that specifies
the cognitive strategies that humans use when they answer survey ques-
tions in different categories. In QUEST sixteen different types of questions


244 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


are represented. Some of the main types, with examples, are the following
(Graesser et al. 1996, p. 148).


Verification: Are you a citizen of the U.S.?
Disjunctive. Are you male or female?
Quantification: How many children do you have?
Definition. What does it mean to be bonded?
Causal Antecedent: Why is my tooth hurting?

Goal Orientation: Why did you move to Memphis?
Instrumental: How did you move to Memphis?


Note that in the QuEsT classification system, there can be different types
of why-questions. Different kinds of why-questions are important in the
field of logic called formal dialectic, which uses formal models of dialogue
to study fallacies (Hamblin 1970). It is argued below that the best way of
analyzing fallacies of questioning in polling is through the use of such
formal dialectical models of argumentation.


4. Forcing an Answer


As noted in the previous section, the structure of the question used in a
poll is of a kind that is meant to narrow down the range of responses to
definite outcomes that can be counted up in a numerical manner. This
structure may not only introduce a bias by encouraging the respondent in
one direction rather than another, but it may also impose a definiteness
on an issue that is not really appropriate or consistent with what the
respondent really thinks about it. The outcome of the poll in such a
case may impute a definiteness that is not really there. So the sampling
procedure used to get the poll result could generate an outcome that is
highly misleading. This sort of fallacy is commonly known as the fallacy
of false dichotomy. It is also sometimes called “the black and white fallacy”
or “the fallacy of simplistic alternatives.” This fallacy is quite simple. It
is the fallacy of falsely representing a range of choices as solutions to a
problem or answers to a question as being only two, when in reality more
than two solutions or answers should be considered. The more general
fallacy is one of limiting the options unfairly, even where more than two
choices may be involved. This could be called the fallacy of forcing an
answer. For example, only three answers might be allowed, when four
are really needed to permit a satisfactory response to the question. This
fallacy is familiar to all of us who have struggled to answer a multiple-
choice question that allows no “none of the above” answer. This kind of


Forcing an Answer 245


fallacy of questioning is already familiar in logic as the fallacy of many
questions. In ancient philosophy, it was called the fallacy of the horns.
For example, one person asks another person whether he has stopped
abusing his aged father. Whether the second person answers “yes” or “no”
to this dichotomous question, he admits to having abused his aged father.

One solution to this fallacy sometime proposed is to use open as
opposed to closed questions in a poll, as indicated by the following exam-
ples.


Closed Question: Do you think the government is doing a good job of
dealing with inflation, or not?

Open Question: What kind of job do you think the government is
doing in dealing with inflation?


The open question is preferable to the closed question, because it leaves
a range of permissible responses open, instead of narrowing them down
to two, as in the closed (yes-no) question. Always using open instead
of closed questions would eliminate the fallacy of false dichotomy, or
certainly make it less severe.

But the practical problem is that, given the nature of polling as a quan-
titative, statistical undertaking, there is a need to get the questionnaire
in a form whereby numerically it can be tabulated by counting up the
answers. This limitation means that in practice, the open question, of
the type above, for example, has to be reduced to some sort of closed or
multiple choice question, with only definite answers allowed, of a kind
leading to definite results that can be counted. So the open question
ultimately has to become a closed question of some sort. For example,
the open question above might become the following multiple choice
question.


Multiple Choice Question: What kind of job do you think the
government is doing in dealing with inflation: (a) good, (b) fair,
(c) poor?


Putting in a fourth opinion, “None of the above” is possible, but may
not make for a very exciting outcome. The polls, especially those used by
the media, are specifically designed to get a newsworthy outcome. Also,
in political polling, it is often appropriate to ask a simple yes-no or two-
choice question. For example, there may be two candidates Xand Yin an
electoral race, and the poll best designed to find public opinion needs
to ask, “Are you going to vote for X or Y?” as the appropriate question.
Thus it is unrealistic to think that simple dichotomous questions can be


246 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


eliminated in polling. They need to be seen as sometimes appropriate.
What is needed is a method of judging when such a question is inappro-
priate or fallacious. It is naive to think that there is any simple syntactic
or semantic way of devising a useful method of this sort. The method
has to examine the subject matter of the poll, and then ask whether the
question is appropriate to the subject matter. Such a method would be
useful, because this fallacy is so common.

If given a yes-no question or another type of multiple choice question
that admits of only a small list of choices as answers, many people, as
noted above, will opt for one choice or the other, even though they don’t
know the answer to the question. The results of such a poll could be
quite consistent, in the sense that subsequent polls putting the same
question would get the same statistical result. Payne (1951, p. 17) stated
the problem succinctly, by way of an example.


With straight faces we might start our interviews among the general public by ask-
ing, Which do you prefer, dichotomous or open questions? We might be surprised
at the proportion of people who would soberly express a choice. Their selections
obviously would not be meaningful in the desired sense. Yet, it would be incor-
rect to assume that their answers were entirely meaningless or haphazard. People
might vaguely think that they understood us but not knowing the first term might
choose the second in high proportions. And in passing, we might forecast that
repeated experiments with the same question would probably give closely dupli-
cating results. Stability of replies is no test of a meaningful question. The more
meaningless a question is, the more likely it is to produce consistent percentages
when repeated.


Would it be a good guide to rational deliberation on a question if we
used the results of a poll based on this type of question? No, it would
not, because the poll is not telling us correctly what the opinion of those
polled really is. But citing the results of such a poll in an argument could
sound impressive. The problem, in such cases, is not just the running of
the poll itself, but how the outcome is reported in the media.

When the results of a poll are given with an exact numerical figure
representing the margin of error, many people think that this number
represents how accurate the poll has been in correctly ascertaining the
opinion of the population group. In other words, the figure is taken to
refer to the probability that the poll might be wrong in drawing the con-
clusion that a group of people have a particular opinion. But that is not
what the figure represents at all. The figure represents the probability
that when the same poll is run with another sample group of respon-
dents, it will come up with the same statistical results. So in other words,


Forcing an Answer 247


the margin of error is the probability that the poll has not picked out
the respondents by a sample that is adequate. The margin of error figure
represents the accuracy of the sampling method. The figure says nothing
at all about whether the poll is really accurate in the sense that its con-
clusion represents the real opinions stated. It says nothing at all about
the wording used in the question in the poll or about how key terms in
the question were (or were not) defined. So, as Payne points out, even
if this figure is very high, showing that the poll agrees with the results of
repeated trials, it could still be that the poll is biased, or for other rea-
sons does not give a true picture of what the respondents think. Wheeler
(1990, p. 203) pointed out that the polls should make an attempt to
filter out respondents who don’t know anything about an issue. People
are naturally reluctant to admit ignorance, and a respondent may even
be quick to give a yes or no answer just to keep the poll interview from
taking up more of their time. Wheeler noted that newspaper polls on
issues do not generally give information on this filtering out factor, and
this omission is an important defect in enabling a reader to evaluate any
inference drawn from such a poll.


Very rarely do they reveal whether people who know nothing about the issue
were filtered out of the sample. It makes little sense to ask people how they
feel about the president’s policy on deregulation of natural gas prices if they
have not previously considered the matter; a surprisingly high percentage of the
population does not think about such questions. Indeed, the pollsters ought to
be reporting less on whether the people support or oppose a given policy and
more on whether they have even thought of it. There should also be much more
done in the direction of showing intensities of opinion, measuring how deeply
people care about a given issue. (p. 203)


The problem is that conflicts of opinion on controversial issues are much
more interesting to the media than detailed information on a question
like the deregulation of natural gas prices. For the outcome of an opinion
poll to be exciting and newsworthy, it should represent a dramatic conflict
that suggests struggle and urgency. Hence there is a natural tendency to
puff up the results of a poll by asking questions that are more likely to
yield a provocative outcome.

Polls inflate and dramatize people’s real opinions by forcing a respon-
dent to make up his or her mind, frequently by asking a yes-no question,
on an issue where the respondent may not have arrived at a decision. This
speeding up of the decision process to get a definite answer is described
by Crossen (1994, p. 106). Itis a pollster’s business to press for an opinion
whether people have one or not. “Don’t knows” are worthless to pollsters,


248 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


whose product is opinion, not ignorance. That is why so many polls do
not even offer a “don’t know” alternative. If someone volunteers a “don’t
know” (and studies have shown many people will guess an answer rather
than volunteer their ignorance), the interviewers are often told to push
or probe. In choices among candidates, those who say they are unde-
cided might be asked how they lean. The result is that people seem more
decided about issues and candidates than they are. Thus the fallacy of
false dichotomy is rampant in polling. But the solution to the problem
is not obvious. In some cases, dichotomous questions are appropriate.
Public opinion polls are generally good at predicting the outcome of an
election, mainly for one reason. When a person votes, he or she also has
to make up his or her mind, and vote one way or the other (although
polls have been wrong, as in the 1992 general election in Britain, where
they wrongly predicted a Labor victory). But on an issue requiring delib-
eration, where people have not made up their minds, or on a question
that the respondents know little about, a public opinion poll can be mis-
leading, suggesting a definite opinion on one side or the other of an
issue where none exists. In these kinds of cases, the use of a dichotomous
question produces a misleading result. Many cases are of this sort, and so
the problem is how to use proper questions that give the respondent the
right amount of latitude to give an answer that represents what she really
thinks about the issue.

Not only do pollsters tend to resist asking questions with a “none of
the above” option, but in reporting the results of a poll, the people who
were undecided may not even be reported as part of the sample. Wheeler
(1990, pp. 196-197) cited a case in point.


Case 7.8
During the 1972 presidential campaign, for example, George
Gallup reported, “The Democratic Party currently holds a marginal
lead over the GOP, 53 to 47, as the party voters believe they can bet-
ter handle the problem they consider to be most important.” In a
year when there was great disenchantment with the candidates in
particular and politics in general, it was preposterous to think that
everybody preferred one party or the other. Indeed, that was not
what people had told Gallup’s interviewers. Only 34 percent had
thought the Democrats were more competent, compared to 28 per-
cent who favored the Republicans. The largest group, 38 percent,
either said that there was no difference between the two parties or
did not express any opinion. That figure may well have reflected the


Use of Polls by Advocacy Groups 249


alienation and apathy in the country. Gallup, however, simply dis-
carded it, arbitrarily allocating half of the group to the Democrats
and half to the Republicans!


In this case, even though there was a “none of the above” option offered
to respondents, the published results of the poll simply neglected to men-
tion this part of the finding. The result is one that looks to a reader much
more significant and interesting than it really is. Presenting dramatic poll
results in the media seems harmless enough, if the issue is not all that sig-
nificant. But if the same practices are tolerated when it comes to matters
of social and public policy in a democracy, the biased poll is more than
just a mischief. It can lead to poor decision making on issues that involve
large amounts of money and even human life.

As Schuman and Presser pointed out, in order to devise appropriate
questions that do not force an answer wrongly from the respondent in
a poll, the pollster must know what the respondent does or does not
know. There has to be empathy and dialogue between the two parties.
The pollster has to try to look at the question from the respondent’s point
of view. The only way to deal with fallacies of dichotomous questions and
forcing answers in polls is to get access to the questions asked, and then
ask yourself, “Could I have answered that question?” The general method
of dealing with such fallacies is to ask the critical question, “What question
was used in the poll to get the reported result?” Butif the poll, as reported,
does not even tell the reader the exact question asked, then the reader
(or poll user) simply has no way to judge the worth of the argument or
claim based on the poll. The problem in such a case is that the asking
of appropriate questions has been effectively blocked. Thus the fallacy is
one of blocking off the dialogue that is needed to make sense of and to
properly evaluate an argument. In the use of polls by advocacy groups,
this tactic of blocking off dialogue is all part of the strategy.


5. Use of Polls by Advocacy Groups


Precisely because statistical polls do so heavily influence government and
political deliberations in a democracy, advocacy groups have now under-
taken to use statistics to get more funding for causes by showing that
a problem is much worse than anyone thought. As Best (2001, p. 40)
pointed out, activists “couple big statistics based on broad definitions
with compelling examples of the most serious cases.” What is typical of
many cause advocacy arguments is that they combine both techniques


250 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


to puff up the dramatic urgency of the problem in order to get public
support in a call to action. Thus this familiar method of advocacy com-
mits two fallacies at the same time. Inflated figures on poverty, abuse of
women, and other issues where advocacy groups have made exaggerated
claims based on polls have been the subject of much critical scrutiny in
recent years. At one point, Time reported that four million women are
assaulted by a domestic partner every year. Newsweek reported that two mil-
lion women are beaten by husbands, ex-husbands, and boyfriends every
year. Both figures were based on polls, but subsequent polls contradicted
these large numbers, raising many questions about the questions asked
and words used in these questionable polls (Adler 1994, p. 57). The use
of such polls is felt to be ethically justifiable on the grounds that they
draw public opinion in support of a worthy cause. Advocacy groups even
see the questioning of these statistics as an unjustified attack on their
goals, using the argument, “If they can save even one woman from being
battered, they don’t see the harm” (Crossen 1994). This use of argumen-
tation from consequences is, in effect, an attempted ethical justification
of the use of biased polling techniques to influence public opinion for
social and political purposes.

Use of slanted questions in political opinion polls to make a candi-
date look good or bad has become so common that it has been given a
widely used name, “push polling.”* Kesterton (1995, p. A24) presented
the following example.


Case 7.9

Push polling: A deceptive political telephone tactic that aims to sway,
rather than survey, the opinions of voters. For example, people in
Colorado last year were asked: “Please tell me if you would be more
likely or less likely to vote for Roy Romer if you knew that Governor
Romer appoints a parole board which has granted early release to
an average of four convicted felons per day every day since Romer
took office.”


Push polling has become a widely used technique of argumentation for
political and advocacy purposes. It is meant to deceive. Such polling is
widely regarded by professional polling organizations as unethical, but
there is little agreement on what should be or can done about the practice
(Feld 2001). Push polls show that asking critical questions about the


° See note 1 at the beginning of the chapter.


Use of Polls by Advocacy Groups 251


question wording of a poll is by no means purely an academic exercise.
Anyone who is trying to influence public opinion by using such a tactic
is likely, as part of the tactic, to try to deflect critical questions about the
structure and wording of the question actually used to obtain the poll
results. Typically, media reports do not include any information of that
kind. The best defense against such fallacious tactics is to promote public
education on how to critically question polls and arguments based on
them.

It is typically not possible to get answers to critical questions about
methods used in polling from media reports, or from an arguer who has
used a poll to support his claim, because the poll result is quoted as part
of an argument in the media. To judge the worth of the argument it
is vital in such cases to ask who did the polling, and whether they are a
reliable organization. But even reputable polling organizations have been
known to make serious mistakes. Even worse, there is growing concern
that reputable polling agencies can have an active agenda of advocating
the particular view or interests of a group that stands to gain or lose by the
poll outcome. In Canada, academics criticized a 1993, study by Statistics
Canada on violence against women, based on the polling methods used
by StatsCan (Mitchell 1995). Critics argued that StatsCan distorted the
picture by using only women as respondents and asking leading questions
to elicit the desired answers. This controversy has raised questions about
the reliability of StatsCan as an objective collector of scientific data, as
opposed to being a government agency controlled by advocacy groups
that have an active interest in using statistics to promote their goals.

It is fair to classify the use of push polling by political parties and gov-
ernment agencies as a species of propaganda. Propaganda is the use of a
one-sided advocacy argument, biased to push for one side of an issue. It
is disguised to look like an objective collection of data, or an argument
that takes both sides of the issue into account in a balanced fashion, in
order to influence mass opinion or to get action for a cause. It is fair to
say that misuse of polling has become an instrument of propaganda on a
wide scale in the Western democratic countries. In making public policy
decisions in a democracy, it is very tempting for advocacy groups to use
polling as an instrument to influence opinion. Because it employs statis-
tical sampling methods, polling appears to many to be a purely objective
kind of inductive inference that is only “reporting the facts.” However, in
many cases, this appearance of objectivity is an illusion. The persuasion
aspect of the wording of the poll is deceptively concealed under the guise
of scientific accuracy.


252 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


One problem that has frequently been observed in polls used to esti-
mate public opinion on complex political issues of the day is the pres-
ence of internal contradictions in their results. According to Susan King,
quoted in Cantril et al. (1990, p. 379), these contradictions tend to recur
where polls are routinely used to measure public opinion on certain
political issues.


Case 7.10

Contradictions occur because these are very complicated issues. For
example, whereas there may be strong registration of public feeling
about government regulation in general — a broad majority of the
public is opposed to additional government regulation, and thinks
there is too much government presence in the private sector — when
you ask specific questions, almost all the polls reflect a sizable major-
ity in favor of health and safety regulation, particularly in the areas
of air and water quality, workplace safety, and consumer product
safety. These questions always elicit around 74, 75, 76 percent pos-
itive response.

As an example of the contradictions, take a Harris poll in May
of 1978, at the time the Consumer Protection Agency was under
consideration. Fifty-eight percent of the respondents indicated that
they were in favor of the creation of such an agency and 28 percent
opposed it. Sixty-nine percent said that creation of such an agency
was long overdue, and about 65 percent agreed that the consumer
couldn’t fight big business alone and needed a government agency
to help protect consumer interests. At the same time, 52 percent
said that they agreed with the statement that another bureaucracy
would just lead to more red tape and higher taxes, and probably
wouldn’t help protect the consumer at all.


It seems in a case like this that public opinion is itself contradictory. The
respondents are in favor of this new government agency, but they are
also against government regulation and bureaucracy and, therefore, by
inference, against the creation of a new government agency that regu-
lates business. It seems like the respondents want to “have their cake and
eat it too.” They don’t want to be regulated by yet another government
agency, and yet they want the benefits that may be gained from having
such an agency. Is this really a contradiction or not? In a way, the appar-
ent contradiction is understandable, because other things being equal,
people would like the benefits of a consumer protection agency. But if


Use of Polls by Advocacy Groups 253


the costs of setting up and paying for such an agency, plus all the restric-
tions on business it would introduce, and its costs, are pointed out, then
many people are going to be much less enthusiastic. But by just asking
the simple yes-no question, “Are you for or against it?” the more com-
plex aspects of the question are pushed into the background. The poll
result gives a simplistic and misleading picture of what people are really
thinking about the issue.

As it has become more and more obvious to the public that advocacy
groups get alarming statistics by asking loaded questions and twisting
definitions, people have lost confidence in the polls. They have doubts
about the ethics of polling and no longer have the confidence in the sci-
entific accuracy of the polls they once had. Loss of confidence in polling
has often been observed by the pollsters themselves. Evans Witt, presi-
dent of Princeton Survey Research Associates, reported that the public
is increasingly skeptical of both the ethics and the output of the polling
industry.


The public is not sure about the scientific basis for polls. What value Americans
see in polling is dribbling away through misuse. They say pollsters aren’t asking
the right questions to get what they really think. And they think that polls can be
twisted and tortured to produce whatever results deep-pocketed sponsors desire.
(Witt 2001, p. 2)


The pollsters themselves have become concerned about this loss of pub-
lic confidence because they are finding it harder to get respondents to
reply to telephone polls. More and more polls are being done on the
Internet, partly for this reason. Witt even reported that according to a
poll conducted by the Pew Research Center in 2000, pollsters were rated
lower by the public for their performance in the presidental election of
2000 than talk show hosts and campaign consultants. Part of the reason
for this loss of confidence is that so many polls announced in the media
and in ads are carried out by media who want a good “story” or by advo-
cates of one kind or another who are using the poll to support their own
cause or product.

The problem posed by misuse of polls has two dimensions. One is the
production of the poll itself. The other is the reporting of the poll in
the media, or by advocates. When a poll is carried out by a reputable
company, the statistical procedures used are very carefully designed to
prevent skewed results due to samples that are too small or not represen-
tative of the population. These statistical methods have been well tried
and tested, and they are very accurate in certain respects. The accuracy


254 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


figures reported along with the poll results by reputable firms show that
the proper statistical procedures for gathering data have been followed.
But what is misleading is that these figures don’t tell the reader anything
about other factors, like the use of loaded questions or emotive termi-
nology, or how the terms used in the poll have been defined. These
omissions allow such a latitude for variation in the poll outcome that the
appearance of scientific accuracy can be quite misleading. But that is just
the first dimension of the problem. The second dimension is the use of
the poll results by a party other than the company who carried out the
poll. The poll results are typically reported in newspapers or other media.
These reports may not include the accuracy figures originally given by the
pollster. They may even reword the finding of the poll in a way that puffs
the outcome up, making it appear more dramatic. Finally, the media may
even have conducted the polls themselves, on their Web pages, for exam-
ple. The polls may even have been conducted by someone who has no
training in polling. For example, phone polls conducted by politicians
or promoters of a product can use questions that are highly biased and
contain argumentation and emotive terminology. They want to put a pos-
itive or negative spin on certain persons or products, and use the poll as
device for this very purpose. Once this practice becomes evident to the
public, it is small wonder they become skeptical about polls.


6. The Advent of Deliberative Polling


According to Yankelovich (1992, p. 22) public opinion polls can be very
misleading, because people may not be aware of the consequences of a
policy. Yankelovich noted (1991, pp. 38-44) that polls showed a more
than 70 percent majority believing that the United States should have
protectionist legislation. But when subsequent polls indicated that people
might then have less choice of products, have to pay more for certain
products, or have less quality, support for protectionism went down 26 to
28 percent.

The general problem, according to Yankelovich, is that when polls
are used to estimate public opinion on issues of public policy, they too
often oversimplify how the public is thinking. As shown in chapter 6,
section 7, Yankelovich viewed public deliberation as a dynamic process
that evolves as the public becomes aware of a problem and thinks out
possible solutions. His criticism of the polls we are so familiar with in the
mass media is that they oversimplify this process by taking only a snapshot


The Advent of Deliberative Polling 255


of one stage in a dynamic process of deliberation. Yankelovich (1992,
p. 24) divided the process of public deliberation into seven stages:


1. People become aware of the existence of a problem.

2. Asense of urgency develops about doing something to solve the

problem.

Policy makers begin to offer proposals for change.

4. Resistance to change arises as people become aware of difficult
trade-offs.

5. People wrestle with the trade-offs, trying to reconcile conflicting


ge


values.

People reach an intellectual resolution on what to do.

7. People personally, emotionally, and morally accept the resolution
of the issue.


The problem with public opinion polls, according to Yankelovich (p. 25),
is that because the media see their job as making people aware of new
issues, they tend to emphasize stages one and two, because they see the
public as a passive receptacle of information. But the most important
thing about a public opinion poll as a basis for forming a public policy is
the stage where people’s opinions are being measured, in the sequence
of deliberations that leads to a public judgment.

The process of thinking described by Yankelovich is a distinctive type
of reasoning that is normatively classified in the typology of dialogues in
chapter 1 as goal-directed practical reasoning used in deliberation. What
people are doing in thinking about a political issue or policy that affects
them personally is to judge its worth as a goal. But at the same time the
actions needed to bring about this goal, and the consequences of bringing
it about, need to be weighed in a balance. So trying to determine how
people are really thinking about a political issue of this sort by taking a
poll, based on asking a one-shot multiple choice question, “Are you in
favor of or against this policy?” is inherently misleading. The poll cannot
represent their real thinking on the issue, because that thinking will be a
balancing of goals, actions, and consequences. In certain respects, they
may be for the policy, while in other respects, they are against it. From the
point of view of the inductive sampling inference based on the polling
questions, there is a contradiction. But from the point of view of the
practical reasoning that represents the real thinking of the respondents,
the contradiction can be resolved.

Because of the deficiencies of standard polling techniques when it
comes to getting a less flawed and distorted picture of what the public is


256 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


thinking on important matters, Fishkin (1991) has proposed moving to a
different model of polling called deliberative polling. The basic problem
revealed by the various examples outlined above is that a poll provides
only a simplistic snapshot of public opinion that can be highly mislead-
ing. Citizens may lack knowledge on a question in a poll, but do not want
to reveal their ignorance or want to try to help the pollster. Hence, as
noted above, they will venture an opinion, even if they really do not know
anything at all about the issue. Even though they may realize that they
have not thought about an issue enough to have a firm opinion, most
respondents feel obliged to venture an opinion in answer to a pollster’s
question, just to help the pollster out. As Fishkin (1991, p. 83) summed
up the problem, “most opinions are invented on the spot,” and thus the
polls are often distorted to make things appear a lot more definite than
they really are. Fishkin’s proposal that deliberative polls be used to solicit
public opinion could overcome these deficiencies. The respondent could
engage in a dialogue with the pollster, instead of just answering “yes” or
“no” to a loaded question based on questionable definitions or emotively
suggestive language. The respondent could admit his ignorance in a dia-
logue format that would permit finer shades of opinion to come out.
The purpose of an ordinary public opinion poll is to answer the ques-
tion of what the opinion of the public is on some issue, at a particular
time. On many issues, many of those polled will lack information about
the issue. But that will not prevent them from venturing an opinion. And
indeed, as noted above, the question of the poll is designed typically to
force them to declare an opinion, one way or the other, on the issue.
The purpose of a deliberative poll is to answer the question of what the
opinion of the public would be if it had a better opportunity to consider
the question at issue (Fishkin 1995, p. 162). The method of conducting a
deliberative public opinion poll has been concisely described by Fishkin.


Take a national random sample of the electorate and transport those people
from all over the country to a single place. Immerse the sample in the issues, with
carefully balanced briefing materials, with intensive discussions in small groups,
and with the chance to question competing experts and politicians. At the end
of several days of working through the issues face to face, poll the participants in
detail. The resulting survey offers a representation of the considered judgments
of the public — the views the entire country would come to if it had the same
experience of behaving more like ideal citizens immersed in the issues for an
extended period. (1995, p. 162)


There are several respects in which the deliberative poll can be con-
trasted to the usual type of public opinion poll we are so familiar with.
Instead of being a snapshot of public opinion at one point in time, the


The Advent of Deliberative Polling 257


deliberative poll is the outcome of a dialogue that develops over time,
passing through various stages. The deliberation goes through an open-
ing stage, and then an argumentation stage in which there is interaction
among the participants. As the deliberation dialogue proceeds, there is
an interjection of information from experts and politicians. The delib-
erations can thus become better informed and more intelligent. There
is what is called an embedding of the information-seeking dialogue in
a deliberation dialogue. In the usual poll, the respondent tends to be
forced to give an answer even if she is ignorant about the issue. In the
deliberative poll, this ignorance of the respondent is gradually overcome
as the deliberation proceeds. This difference means that many of the fal-
lacies that inevitably occur in the ordinary polls, because of the way the
poll is designed and has to be carried out, are much less likely to occur
in the deliberative poll. A further major difference is stated by Fishkin
above. The purpose of the deliberative poll is different from that of the
usual poll. The usual poll has the aim of simply collecting information
about what view the public is holding. The deliberative poll has the aim of
judging what view the public would hold if it was thoughtfully informed
about the issue and the arguments on both sides.

Traditional polling is a method of estimating public opinion on polit-
ical issues that takes no account of the reasons a respondent has for
holding an opinion. To get a better grasp of public opinion, critical ques-
tions about the questions used in the poll need to be asked. In particular,
the extent of the known consequences of a policy at issue needs to be con-
sidered, in judging the worth of a conclusion derived by inference from
a public opinion poll. To get a deeper analysis of how the respondents
are reacting to the question posed in the poll, it is necessary to adopt a
broader viewpoint. In this viewpoint the question and reply are seen as
part of an ongoing deliberation on some issue the public is thinking
about. By adopting a dialectical model of deliberation, a critical thinker
can resolve the apparent contradictions in the public responses to the
question put in the poll. Fortunately, the ordinary poll is not the only
method of judging public opinion on an issue. Focus groups, discussion
groups, and deliberative polls are alternative methods that offer deeper
insight into how the public is thinking about that issue. Deliberation is
one of the dialectical models of argument analyzed in Walton and Krabbe
(1995).

Recent research in AI and argumentation has begun to study formal
models of deliberation, as noted in chapter g, section 5. In this research,
deliberation is seen as a kind of conversation or dialogue in which two
parties communicate with each other collaboratively. The conversation


258 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


is modeled as a formal dialogue in which there are rules binding on the
moves made by the participants. The rules govern the kinds of moves
that can be made at each stage of the dialogue. As shown in chapter 2,
section 5, Hitchcock et al. (2001) have set out a formal model of delib-
eration with the intent of making the model precise enough to be imple-
mented by computer software. The obvious setting for such a dialogue
model is that of multi-agent systems in computing. In multi-agent sys-
tems, software entities need to communicate in order to carry out vari-
ous tasks collaboratively. In a deliberation dialogue of the kind modeled
by Hitchcock et al., the two participants take turns making proposals
and counter-proposals. But they also need to make other kinds of moves
(speech acts), like asking and replying to questions. As shown in chapter
2, Hitchcock et al. structure deliberation as a type of dialogue that goes
through eight stages as it moves toward its goal. The goal of a deliberation
dialogue is to solve a problem by taking action on a question that poses
a choice among possible courses of action. As deliberation proceeds, the
two parties put forward various proposals for dealing with the problem,
and examine arguments for and against them. The following itemization
of the eight different types of moves in a deliberation dialogue is quoted
from Hitchcock et al. (2001, p. 7).


Open: Opening of the deliberation dialogue, and the raising of a governing
question about what is to be done.


Inform: Discussion of: (a) the governing question; (b) desirable goals; (c) any
constraints on the possible actions which may be considered; (d) perspectives by
which proposals may be evaluated; and (e) any premises (facts) relevant to this
evaluation.


Propose: Suggesting of possible action-options appropriate to the governing
question.


Consider: Commenting on proposals from various perspectives.


Revise: Revising of: (a) the governing question, (b) goals, (c) constraints, (d)
perspectives, and/or (e) action-options in the light of the comments presented;
and the undertaking of any information-gathering or fact-checking required for
resolution. (Note that other types of dialogues, such as information seeking or
persuasion, may be embedded in the deliberation dialogue at this stage.)


Recommend: Recommending an option for action, and acceptance or non-
acceptance of this recommendation by each participant.


Confirm: Confirming acceptance of a recommended option by each participant.
We have assumed that all participants must confirm their acceptance of a recom-
mended option for normal termination.


Close: Closing of the deliberation dialogue.


Argumentation Schemes and Critical Questions 259


Hitchcock et al. provided a set of rules that determine what each partici-
pant can say at each move in the dialogue. When all the relevant proposals
have been examined by both sides, and the arguments for and against
each proposal have been considered, the participants need to reach
agreement on which course of action to go ahead with. This formal model
of deliberation conforms to the standard model in recent argumenta-
tion theory in that it is commitment-based. Commitments are defined by
the speech acts of the participants and by the commitment rules. In a
commitment-based system, the premises of one participant’s arguments
are furnished by the commitments of the other. The commitment-based
model is contrasted with the belief-desire-intention (BDI) model. In the
latter model, belief is used instead of commitment as providing the basic
structure underlying the rules of the system.

Polls are currently being abused by cause advocacy groups, public rela-
tions firms, corporate advertisers, and government agencies, in ways that
are clearly fallacious and deceptive. They are among the most persuasive
argumentation tools for deceptive advocacy, propaganda, and manipu-
lation of public opinion. These claims have surely been proved quite
convincingly by the examples cited above, which resonate with familiar-
ity. But what can we do about it? It would be unrealistic to think that
we could stop such manipulative argumentation tactics or that we can
ignore polls. We do need public opinion polls as social indicators that
are vital to the intelligent formation of public policies in a democracy.
Polls should not be seen as inherently fallacious or as something we can
do without. The best solution is to teach better awareness of the falla-
cies and tricky techniques of argumentation that polling is susceptible
to. The best solution is to educate the public in critical thinking about
polls and to promote wider public awareness about the importance of
these fallacies, especially in policy formation and political deliberation
in a democracy. The movement toward deliberative polling, in place of
an uncritical reliance on the traditional methods, should be regarded as
a step in the right direction.


7. Argumentation Schemes and Critical Questions


Part of the solution to the problem is to recognize that citing a statistic
based on a poll to support a claim is allied with several distinctive forms
of argument. In many cases, the form of argument used fits the pattern of
one of the following argumentation schemes. The argumentation scheme


260 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


most applicable to the cases studied above is the following one, the basic
type of argument used to report the result of a poll.


The Report of a Public Opinion Poll Argument
X percent of respondents answered question Q giving answer A.
Answer A implies that statement Bis true (or false).
Therefore, X percent of respondents are of the opinion that Bis true
(or false).


The critical questions for the Report of a Public Opinion Poll argument
focus on the question asked in the poll. As shown above, the readers of
the poll are often not even told what this question is. Thus the key critical
question is to ask what the question was. The other two critical questions
also concern the question wording.


Critical Questions for the Report of a Public Opinion Poll Argument
1. What is the specific wording of question Q?
2. Can key terms in Q be defined precisely, in line with standards of
precision appropriate for the poll?
3. Is there a bias in question Q, due to emotive terms or the structure
of the question?


These three questions are not the only ones that can or should be asked
in response to a Report of a Public Opinion Poll argument. But as shown
by the case studies, they are the basic ones needed to spot weak points
or reveal fallacies in such an argument. The Report of a Public Opinion
Poll argument is always based on a question worded in a particular way.
The wording is always based on a definition of at least one key term. The
statistic depends on how the key term was defined. Various aspects of
the definition will affect the outcome of the poll by inflating or deflating
the numbers of the outcome. As we have seen, for example, the wider the
definition is, the larger will be the number cited as the finding of the poll.
What is important to recognize is that in response to any argument of
this type, or any argument based on a poll or statistical finding, a very
important focus of critical questioning should be on how the key term
should be defined.

The key role of definitions and the need to question them has already
been revealed by the previous case studies. But to underline the point,
it may be helpful to quote another common type of example studied by
Best (2001, p. 42).


Argumentation Schemes and Critical Questions 261


Case 7.11

When someone announces that millions of Americans are illiter-
ate, it is important to ask how that announcement defines illiteracy.
Some might assume that illiteracy means that a person cannot read
or write at all, but a speaker may be referring to “functional illiter-
acy” (that is, the inability to read a newspaper or a map or to fill
out a job application or an income tax form). Does illiterate mean
not reading at all? Not reading at the third grade level? Defining
illiteracy narrowly (as being unable to read at all) will include far
fewer people and therefore produce far lower statistical estimates
than a broad definition (being unable to read at the sixth grade
level).


A similar case, also cited by Best (p. 43), is that of the various statis-
tics on homelessness that have so often been stressed by social activists.
Competing definitions of homelessness have often been given. Should
we count only persons whose poverty made them homeless, for example?
Or should we include disaster victims? Advocates for the homeless have
argued for much broader definitions. Under such a broader definition,
for example, people living with a relative might have to be counted as
homeless. In such cases, then, the first critical question should always
be how the key term is defined. There is usually considerable scope on
how widely or narrowly to define a term. Thus, asking probing critical
questions may be necessary in order to grasp how inclusive the definition
is, and to think of alternative definitions that may be wider or narrower.
Once a respondent carries out this form of critical examination of the
argument, it will become clear how the statistic is dependent on the def-
inition. By this means, the power of the statistic to persuade is eroded.
The argument based on the numerical finding at first appears objective
and even unchallengeable. But once the critical question of definition is
raised, the power of the argument may simply evaporate.

In connection with the study of fallacies of polling, it is very useful to
be aware of two other forms of argument that commonly play a role in
arguments based on public opinion polls. The first one has to do with
the use of public opinion polls by advocacy groups of various kinds to try
to get public action on an issue.


The Call for Action Argument
Because of statistical finding S, it is shown that Pis a big problem.
Therefore we should take action A in order to solve P.


262 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


Critical Questions for the Call for Action Argument
1. How are key terms defined in the question used to get S from a
poll?
2. Do the definitions or terms used in the poll have a bias?
g. Are there actions other than A that might solve the alleged
problem?


Note that the conclusion of this form of argument is not a claim that a
statement is true or false. Instead, the conclusion is a call for action. Itis a
recommendation that a particular course of action would be a good idea.
Thus this is a practical form of argument. Its logic is that of goal-directed
practical reasoning. The context in which it should be evaluated is that
of a deliberation.

Another form of argument associated with polling, and often based
on a public opinion poll, is the appeal to popular opinion. This form of
argument has long been recognized as potentially fallacious in logic. The
argumentum ad populum is the traditional logical fallacy studied in chapter
6. As shown in chapter 6, there can be various forms of appeal to popular
opinion, and not all of them are fallacious. The form presented below is
a special subtype based on polling.


Appeal to Popular Opinion
Poll results S show that many people (or a majority) accept statement
A,
Therefore, statement A is (probably, plausibly) true.


Critical Questions for the Appeal to Popular Opinion Argument
1. What reason is there to think that majority acceptance of A is rele-
vant to accepting A as true?
2. Could the poll be biased in some way to inflate statistic S?


This form of argument is normally quite weak in itself, and an audience
may easily detect the weakness of it. But itis often bolstered by other forms
of argument. For example, suppose the majority includes the experts.
Then this would make the argument stronger and harder to attack. The
problem in such cases is one of disentangling the appeal to popular
opinion type of argument from other types of argument, such as the
appeal to expert opinion.

The call for action argument and the appeal to popular opinion
argument are common forms of argument used by advocacy groups,


Using Formal Dialectical Models of Argumentation 263


public relations firms, and others in the business of manipulating public
opinion. Neither is inherently fallacious. There is nothing wrong with
advocacy or with using such arguments to advocate a cause or a polit-
ical viewpoint or to sell a product. Persuasion by using arguments is a
legitimate type of dialogue. But such arguments often conceal a shift.
They are supposed to be part of intelligent public deliberations on how
to solve social problems, like the plight of the homeless. But then they
slide into advocacy argumentation that can properly be used in persua-
sion dialogue, but may be misleading when it is presented as supposedly
part of deliberation dialogue. The fallacy aspect enters in through the
deceptive shift from the one type of dialogue to the other. Such an argu-
ment may be all right as part of a persuasion dialogue, but it may fall
short of the rules and standards appropriate for deliberation. Here the
dialectical model of deliberation as a model of rational argumentation is
extremely important for evaluating these forms of argument.

One key problem posed by our case studies is how to determine, in a
particular case, whether a given argument is strong or weak. An associated
problem of evaluation is to judge whether it is merely weak or fallacious.
A fallacious argument is worse than one that is merely weak, or open to
critical questioning. It is one that can’t be critically questioned or has fea-
tures making it difficult to critically question. A fallacy is a bad argument
that disrupts a dialogue by either blocking it or making it problematic
or difficult for the dialogue to continue properly. Fallacies often involve
deception and deliberate tactics of confusion or unfairly trying to get the
best of a speech partner. To prove that an argument based on a poll is
fallacious, you have to show not only that critical questions have not been
answered but that there is some factor at work in the context of dialogue
that blocks off or interferes with the asking of critical questions, due to
the way the argument has been put forward in a given case. The context
of dialogue is all-important here. That is why the dialectical models of
persuasion dialogue and deliberation dialogue are needed to prove that
an argument based on a poll is fallacious.


8. Using Formal Dialectical Models of Argumentation


It is shown in this section that it is necessary and especially important
to use the dialogue methodology in current argumentation theory to
frame the asking of the question in a poll in a context of dialogue. This
chapter has already set out a number of paradigm examples (or so-called
cases) of fallacious reasoning employed in or based on polls. It concludes


264 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


by offering a dialectical (dialogue-based) technique that can be used to
probe into a question-reply dialogue in a given case and to ask the right
critical questions about the actual wording of questions in a poll. It is
argued that the best way to offset the potential for deception and bias
in polling is to anticipate and deal with specific fallacies by developing
a dialectical model of question asking and answering. But it will also be
shown how the dialectical methods need to be combined with empiri-
cal methods that measure statistical effects of the question wordings in
polls called “response effects” (Schuman and Presser 1981). Empirical
methods combined with dialectical methods provide a precise way of
measuring wording bias of a question and identifying fallacies due to this
bias.

Since Hamblin (1970) constructed several simple formal models of
dialogue to study fallacies, the use of normative models of dialogue to
evaluate argumentation use in particular cases has developed in various
directions. Formal models of persuasion dialogue along the lines set out
by Hamblin have been constructed in Walton and Krabbe (1995). As
noted in chapter 1, Hitchcock et al. have constructed a formal model of
deliberation dialogue that can be applied to polling, especially to deliber-
ative polling. Van Eemeren et al. (1996) have brought together a useful
survey of the latest developments in argumentation theory based on this
dialogue approach to the study of argumentation. The problem arising
from the cases of fallacies of polling studied so far is that the use of syn-
tactic and semantic methods to analyze the various kinds of problematic
questions used in polls is not sufficient. What is also needed is to examine
how the questions have been used in a context of dialogue. Let us then
ask how some of the problems raised could be addressed in a dialectical
framework.

The first problem that needs to be addressed is how we can use the
method to distinguish between inappropriately loaded questions — or
statements or terms — and genuine argumentative moves (that also go
some distance toward proving the respondent’s thesis false). This ques-
tion is an excellent one, and fully deserves to be answered, but it is useful
to observe that it is a loaded question itself, especially in regard to one
particular presumption. The question presumes that there is a dichotomy
between inappropriately loaded questions that should be critically ques-
tioned or may even be fallacious and genuine argumentative moves. That
is, it presumes that loaded questions are inherently non-genuine or even
illegitimate, spurious, or fallacious. But thinking that such a judgment
can be made without taking the context of dialogue into account is a


Using Formal Dialectical Models of Argumentation 265


simplistic misconception (Walton 1995). While the spouse abuse ques-
tion (to cite the modern classic case based on the ancient one) is fallacious
as used in some cases, there are cases where asking the question, “Have
you stopped abusing your spouse?” could be perfectly reasonable. In
other words, loaded questions are not always fallacious, or non-genuine
argumentative moves. Whether such a question has been used reasonably
or not in a given case is determined by constructing a normative model
of dialogue for the case. Then what needs to be done is to evaluate the
prior sequence of questioning in light of the known details of the case
and the appropriate normative model of dialogue for the case (Hamblin
1970; Walton and Krabbe 1995).

The second problem can be expressed in the following questions and
assertions. What is the connection between the dialectical analysis — using
the models of dialogue and the projected chains of argumentation used
to determine the distance between the given proposition and the respon-
dent’s thesis — and the empirical test of response effects proposed by Schu-
man and Presser? Why even assume that there is any connection here? To
assume such a connection is to assume that people’s patterns of responses
to questions are, at least to some degree, connected to judgments about
the ways in which ideal chains of argumentation might proceed. But in
fact, responses to poll questions might be much less rational than that. To
respond to the worries expressed by this set of questions and assertions, it
is best to begin by once again pointing out certain potentially misleading
implications in them.

One factor in the method for judging how loaded a question is in a
given case is connected to judgments about the ways in which ideal chains
of argumentation might proceed. Citing this factor by itself, in relation to
people’s patterns of responses to poll questions, makes the method sound
hopelessly idealistic. It makes it seem to assume, unjustifiably, that poll
respondents really think out or are aware of chains of logical reasoning in
some ideal model of argumentation. Can we assume that poll respondents
are all that rational? It would seem to be unjustified (and worrisome) to
make any such assumption.

To respond to these worries, some comments need to be made about
the use of dialectical models as a method for evaluating argumentation.
Yes, the method does assume that a respondent in a given case is rational
in a certain sense, because it applies a normative model of dialogue,
and the projecting forward of a chain of reasoning in that model of
dialogue, toward the respondent’s thesis. Because it is an ideal model,
like all models, it does not apply or fit perfectly to the details of any


266 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


particular case. Thus the evaluation of a loaded question in any particular
case will inevitably be based on certain assumptions that may not fit the
case exactly. Indeed, the evaluation of any particular case will have to be,
in certain respects, and to some extent, conditional in nature. Is that a
problem? It is not. What the evaluation of a case does is to place the asking
of the question in the given case in relation to a context of dialogue that
can be extrapolated (by presumption) from the information given in the
text of discourse of the case. So the question is evaluated as loaded from
the point of view that one can reasonably attribute to the respondent (in
the absence of indications to the contrary). This evaluation of a case on a
basis of attributing commitments to a participant in a dialogue is typical
of normative methods. What has to be recognized is that commitment is
not the same as actual belief (Hamblin 1970), but it can serve as a kind
of dialectically constructed profile of belief.

Another point to be made about this particular method of judging
loaded questions is that it is tailored to the data given in the particulars
of the individual case it is being applied to. What is especially important
to note is that the evaluation of how heavily a question is loaded in a
given case depends on the commitments of the respondent, insofar as
these are known. And how heavily a question is loaded depends on that
respondent, or on a group of respondents, in the case of a statistical
poll. So it is important to realize that, according to the method proposed
above, a question can be heavily loaded for one respondent and less
heavily loaded (or not loaded at all) for another respondent. So the
determination of how heavily a question is loaded in a given case is not
as strongly idealized as the worries expressed above suggest.

Another factor to be clear about is that the test for response effects
used by statisticians is far from a perfect instrument. It arises from the
worry that a question used in a poll might be loaded or biased in a way
that the pollster did not anticipate. The worry is that such a bias would
make the announcement of the finding of the poll (expressed as a sci-
entific finding, with numerical measures of chance of error announced)
misleading to users of the poll. Testing for a response effect is one way of
getting confirming evidence that a problem of this kind exists in a given
case. And the validity of the test, in a given case, depends on various statis-
tical assumptions about sampling — in particular, on the assumption that
the respondents used in the second test are the same kind of respondents
as those used in the first test. These are the usual statistical assumptions
about selecting a sample of respondents using methods that do not con-
tain biases of various kinds well known to statisticians. So there are plenty


Combining Dialectical and Empirical Methods 267


of worries about any running of a statistical test for a response effect. It
is not a perfect instrument, any more than any statistical test used in any
poll is.

The general dialectical method proposed for evaluating whether and
how heavily a statement, term, or question is loaded in a given case can
be summed up as follows. A statement is loaded in a particular case (in a
context of dialogue) if it goes some distance toward proving the respon-
dent’s thesis false. A term is loaded if it occurs in a loaded statement.
A question is loaded if it contains or presupposes terms or propositions
that are loaded. So defined, then, whether and how heavily a proposition
(term, question) is loaded, in a given case, is determined by four factors:
(1) the commitments of the respondent in a dialogue, (2) more gener-
ally, the context of dialogue for the given case (insofar as that is known),
(3) the type of dialogue the participants are supposed to be engaged in
(insofar as that is known, or has been determined), and (4) the projected
distance between the proposition (or term or question), as used in the
dialogue exchange, and the respondent’s thesis. This method involves
applying a normative (ideal) model of dialogue to the argumentation
used in a particular case, embedded in the text of discourse given in an
actual case. How heavily the proposition (or term or question) is loaded
is determined by applying the normative model of dialogue to the given
details of the particular case. In carrying out such an application, it is
necessary to also use the tool of the profile of dialogue, as explained in
section 1 above. In addition to this normative method, an empirical test
is proposed. A question is loaded, or contains loaded terms, if individuals
respond to it differently in statistical polls when it is reformulated in an
equivalent way using other words. It is not necessary, or practically useful,
to use this empirical test to evaluate how heavily a question is loaded in
all cases (of the kind illustrated above as typically of concern in logic and
critical thinking textbooks). Still, in principle, it is salutary to see that
there is an empirical test that can be used for this purpose, particularly
in evaluating questions used in statistical polls.


g. Combining Dialectical and Empirical Methods


What an empirical test for a response effect tells you is that there is some-
thing in the wording of the question that is loading the question or biasing
itin acertain direction. The problem could be either in the connotations
of the words used or in the logical structure of the question. The bias
is in relation to the conventional word usage and commonly accepted


268 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


opinions of a particular class of respondents, chosen according to crite-
ria of the kinds commonly recommended by statisticians for polling. The
test is a clue to or indicator of a trick or twist in the wording of the ques-
tion that a pollster may not have been aware of until it was thus revealed
and confirmed. This empirical test does not measure, in general, how
heavily a question is loaded. It is only designed to measure unanticipated
response effects due to question wording. It measures how one term in
a question is loaded, in relation to how an apparently equivalent term is
loaded in the same question, for a selected group of respondents. Thus
it tells us something about loaded terms but does not measure, nor has
anyone claimed that it measures, how heavily a question is loaded with
respect to a particular respondent or group of respondents.

So why should we assume that there is any connection between this
kind of empirical test for response effects of the wording ofa question and
the dialectical method of evaluating how heavily a question is loaded in
a given case that was proposed above? The reason is that the dialectical
method proposed above judges how heavily a question is loaded, in a
given case, in relation to the commitments of the respondent in that
actual case. Such ajudgment presumes that these factors are known or can
be judged by applying the profile of dialogue to the particulars of the case.
When the statistical test for response effects of the wording of a question is
run, it is on a particular group of respondents, where the characteristics
of this group have been chosen by the statistical survey methodology.
What is being estimated is how heavily the question is loaded, in virtue
of its wording for that group of respondents. So when it is judged that
the question is loaded or “biased” to a certain degree, for that particular
group of respondents (as extrapolated to a wider population by the usual
methods of statistical surveying), the result of the test applies to that group
of respondents. In using such a test, it is both natural and necessary to
make assumptions and to use these assumptions about the known views or
positions of this group of respondents. These factors, which correspond
to the known characteristics of the group selected, represent (in the
dialectical model) the thesis (and the known commitments generally) of
the respondent.

Collection of data in research and in statistical polls and public opinion
surveys is always based on the asking of questions. But if natural language
wording is used in the question, the question is bound to be more or less
loaded in a particular direction, and therefore bound to have significant
persuasive implications. Yet because of the way the results of scientific
investigations and surveys are typically announced, it appears that the
finding has been obtained by an objective and unbiased collection of


Combining Dialectical and Empirical Methods 269


data. The epistemological significance of this dissonance between appear-
ance and reality should be regarded as extremely important from a view-
point of critical thinking. We need to realize that before we act on these
omnipresent polls, or take them seriously as results that have been sci-
entifically validated and proved, and as constituting good evidence for
a conclusion, some way of measuring the bias of the question has to be
taken into account. But how do you measure the connotations of words
and the innuendo or implicatures in a question? This is the problem, and
statisticians are not used to dealing with problems of this kind. Indeed,
they are not well equipped to deal with it, because the problem is a dialec-
tical one, best solved by pragmatic methods on a case-by-case basis.

Work needs to be done by social scientists to investigate the relation-
ship between normative models of dialogue and empirical methods of
judging the attitudes and commitments of respondent groups in statis-
tical polls and surveys. Normative structures of dialogue that have been
developed (as cited above) are especially interesting precisely because
they do seem to model everyday argumentation much more naturally
than the deductive and inductive logical calculi that have dominated the
field of logic for so long. But exactly how the formal dialectical modeling
of loaded questions (and the tricky problems associated with them) cor-
relates with statistical techniques for empirically estimating attitudes and
commitments of respondents is really a field of inquiry in its own right,
and one that, so far, has been explored very little. As more and more peo-
ple become aware of the abuses of statistics in push polling and similarly
dubious practices now so widely operative in the collection of data, the
need for taking critical thinking seriously in this area has become more
and more evident.

As noted above, Graesser et al. (1996) developed the computer pro-
gram called QUEST to study strategies used by respondents when answer-
ing questions in polls. The QUEST model views questioning and answering
within a process of communication in which both the questioner and the
respondent have goals. Thus the QUEST model can be seen as dialectical.
It has four components (p. 149). In the question interpretation compo-
nent, the question is parsed into a logical form and its presuppositions
identified. In the information sources component, scripts, concept, and
frames are used to identify the knowledge structures. In the pragmatic
component, three factors are identified: the goals of the questioner and
the respondent, the common ground between the questioner and the
respondent, and the informativeness of the answer. In the convergence to
relevant answers component, matters of relevance are considered. The
purpose of QUEST is to identify problems that respondents typically have


270 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


with attempting to answer specific types of questions. An example cited
above (p. 154) is the kind of case in which there are problems with pre-
suppositions of questions. The ultimate aim of developing a program
such as QUEST is to improve survey questions by identifying poor ques-
tions and diagnosing particular problems with them (p. 166). A cognitive
computational model such as QUEST is both normative and dialectical in
the way it classifies and processes the asking and answering of questions
in polls and surveys.

Any method that is useful for analyzing fallacies of question bias in
polling needs to be dialectical as well as empirical. For judging how heavily
a question, term, or statement is loaded has been shown to require a
method that is both dialectical and empirical. The judgment needs to be
made by applying a normative model of dialogue to a particular case in
which a question was asked. The normative model is prompted by the
conversational context of the case, insofar as it can be determined from
the question itself and the text of discourse surrounding it (as known in
the case). The method is both normative and dialectical in that it works
by applying an abstract model of dialogue to the known particulars of
question use in a given case. However, as has been shown, empirical tests
(of the kinds used in statistical surveys) can be brought to bear, to some
extent, as well. The answer to whether a question can rightly be judged to
be loaded, as used in a given case, turns out to depend on the context of
dialogue in which the question was asked. The same method applies to
loaded terms. How can we judge whether a term used in, say, a question
or an argument is loaded? How can we judge how heavily the question is
loaded? These are questions that need to be answered by looking at the
details of the sequence of dialogue in which that term appeared, in a given
question or statement. One part of the method is the use of empirical
techniques to test for response effects. Another part of the method is to
apply a cognitive model such as QUEST to the questions used in the poll,
and diagnose specific problems and instances where bias is likely to occur.
Underlying both methods should be a dialectical model of question-reply
dialogue.


10. Conclusion and Summary of Fallacies


It needs to be emphasized that for the most part, this chapter has been
about fallacies not in polls themselves but in media arguments derived
from polls. Statistical methods used to design and validate polls are very
precise and have been very well tested, so that the most elementary


Conclusion and Summary of Fallacies 271


fallacies, such as drawing a conclusion based on too small a sample or on
an unrepresentative sample, are dealt with very well by the professional
pollsters. The main problems we have studied in this chapter concern
the unwarranted and misleading inferences drawn from polls by their
readers and users, often an audience that may not be well aware of the
limitations of statistical methodology. However, some of these problems
are created by the designers of the polls and by the media who report poll
findings. Many statistical polls are run not by professional statisticians but
by those in the media who are under the pressure of deadlines, and also
under the pressure to puff up a poll by making a finding that appears
exciting to the readers. Also, it might be noted that some of the fallacies
and other problems studied in this chapter result inherently from the use
of ordinary language and are not limited to polls.

What should we conclude about the use of undefined terms, loaded
terms, persuasive definitions, and so forth, in arguments generally, and
especially in public opinion polls? The first thing that we found was that
there is nothing inherently wrong or fallacious about using a question
that has emotive terms in it or has a bias or response effect due to ques-
tion wording. In a parallel fashion, there is nothing wrong with using
loaded terms in an argument. Nor should using persuasive definitions
be seen as fallacious per se, whether in polling or in other arguments.
For persuasion is a legitimate function of argumentation. There is noth-
ing intrinsically wrong with the general practice of using loaded terms
in a question or statement. But being aware of how polls can be biased
is vitally important when the poll is used to argue for a policy or sup-
port an argument. Critical questions should be asked before accepting
the poll outcome or drawing inferences from it. But polls based on a
friendly (persuasive) definition should not automatically be judged fal-
lacious. The use of persuasive definitions in mass media argumentation
is a subject for further study in the next two chapters.

Where then is the fallacy in the use of such questions and arguments?
The initial problem is really one of identifying bias that tends to be hid-
den because wording bias is not usually measured or even mentioned
when a poll is published. Concealment is often the basis of deception. By
showing how response effects due to question wording can be measured
in a cognitive model, it can be shown how the problem with such ques-
tions is one of concealment. The question, on the surface, appears to
have a purely information-seeking function in the collection of data. But
underlying the appearance, the question has a function of persuasion.
The question is really an argument, or is being used as an argument for


272 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


the purpose of persuasion. And the argument becomes fallacious when-
ever the biased poll is used as a systematic tactic of argumentation to
mislead an audience. A fallacy, in this sense, is a deceptive tactic of argu-
mentation used to get the best of a speech partner in a dialogue unfairly.
As shown above, biased polls are routinely used by advocates as argumen-
tation tactics to mobilize support for causes. This technique is known in
politics as “spin control.” Polling fallacies work by concealing a bias in
question wording, and then using the biased poll to advocate a cause by
statistically inflating the outcome. It is proper to speak of a fallacy being
committed in such cases because the argument can be a serious obsta-
cle to the dialogue of which the question or statement are supposed to
be a part. Biased questions can, of course, be properly used in a persua-
sion dialogue. But the standards for argumentation in an information-
seeking dialogue are different from those of a persuasion dialogue. Delib-
eration dialogue is often based on information-seeking dialogue. Thus
it is often in the transition from one type of dialogue to another that
an argument becomes fallacious. For example, if the context is one of
public deliberation on how to spend money, the proper standards for a
deliberation type of dialogue should be followed (Hitchcock et al. 2001).
But how is intelligent deliberation possible if it is based on biased infor-
mation coming from a supposedly scientific poll? If the poll is supposed
to be an objective collecting of information, it should not be judged by
the normative standards of a persuasion type of dialogue. The problem
is even worse if the poll outcome cannot be questioned because no infor-
mation is forthcoming on how key terms were defined. Thus what makes
the use of loaded terms fallacious in both questions and statements is
that the question or statement at issue is used inappropriately as part of a
normative framework of dialogue that surrounds its contextual use. If it
misuses loaded terms in various ways, asking a question in what appears to
be a scientific public opinion poll can be seriously deceptive. By exploit-
ing and actively promoting the assumption that such polls are objective,
the poll that uses a loaded question can give a highly misleading account
of the way the public is really thinking on some issue of current public
deliberation.

The following fallacies were identified and analyzed above. The fallacy
of the inappropriate persuasive definition is committed where a persua-
sive (emotive, friendly, biased) definition is explicitly used in a poll as
part of a tactic to deceptively manipulate the poll users. The fallacy of the
concealed persuasive definition is committed when the persuasive spin
introduced into the poll by an implicit persuasive definition has not been


Conclusion and Summary of Fallacies 273


revealed by the poll outcome presentation. Two other fallacies are con-
verses of each other. One is the use of a broad definition to inflate a
statistical result; the other is the use of a definition that is too narrow to
deflate a statistical result. The fallacy of meaningless statistics is commit-
ted through the use of a vague term that has not been defined, coupled
with the announcement of a precise statistical result of a poll. The fallacy
of using an atypical example in place of a definition in a poll is committed
when there has been a failure to give a needed definition, and this failure
is masked by the use of an example designed to have emotional impact
on the users of the poll. The fallacy of question structure bias in polling
is committed where the structure of the question introduces a bias into
the poll that is deceptive, concealing a “yea-say effect.” This tactic is often
employed in push polling in political polls. The question is really being
used as an attempt to persuade or to influence voters, but on the surface
it is paraded as merely a collecting of information by taking a poll. The
double negative fallacy of question wording is a tactic to confuse both poll
respondents and users by violating standards of asking a clear question.
This too is a fallacy related to the structure of a question used in a poll.
The fallacy of false dichotomy is a general fallacy in logic that can occur
in many different contexts of dialogue, including so-called objective or
multiple-choice testing. However, this fallacy is especially prominent and
important in polling. As shown above, there is a general tendency on the
part of pollsters to try to force an answer in order to get a more dramatic
and newsworthy poll outcome.

In many cases, polls are useful and accurate. In a presidential election,
for example, a simple dichotomous question like, “Which candidate are
you voting for?” can be appropriate, and the poll results coming from it
could be highly accurate. The move to deliberative polling is also some-
thing to be applauded. A deliberative poll can take finer shadings of opin-
ion into account, especially on matters of public policy in a deliberation
that goes through several stages as information comes in on an issue. Too
often in the past, on more subtle and complex matters of public opinion
and attitude, the use of a simple dichotomous question, especially one
containing emotive wording, has been fallacious. It has become increas-
ingly evident in recent years that in many cases, especially in matters of
public policy, polls have been abused. The cases analyzed above show this
pattern of deceptive manipulation of polls to influence public opinion
only too well. Common experience confirms it. The polls themselves are
not only biased, but they are used to draw unjustified inferences and even
to commit fallacies by means of tactics designed to mislead, inflate, and


274 Fallacies and Bias in Public Opinion Polling


advocate. Misusing polls has turned out to be profitable and highly suc-
cessful for those in the business of manipulating public opinion. Leading
pollsters themselves are conscious of the erosion of public faith in polling
caused by these abuses, and have made efforts to set standards. However,
it is doubtful that we will ever be able to rely on those who run polls and
use them for various purposes. We will never be able to be sure that they
are fallacy-free. It is up to us as critical thinkers to become aware of the
biases and fallacies and to take a “buyer beware” attitude to accepting
media arguments based on polls and to forming public policies based on
them.


Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


Stevenson’s theory of the persuasive definition has been applied only to
abstract ethical theory and to philosophical discussions. It has perhaps
been seen as not too widely significant when confined to that frame-
work. But its implications are of sweeping significance once it is applied
to media argumentation. It is shown in this chapter how many media
arguments are based on emotively loaded words or phrases that raise
questions about the values, verbal classifications, and definitions of these
terms. The persuasive definition, or as it is sometimes called in statis-
tics, the friendly definition, is the definition that is stacked in such a way
as to put a positive spin on the argument of the definer. This chapter
shows how persuasive definitions are extremely powerful media tools,
and how they are often used to influence public policy arguments. Five
cases based on the use of persuasive definitions in public policy argu-
ments are presented, analyzed, and evaluated below. In all of these cases,
the use of the persuasive definition as an argumentative technique had
consequences that changed social policies in a way that led to significant
gains in the interests of some advocacy groups and losses in the interests of
others.

Using these rhetorical case studies, some basic dialectical problems are
posed about the legitimacy of persuasive definitions, about how to recon-
struct the chains of argumentation they are based on, and about how
to evaluate them. The traditional approach, with its dichotomy between
nominal and real definition, is shown to be inadequate; it is confining
and misleading in many ways. It is shown that we need to begin with a
case-based approach that illustrates how persuasive definitions are actu-
ally deployed as media argumentation devices in different contexts. Then


275


276 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


it is shown how a method can be developed that classifies, analyzes, and
evaluates definitions, and arguments based on them, with reference to
the way each definition was used for some conversational purpose in a
given case.

It is shown that persuasive definitions are inherently legitimate when
used in a dialectically appropriate way in a context of dialogue. Now that
the speech act of persuasion has been defined in chapter 2, it becomes
possible to investigate, at a much deeper level than was possible before,
the conditions under which persuasive definitions should be regarded as
legitimate and appropriate as devices of persuasion. But to get deeper,
we also have to identify the argumentation schemes in which arguments
based on verbal classifications, values, and definitions are put forward.
This chapter shows that persuasive definitions can be appropriate in a
persuasion dialogue, provided the right conditions are met concerning
the chain of argumentation in which the definition is put forward by the
proponent and reacted to by the respondent. But if persuasive definitions
can be legitimate under the right conditions in some cases, how is it
that they can be tricky, deceptive, and even fallacious in other cases,
where they are powerful instruments of deception? This difficult question
is the final one taken up in this chapter. Rhetoric by itself, before the
advent of argumentation schemes, and methods from AI, such as tools
for argumentation diagramming that can incorporate schemes, could
never solve the problem posed by this question. This chapter shows that
with the advent of the new dialectical tools, we are now getting close to
solving it.


1. Stevenson’s Theory of Persuasive Definitions


The concept of the persuasive definition, as used in a certain way in argu-
mentation, is a theory introduced by philosopher Charles L. Stevenson in
his article published in the journal Mind (1938). It was then elaborated
and presented in the form most of us are familiar with it today in his book,
Ethics and Language (1944). A basic assumption behind Stevenson’s con-
cept of the persuasive definition is that words used in argumentation, for
example, in ethical discussions, have both an emotive and a descriptive
meaning. This distinction between the two types of meaning appears to
have been drawn from earlier theoreticians of language use. According to
the account given by Aomi (1985, p. 187), the phrase “emotive meaning”
was coined by Ogden and Richards in their book, The Meaning of Mean-
ing (1923). Ogden and Richards postulated that the descriptive meaning


Stevenson’s Theory of Persuasive Definitions 277


is the core factual or descriptive content of a word, while the emotive
meaning represents the feelings or attitudes (positive or negative) that
the use of the word suggests to respondents. Stevenson’s theory of how
persuasive definitions work in argumentation is built on this distinction.
How a persuasive definition works, according to Stevenson’s theory, is by
redefining the descriptive meaning of the word, while covertly retaining
its old familiar emotive meaning. The potential deception in this tech-
nique is that while the word ostensibly appears to have been given an
entirely new meaning, it continues to retain its past emotional mean-
ing. The emotional connotation expressed by the old meaning could
be positive or negative. For example, the word “liberation” has positive
connotations, while the word “oppression” has negative connotations.
Because of the lingering of this emotive meaning, the respondent is
covertly persuaded to accept (or reject) the new definition, based on
persuasive positive or negative connotations in the existing usage of the
word.

To show how Stevenson’s concept of the persuasive definition works
in practice, it is best to give an example. Stevenson himself (1944, p. 211)
offered the following illustration, in the form of a dialogue between two
parties called A and B.


Case 8.1


A: He has had but little formal education, as is plainly evident from his con-
versation. His sentences are often roughly cast, his historical and literary
references rather obvious, and his thinking is wanting, in that subtlety and
sophistication which mark a trained intellect. He is definitely lacking in cul-
ture.

B: Much of what you say is true, but I should call him a man of culture notwith-
standing.

A: Aren’t the characteristics | mention the antithesis of culture, contrary to the
very meaning, of the term?

B: By no means. You are stressing the outward forms, simply the empty shell of
culture. In the true and full sense of the term, “culture” means imaginative
sensitivity and originality. These qualities he has; and so I say, and indeed
with no little humility, that he is a man of far deeper culture than many of
us who have had superior advantages in education.


B is arguing that the conventionally accepted definition of “culture” is
superficial, and he proposes a new definition that redefines the term
“culture” in terms of sensitivity and originality, and not just outward
appearances.


278 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


What might be the effects of such a redefinition if applied to a case
of ethical judgment? We can pose this question by extending Stevenson’s
example to a new one, which we now invent and call case 8.1a.


Case 8.1a

Suppose Rodney uses bad grammar, has bad table manners, and
displays an ignorance of history, literature, and classical music, but
is emotionally sensitive, and highly original, even eccentric in his
behavior. By the standard meaning of “culture,” Rodney would defi-
nitely not be said to be a cultured person. But suppose that Rodney’s
boorish behavior is excused by claiming that according to the new
definition, he is a cultured person.


In case 8.1a, Rodney’s (apparently) bad behavior is being justified or
excused by arguing that in the way that really counts, or really should
count, he is a cultured person. What’s really happening is that a kind of
positive spin is being put on the case by using language that makes Rod-
ney’s behavior seem okay. How does the technique work? It works because
the term “culture” retains its positive emotive meaning, thus seeming to
support the view that Rodney is really behaving in an acceptable way.
Stevenson’s theory (1938, p. 333) can be used to explain how the argu-
mentation works to create a deception in such a case. The redefined word
retains the old positive emotive connotations that it always had, as noted
above. But people tend not to realize that they are still being influenced
by them, even though they have agreed to change to the new descriptive
meaning, which perhaps should not still continue to have positive conno-
tations, at least of the same kind. The technique works because the shift
of descriptive meaning is typically not accompanied by a shift of emotive
meaning. The result is a deceptive kind of blurring or ambiguity of mean-
ing in the sequence of argumentation. This deceptive aspect has often
evoked quite a critical attitude toward persuasive definitions in logic text-
books, where they are treated as, if not fallacious, at least something to
be wary about. However, persuasive definitions sometimes appear to be
acceptable.

A leading characteristic that helps us to recognize persuasive defini-
tions, according to Stevenson (1944, p. 214), is that they are often pre-
ceded by the words “true” or “real.” In case 8.1, for example, B says that she
is talking about the “true” meaning of culture. Another illustration pre-
sented by Stevenson (1938, p. 334) defines “courage” as “strength against
adverse public opinion.” Persuasive definitions are commonly found in


Stevenson’s Theory of Persuasive Definitions 279


intellectual writings, such as on philosophy, literary criticism, and the
social sciences. Philosophical arguments and ethical treatises in particu-
lar are full of persuasive definitions. Hallden (1960) has described many
cases of such writings that give persuasive definitions of concepts like
love, humor, poetry, culture, life, and democracy. It would be a sweeping
condemnation to reject all these arguments as being somehow logically
deficient, or even fallacious, just because persuasive definitions are used
in them. So the diagnosis of exactly what is wrong with using persuasive
definitions appears to be an unsolved problem. Whatever the solution
to the problem is, Stevenson was certainly right to warn that persuasive
definitions can be quite tricky and powerful tools of persuasion.

Aomi (1985, p. 187) explained the basic components of Stevenson’s
theory very well by stating the following four requirements of the effec-
tiveness of a persuasive definition.


1, The word being defined has strong emotive connotations.

2. The descriptive meaning of the word is vague and ambiguous
enough to be semantically manipulated.

3. The change of meaning by redefinition is not noticed by naive
listeners.

4. The emotive meaning of the word remains unaltered.


This four-tiered account of how persuasive definitions work shows how an
emotive inertia factor is a key aspect of the process showing how the use
of such definitions can be both persuasive and deceptive. The third and
fourth requirements show how the function of a persuasive definition
in persuading an audience depends on two factors: (1) how the people
in the audience react emotionally to the word being redefined and (2)
whether they notice the meaning shift implied by the redefinition.

Stevenson’s theory seems mainly applicable to ordinary conversational
argumentation and philosophical discussions, as indicated by the exam-
ples. But when one tries to apply it to mass media argumentation, other
factors come into play. Persuasive definitions used in political arguments
are most often designed to influence public opinion but are sometimes
used to change public policies, regulations, or even laws or legal defini-
tions. But once a definition is set in place in a bureaucracy, there is an
inertia effect. It can’t be changed easily by a single individual retracting
it. In such cases, we are dealing not just with a proponent and respondent
who are single agents. We are dealing with a community of arguers.

It is common that issues concerning the definition of terms used in
mass media argumentation have a legal aspect. In such cases, there is


280 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


a shift from the framework of a political or philosophical discussion to
a legal one. But the rules and standards by which definitions and argu-
ments are judged is quite different in the legal framework. To put the
point in a more graphic way, two distinct communities of arguers are
involved. A community is generally thought of as a group of actual per-
sons. But McKerrow (1990) has suggested that the term has a differ-
ent meaning as applied to the normative evaluation of argumentation.
In this sense, a community of arguers can be seen as a set of agents
or participants in dialogue who share a set of rules and common goals
guided by their wish to collaborate verbally in order to discuss an unset-
tled issue. A community in this sense is defined by the collaborative
willingness of a set of participants to abide by a set of social practices.
There can be different communities guided by different sets of rules.
One type of community cited by McKerrow (1999, p. 30) is the personal,
but other types include the social, the technical, and the philosophi-
cal. McKerrow also noted (p. 29) that communities can be composed of
individuals who follow the rules of a community out of free choice or
“as a result of an edict from others in positions of authority.” One can
see that the freedom to put forward and to accept or reject definitions
can be expected to vary considerably from one community of arguers to
another.

For example, in a personal or philosophical discussion, a proponent
is free to put forward a definition at any time, and the respondent in the
discussion is free to accept it, reject it, or raise critical questions about it.
If it is a persuasive definition, just because it is a speech act of persuasion,
of the kind that might be found in an argument, the conclusion that it is
wrong does not necessarily follow. Of course, words already have estab-
lished meanings in ordinary usage. But it is quite possible to redefine a
term as part of an argument. The respondent to whom the definition
was directed should, however, have the right to question it or even to put
forward an opposed persuasive definition. In a philosophical discussion,
perhaps the respondent could even be said to be obliged to question
the definition, and probe into it philosophically instead of accepting it
uncritically. However, the situation will be quite different in argumen-
tation in a legal community. For example, in a trial or in another legal
proceeding, many terms have a meaning that has long been established
by legal usage, statute, or a court ruling. The legal community is bound
by these definitions and accepted usages of terms, once established. Of
course, legal definitions and usages of terms can change, and often do
as new cases or rulings modify, extend, or even replace old meanings
with new definitions. But in this community, one is not free to simply


Cases of Public Redefinitions 281


advocate a persuasive definition of a term that already has an accepted
legal meaning. Of course, one can do that, but that does not mean that
the respondent will accept it or should even be bound to give it weight
as a presumption overturning the existing presumption in law.


2. Cases of Public Redefinitions


The case studies in this investigation show how persuasive redefinitions of
terms already defined in science, law, or everyday usage are very often, in
a clever and subtle way, deployed to serve the interest of the definer. Per-
suasive definitions are commonly treated in logic textbooks. There have
been studies of how they work as rhetorical tools used in argumentation,
most notably by Stevenson (1944). However, in the literature, they tend
to be treated as potentially confusing but fairly harmless logic-chopping
devices used to boost up the plausibility of arguments in intellectual philo-
sophical discussions. The case studies analyzed below show that persua-
sive definitions are far from the harmless verbal tricks they may appear to
be. They are extremely powerful and significant argumentation tactics in
legal and political argumentation with serious financial implications at
all levels of government and at all levels of the justice system. Politics, in
the view of Sederberg (1984) can even be seen as the attempt to control
shared meaning. It can be seen as an arena in which “the contenders
struggle to impose their respective meanings upon one another” or as a
stable situation in which the powerful try to impose on others shared
meanings underlying existing social arrangements (Sederberg 1984,
p- 59). Definitions, on this view, are among the most powerful instruments
of politics. Arguments about definitions are often taken to be trivial, but
a brief investigation of some cases of political mass media argumentation
will show that this impression is far from accurate.

In the following two cases, a U.S. president used a key term in the
media, but then later, under the pressure of events, redefined it in a
way suggesting a persuasive definition. Both cases are very interesting, in
relation to the subject of investigating definitions, because they reveal the
scope and importance of the subject. Far from being trivial, definitions,
especially in legal and political cases, can involve vast sums of money, can
affect the interests of powerful groups, and can be important in shaping
public policies at the national level. Both cases are summarized from the
much more detailed accounts given in the sources cited. Neither case
should be taken as unusual. The interesting phenomena they illustrate
would appear to be extremely common in political argumentation. A
number of other cases in which definitions have had considerable impact


282 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


in the domain of public argument can be found in a recent special issue
of Argumentation and Advocacy on this subject (vol. 35, no. 4, 1999). For
example, Titsworth (1999) has shown how the definition of “learning
disability” has had an ideological basis in public discourse.

In the following case, President Ronald Reagan had proposed tax cuts
to the federal domestic budget, but did not want to appear to be cutting
programs in a way that would make his policies unpopular or offend par-
ticular groups. He proceeded with the strategy described below, summa-
rized from the account in Zarefsky, Miller-Tutzauer, and Tutzauer (1984).


Case 8.2

In a speech given in 1981, Reagan pledged to trim spending in fed-
eral domestic assistance programs while maintaining benefits for
the “truly needy.” Under pressure to clarify this key phrase, five days
later the administration presented a specific list of programs that
constituted the country’s “social safety net” and would be exempt
from cuts. The implication was that those who were “truly needy”
would not have their “safety net” program cut (p. 115). Later in the
year, however, Reagan cut social security and disability programs,
but continued the pledge that the government would respond to
the “truly needy,” thus narrowing the list of “safety net” programs. By
redefining “truly needy” and “safety net,” he could propose making
these reductions without breaking his earlier promise. These redef-
initions proceeded gradually, and were not widely recognized by
the public (p. 117). But they reassured those dependent on social
services, because they could feel that as long as they were “truly
needy,” their programs would not be cut.


In this case, the use of the word “truly” in the phrase “truly needy” indi-
cates the use of a persuasive definition. Even though it is admitted that
the word “needy” is being redefined or altered, the word “truly” suggests
that those who are really in need will not have programs cut. And anyone
who depends on such a program will feel that they are definitely in the
class of the truly needy. The use of the persuasive definition is reassuring
to voters, while at the same time it leaves open a lot of latitude for making
cuts without the danger of breaking a promise.

A definition can be used by someone as powerful as an American
president to set the terms of a discussion taking place at the national and
international levels of politics. Zarefsky (1986) used the case of President
Johnson’s “War on Poverty” to illustrate this point. According to Zarefsky


Cases of Public Redefinitions 283


(p. 11), “The function of presidential definition is primarily to shape the
context in which events or proposals are viewed by the public.” Context
can determine response, in Zarefsky’s view, by containing presumptions.
Once a presumption is set in place by a presidential definition, a bur-
den of proof is put on any respondent who would argue in a way that
appears to go against the presumption. Thus once President Johnson
had defined his initiative to get the Economic Opportunity Act passed
as part of what he called a War on Poverty, opponents found it difficult
to make objections against a proposal described by such an appealing
phrase. You have to remember that this phrase was appealing during the
time before the Vietnam War became such a focus of dissent. Johnson’s
opponents tried to criticize the “anti-poverty” label as a rhetorical trick,
but were unsuccessful. President Johnson even referred to some of these
objections by remarking, “Why anyone should hate an antipoverty pro-
gram, I don’t know” (Zarefsky 1986, p. 35). This kind of example shows
how a president can mobilize resources behind an initiative by defining
the issue in a way that invokes a presumption in favor of one side. The
presumption is set in place by the language that is used. It may not be
explicit definitions of terms that sets the presumption in place so much
as the way certain things are categorized using terms that have a positive
or negative emotive spin. At that time, the expression “War on Poverty”
had such a positive spin that it was almost irresistible. To question or crit-
icize it, an opponent would immediately risk looking bad, and would be
heavily on the defensive.

Both the safety net case and the War on Poverty case involve argu-
mentation in which definition is covertly used. In the safety net case, a
term was originally defined in a certain way, but then later, the criteria
were changed so that the definition itself was covertly altered. In the War
on Poverty case, Johnson used emotionally loaded language to invoke a
presumption in favor of his own initiative that labeled opposition to his
viewpoint as against “anti-poverty.” He did not explicitly use a specific def-
inition of the term “poverty” as the lynchpin of his rhetorical strategy, as
far as I can tell. But he covertly used a tactic of persuasion relating to defi-
nition by conjoining the two terms “war” and “poverty” in a way that made
it seem difficult to oppose his legislation. His proposal came under this
positive-sounding category, and anyone who opposed it would appear to
be arguing against the “anti-poverty” side of the issue. This tactic of using
emotive terms to give a positive spin to an argument had been noticed
early on by Jeremy Bentham. Bentham was familiar with parliamentary
and legal debates, and identified what he called “laudatory” (emotively


284 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


positive) and “vituperative” (emotively negative) terms used as rhetorical
strategies in these disputes. He proposed a three-way classification of such
terms used in argumentation (1969, p. 337). They are eulogistic (lauda-
tory) if they evoke general approbation, dyslogistic (vituperative) if they
evoke disapprobation, or neutral, if they fall into neither category. In the
War on Poverty case, Johnson invented a eulogistic expression to define
the viewpoint he wished to advocate. Because “poverty” is something neg-
ative, a “War on Poverty,” he thought, would be something positive. The
phrase seems to identify a cause that everyone would want to join. The use
of this laudatory expression, similar to the terms “pro-choice” and “pro-
life” in the abortion debate, set the discussion for the subsequent political
and mass media argumentation on a tilted playing field. What it is vitally
important to recognize in such cases is the persuasive role in mass media
argumentation played by terminology. The argumentation can be explic-
itly founded on a persuasive definition. Or it can be based on emotive use
of language grounded on a categorization covertly based on an unstated
definition that invokes a continuing presumption in favor of one side in
a dispute. Once the terms of the dispute are set in place, it becomes very
hard for the opposing side to have a real voice. Until that side can raise
critical questions and pry out the overt definition-based move, it remains
in avery difficult position. That side always seems to be on the defensive.
How can anyone deal with this tactic? What is needed is to expose the
structure underlying the forms of argument used in such strategies, and
also the dialogue structure that determines how such arguments should
be critically questioned.

The next case is more complicated, because it involves the definition
of a term that played an important role in political debate, but is basically
a scientific term. The account below is summarized from the detailed
description and analysis given by Schiappa (1996, pp. 213-220).


Case 8.3
The term “wetlands” came to prominence in the environmental
debates of the late 1960s and early 1970s. It refers to an area satu-
rated by water to the extent that only specially adapted plants can
grow in it. Wetlands are very valuable to the ecology, according to sci-
entists. Environmentalists, concerned about the disappearance of
wetlands, especially due to building, have lobbied to protect these
areas from development. Large amounts of money are at stake, and
developers have engaged in many widely publicized legal actions
and debates on the issue with environmentalists. Starting in the


Cases of Public Redefinitions 285


1970s efforts were made to introduce a standardized ecological defi-
nition of the term “wetlands.” A 1979 definition cited features such
as the kind of soil, the kind of vegetation, and the way water is
present. In 1989 a definition of this kind was codified in a federal
government manual for identifying wetlands.

In the presidential election campaign of 1988, George Bush com-
mitted his administration to a policy of “no net loss” of wetlands. By
1990, it became clear that if Bush kept to this commitment, he was
in danger of alienating many of his pro-business, pro-development
constituents. Accordingly, in August 1991, a document produced
by avice presidential task force proposed a redefinition of the term
“wetlands” making the criteria stricter than those given in the 1989
manual. According to studies by scientists and environmentalists,
under the new definition, 50 million acres previously designated
“wetlands” would now be excluded. This so-called codification of
the definition in the 1989 manual was implemented in federal agen-
cies without approval by the White House or Congress and without
inviting public comment, even though it met with intense opposi-
tion from environmentalists.


Schiappa commented that it is important to recognize that this dispute
over defining “wetlands” needs to be seen as a matter of competing inter-
ests. The problem is that “wetlands” is a scientific term that should be
defined by the scientific experts, using a so-called real definition. But
when politics is involved, and hence also competing interests, it is easy to
slip over into a persuasive definition that suits political needs, driven by
powerful interest groups. The problem is that such redefinitions tend to
merge scientific and political discourse in a way that misleads the public
and allows a “technocratic elite” to be granted “definitional hegemony”
to promote their own interests and causes under the guise of scientific
neutrality. When you look at the details of the rhetoric in this case, as
described by Schiappa, it is clear that the debate is not really about sci-
ence, but is driven more by the competing interests of groups. Those
involved in land development, building, real estate, logging, and so forth,
are all on one side, and the environmentalists are all on the other side.
The politicians are trying to steer their way rhetorically between these
competing interests while retaining a majority of supporters, and redefi-
nition of contested terms is an extremely useful tool for this purpose. In
his book on definitions, Schiappa (2003) has given an even fuller account
of how the term “wetlands” evolved in mass media argumentation.


286 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


The third case is one of a legal redefinition of a term that has not
only legal implications, but all kinds of consequences for public policies
and programs supported by government. Picking out any one case of
this sort is arbitrary, because so many legal decisions, especially in the
interpretation of statutes, are so heavily dependent on how key terms are
defined or redefined. But this particular area has even attracted quite a
bit of philosophical discussion in recent years.


Case 8.4

Burgess-Jackson (1995) has argued for the claim that radical fem-
inists’ redefinition of the word “rape” is a persuasive definition.
Burgess-Jackson cited several definitions of “rape” put forward
by radical feminists (p. 428), including the one by law professor
Catharine MacKinnon, which says that rape is “sex by compulsion,
of which physical force is one form.” A notable implication of this
definition is that an act of sex in which no physical force is involved
could come under the category of rape. Another definition cited by
Burgess-Jackson, one put forward by the American College Health
Association, includes “verbal coercion” as part of the definition of
“rape.” These definitions appear to depart from the lexical meaning
of the word “rape.” The Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary
(1993, p. 968) defines “rape” as “sexual intercourse with a woman
by a man without her consent, and chiefly by force or deception.”
The feminist redefinitions, by adding “verbal coercion,” take the
opening made by the qualifier “chiefly” in the lexical definition fur-
ther, and extend it to cases that would not have been considered
rape in the past. A case of this sort would be one in which, during
amatory activities, the woman says “no,” but the man persists, and
although no physical coercion (or deception) was involved, the two
end up having sex. Under the feminist redefinition, many cases of
this sort that were formerly not considered to be rape would now
be judged to be rape.


Burgess-Jackson argued that the feminist redefinition of “rape” cited
above should be classified as an instance of persuasive definition. Does
it meet the four requirements? It seems that it could. The word “rape”
has strong emotive connotations. The descriptive meaning of the word
is vague enough to be semantically manipulated. What about the change
of meaning not being noticed by naive listeners? It is possible that this
requirement could be met. Although ignorance of the law is no excuse, in


Cases of Public Redefinitions 287


fact many of us do not keep up with changes in the way words are inter-
preted in new legal rulings. And then there is the fourth requirement
that the emotive meaning remains unaltered. This requirement would
seem plausibly enough to be met in the case of the word “rape.” In short,
there does seem to be the basis of a case for arguing that the feminist
redefinition of rape fits the category of a persuasive definition, according
to Stevenson’s theory.

The legal history of the changing definitions of the term “rape” has
been chronicled by Schiappa (2003, ch. 4). The traditional legal defi-
nition of “rape” excluded the possibility that a man could rape his wife,
because it was based on the old notion of the woman as the property of
the man. According to this notion, when the man and woman entered
into the contract of marriage, the woman agreed to give the man the
exclusive rights to sexual intercourse with her. Given this agreement,
she couldn’t then argue later that her husband had raped her. Feminists
were opposed to this notion of the woman as property because it failed
to see women as equal to men. Thus the current argument was that the
traditional definition of “rape” should be expanded. In the new defini-
tion it should be possible for a husband to rape his wife. It should also
be expanded to include the possibility of one man raping another man.
Thus the new definition of “rape” would also come to cover homosexual
activities. Advocates of the new definition argued that the notion of con-
sent should be central to rape. So, for example, ifa married woman does
not agree to have sex with her husband, and he forces her to have sexual
intercourse, then she should be allowed to charge him with rape. As Schi-
appa shows, the acceptance of the new definition in law has been slow
and dogged by controversy. At the time of writing, according to Schiappa
(2003, p. 68) seventeen states have abolished the marital rape exemption
by deleting words such as “not his wife.” The exemption survives in some
form or other in the majority of states.

What can be observed in this case is that the redefinition of “rape” advo-
cated by the feminists is more than just a matter of academic theorizing
or of abstract philosophical discussion. It has had legal implications that
affect everyone. The persuasive discussions of rape prompted by feminists
have gradually been followed by changes in the legal definitions of the
term. Of course, it is one thing to have critical discussion or to engage in
abstract philosophical theorizing. It is quite another to have a definition
accepted in law. The change in legal definitions comes about very slowly
within a massive institutional framework. Normally, in a critical discussion
or persuasion type of dialogue, as we have emphasized, the proponent


288 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


should be free to bring forward a definition and the respondent should
be free to accept or reject it. Of course, putting forward a definition acts
as a presumption. If the respondent doesn’t accept the definition, then
he should give some sort of reason or offer an alternative. But at any
rate, the respondent should be free to ask appropriate critical questions.
Once a definition becomes established in law, however, through statutes
and legal rulings, it can be very hard to overturn it. Once it’s there, it’s
there, and it may take a massive mobilization of effort, and a long time, to
change it. The important thing to note here is the shift of context. It may
be one thing to define a term like “rape” in a philosophical discussion. It
is quite another thing to get it redefined once the definition has entered
the legal area. The legal system takes over and an individual is no longer
free to accept or reject a definition.


3. Wider Implications of These Cases


The study of persuasive definitions is not new to logic. Since Stevenson’s
analysis, it has now become common to have a section on definitions in
logic textbooks that warns of the deceptiveness of persuasive definitions.
But the wider implications of the use of persuasive definitions in polit-
ical and legal settings have not been fully taken into account in these
treatments of the subject. Definition is widely taken to be a relatively
trivial business of “logic-chopping” that, while it can be tricky, can easily
be sorted out by being careful with words. But quite to the contrary, the
case studies above show that matters of verbal redefinition are far from
trivial, and can be extremely difficult and costly to deal with. What they
show is that not only can definitions and redefinitions be deceptive, but
they can support particular interests. Once they are lodged into place in
statutes, government manuals, and institutional regulations, they can be
coercive in empowering some groups and disempowering other groups.
The battle about words is part of, and is a tool used in, a larger battle
about values, politics, and often money.

It should not be news to us that words as well as pictures are instru-
ments of public relations techniques used in politics, war, propaganda,
and advertising. But a realization of the extent to which persuasive def-
initions are woven into our legal system and our democratic system of
government may come as something of a surprise. The reason for its
unexpectedness is that popular opinion tends to take certain assumptions
about definitions for granted, without reflecting on them too deeply. It
is taken for granted that words, especially scientific terms and terms used


Wider Implications of These Cases 289


in legal statutes and government regulations, have an objective meaning.
On the other hand, it is often assumed that when there are verbal dis-
putes about the definitions of words, such disputes are relatively trivial,
and can easily be resolved by simply clarifying the meanings of the words.
The case studies above clearly show that these assumptions are simply not
true in some cases, and that the cases in which they are not true can be
quite important. The case studies also suggest that deeply problematic
cases may be a lot more common than we think.

One especially disturbing aspect of these cases is that they involve not
only political and legal definitions, but also scientific definitions. Suppos-
edly, itis up to the biologists to define “wetlands” and up to the economists
to define “needy.” Part of the problem is that such terms have been trans-
ferred from a scientific context to a legal or political context. The nature
of the shift was most marked in the case of “wetlands.” At first, this term
was given a definition by scientists. But then, because of the cases brought
to trial, the term took on a legal meaning. What happened was that scien-
tists were brought into courts by both sides to testify as expert witnesses. As
such trials became commonplace, a legal meaning of the term “wetlands”
came to be defined. Then, as Schiappa’s case illustrated so well, the term
“wetlands” was redefined politically, and the new definition, now codified
in an important government manual, had important consequences for
the way land was officially designated by the government and for whether
it could be developed for commercial purposes or not. This kind of shift
is very significant, for there may be important differences between howa
term should be defined scientifically and how it should be defined legally
or politically. Scientific definitions are supposed to be objective and pre-
cise. They are not supposed to be subject to manipulation by competing
interests, in the way that political definitions are. Legal definitions are
often supposed to depend on scientific definitions. But still, in law the
aim is not only discovery of the truth of a matter, but also fairness to the
persons involved. For this reason, politics, and also law to some extent,
are widely taken to be subjective in a way that science is supposed not to
be;

But these matters are now widely subject to dispute. In recent years
the claim has been made that objective scientific rationality is a sham and
that scientific definitions are also influenced by the interests of scientists
as a group. Thomas Kuhn is often cited as an exponent of this kind of
view of scientific argumentation. Scientific hypotheses and definitions,
according to this view, should always be seen as subject to change in
the future. Kuhn (1970, p. 50) has shown that the term “molecule” is


290 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


defined differently in physics than in chemistry; what counts as a molecule
differs according to the current needs of the two fields of physics and
chemistry. According to this postmodernist view, not only can a non-
scientific definition of a term be different from a scientific definition,
but the scientific definition serves the interests of scientists in just the
same way that a non-scientific definition commonly serves the special
interests of groups who advocate its usage.

While there is something in this postmodernist view, I believe it goes a
bit too far. Surely, a scientific definition should be seen as different from
a legal definition, and both should be seen as different from a political
definition. A scientific definition, for example, is different from a legal
definition because it has a different purpose, and because the standards
for evaluating it are, and should be, quite different. A scientific definition
should be judged by scientific standards appropriate for the scientific
discipline it is part of. A legal definition should be accepted, rejected, or
criticized on legal grounds. When a scientific definition is introduced as
evidence in court, by an expert witness, for example, it is either accepted
in that science or it is not. The participants in the trial, for example, the
judge or the lawyers, can’t redefine the term as it is used in that science.
They can argue about what the legal implications of it should be, or they
can bring opposing scientific experts to testify that previous testimony
about the accepted scientific definition was not accurate.

Schiappa (1993, pp. 408-412) has shown how the definition of “death”
raises an interesting kind of controversy. The term “death,” as applied to
a person, is a medical and scientific term that has legal implications. In
recent times, new medical life-support technology has made possible a
kind of situation in which a person whose brain function has been irre-
versibly destroyed can still be maintained so that his or her breathing and
blood circulation functions are maintained. Is such a person alive, or can
he or she be declared dead, for organ removal purposes? This question
is one of considerable public significance. So it has led to active ethical
discussions about how the word “death” should be defined. As Schiappa
showed, many of the arguments put forward by philosophers, physicians,
and other commentators supported what the participants in the debate
apparently took to be real definitions with some sort of scientific or at
least objective validity. Ethical disputes have been very common and, as
Schiappa shows, have shared a certain characteristic pattern of argumen-
tation. An onlooker to the debate, or someone who reads about it later,
may see the participants as offering competing persuasive definitions. But


Wider Implications of These Cases 291


the participants themselves put forward their definitions as though their
claims were objective assertions of what is true, and represent accounts of
the facts that can be verified. As Schiappa shows, the philosophical argu-
mentation supports a particular definition by proceeding through two
stages. First, fixed criteria that are portrayed as “essential” or objectively
true are set up. Then it is argued that the recommended definition meets
these criteria, while opposing definitions fail to meet them. Study of this
sort of case seems to suggest that such controversies, not only about legal
and philosophical definitions, but even about medical and scientific ones,
are best viewed as comprised of argumentation putting forward persua-
sive definitions. It seems to be a distortion or misconception to view the
definitions as true and verifiable propositions about factual or objective
properties.

One of the most fascinating aspects of Schiappa’s case study of ethical
discussions on the definition of “death” stems from a leading character-
istic that helps us to recognize a persuasive definition cited above. In
persuasive definitions the term being defined is often prefixed by use of
the words “true” or “real.” So although it seems almost paradoxical to say
this, the philosophical notion of “real definition” may in fact itself be seen
as a kind of persuasive definition. Schiappa observed that when partici-
pants put forward their own definitions of “death” in the ethical debate
on the redefinition of death, they tended to portray their own proposed
redefinition as being the “real” definition. Is this move in argument itself
a kind of attempt to use the technique of persuasive definition? The idea
is an odd one, and has a postmodernist ring to it.

The postmodernist views are that definitions can change, that they
are more persuasive than tradition indicates, and that they are bound to
disciplines and other groups that have interests at stake. All these views
seem to be justified, up to a point, by case studies of how the argumenta-
tion actually works when terms of public significance are redefined. But
what seems to follow, that the term in question can freely be redefined
by a different interest group simply to meet the rhetorical needs of the
moment, seems wrong. The view that definitions can rightly be used for
different purposes in different contexts seems right. But the implication
that a scientific definition is therefore not only subject to redefinition in
the same way as a political definition is, by pressure of competing inter-
est groups and majorities, does not seem to be right. What is needed is
a new approach to definitions, along the dialectical lines proposed by
Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca (1969), an approach that accepts the


202 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


contextual variability of definitions without being stuck with some of the
more paradoxical and anti-dialectical consequences of radical postmod-
ernistic views.


4. Definitions in the New Dialectic


There are two old ideas about definitions that can get us into a lot of trou-
ble when relying on definitions in argumentation. One is the idea that
words have a precisely determined objective meaning. This view, called
essentialism, holds that each word has a fixed meaning or “essence,” and
the object of any verbal discussion is to find the essence of the term in
question. The other idea is that the meanings of words are relatively triv-
ial and unimportant. A corollary of this second view is the assumption
that definitions can be stipulated arbitrarily by one party in a discussion.
The second view stems from the empiricism that is dominant in Western
culture. This common version of empiricism accepts the inference that
because collection of data (the facts) is all that really matters, therefore
questions of definition are really trivial. These two ideas are not neces-
sarily consistent with each other, but they are preconceptions that are
commonly held in an unreflective way, as popular beliefs. As Perelman
and Olbrechts-Tyteca (1969, p. 211) showed, philosophical analyses of
definitions have tended to be fairly consistent with these commonly held
beliefs. Philosophical analyses have tended to operate within a dichotomy
between so-called real definitions and nominal definitions. A real defini-
tion is supposed to be an objective account of the way things are. A real
definition (supposedly) describes the true essence of the thing being
defined. A nominal definition is supposed to be merely conventional or
arbitrary. According to Perelman’s analysis, definitions are human agree-
ments about how words should be used. Thus according to Perelman’s
analysis, the dichotomy between real and nominal definitions is a false
and misleading abstraction. For Perelman, a definition should always be
regarded and evaluated as an argument. Definition should not be catego-
rized as either purely arbitrary or as purely descriptive accounts of fixed
meanings.

The approach to definitions taken in the new dialectic is directly at
odds with these popular views. In the new dialectic, argumentation is
always evaluated as used for some purpose in a conversation. Definitions
are viewed in the same contextual way. To understand a definition, you
have to understand the purpose that it was put forward by one party to
fulfill, in relation to some other party in a conversational exchange. This


Definitions in the New Dialectic 203


dialectical view of definitions is opposed to essentialism. According to
essentialism, the definition is based on a fixed meaning that does not
vary with the context of conversation in which a word is used. According
to the new dialectical view, a definition should be evaluated in light of the
purpose it was put forward to fulfill, and this purpose changes, depending
on what type of conversation the definition was supposed to be part of.
Also, in the new dialectic, definitions are not trivial, because putting
forward a definition of a key term or phrase can relate directly to the
purpose of a conversation. For example, in a persuasion dialogue, the
purpose of the one party is to persuade the other party to come to accept
some proposition that he did not accept before. In such a context of
use, a persuasive definition could be quite appropriate. But in much of
traditional logic, persuasive definitions are regarded as highly suspect, if
not altogether illegitimate.

The difference between essentialism and the new dialectic can be
seen with reference to lexical definitions, the kind found in dictionaries.
According to essentialism, a word has an objective meaning, or “essence,”
and the dictionary tries to provide that meaning by giving the genus and
differentia. According to the new dialectical view, the purpose of a lexical
definition is to explain the meaning (or usage) of the term to someone
who already knows the meanings of other terms closely related to it.
These other terms are likely to be more familiar and common. So I may
not know the meaning of “hauberk,” for example, an uncommon term.
But I am likely to know the meaning of terms like “coat” and “chain mail”
that are used to explain what a hauberk is. In the new dialectical view, the
purpose of putting forward a lexical definition of a term, as in a dictionary
entry, for example, is to explain the meaning (or usage) of the term to
someone who does not understand it. The purpose of a lexical definition
is to explain the meaning of a term that is unfamiliar by expressing it in
terms that readers are likely to be familiar with.

The distinction between argument and explanation is very important
in the new dialectic. An argument is made up of propositions called
premises and conclusions, where the conclusion is unsettled or subject
to doubt. The purpose of putting forward the argument is to fulfill the
so-called probative function, meaning that the premises can be used to
remove the doubt attached to the conclusion and thereby settle the argu-
ment. On this view, it is always characteristic of an argument that the
conclusion is being doubted or is unsettled with respect to being true
or false. In contrast, in the case of an explanation, the presumption is
that the proposition to be explained (the so-called explanandum) is true


204 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


and is not unsettled or doubted. For example, if you ask me to explain
why the radiators are normally under the outside windows in a room,
there is a presumption that we both accept that radiators are normally
under the outside windows in a room. In contrast, suppose we are having
an argument about whether Columbus discovered America. It is implied
that one of us doubts, or has expressed doubts, that Columbus discovered
America. The purpose of having an argument is to try to resolve these
doubts, one way or the other. On the new dialectical view, the distinction
between an argument and an explanation derives from the purpose of the
conversation. Because we sometimes confuse this distinction, the under-
standing of how to distinguish between an explanation and an argument
is very important in the new dialectic.

One of the main confusions about definitions is that we tend to pre-
sume that there must be just one reason for putting forward a definition,
and that therefore all definitions need to be evaluated in the same way.
But in many cases, the purpose of putting forward a definition is not to
offer an explanation but to offer or support an argument. For example, if
you and I are arguing about the abortion issue, and you define abortion
as “the murder of unborn babies,” it should be clear that you are putting
forward an argument. The proposition that an aborted fetus is a person
or “baby” would almost certainly be strenuously denied by the other (the
pro-choice) party to the dispute. And because “murder” is one of the
worst of crimes, by defining abortion as murder, the proponent of the
definition has already put in place premises that can be easily used to
prove that abortion is wrong. In this case, the offering of the definition
can be analyzed as an argument, and should be seen as an argument.
Putting forward a definition that really has the function of an argument
is extremely common in everyday discourse, because words often have
an argumentative spin or can be defined in such a way that such a spin is
placed on them. Once we have been made aware of these phenomena,
we begin to see how common they are.

In some cases, the definition of a term, once it has been repeated
enough to have an impact on the way controversy is expressed, can have
a powerful rhetorical effect on public policies and views. Zarefsky (1998)
has presented several case studies of current ethical and political con-
troversies in which the power of an advocate group to persuade the
public to come to accept its view of the matter, and to act on it, has
clearly depended on definition. One case, summarized below, concerns
the abortion debate.


Definitions in the New Dialectic 205


Case 8.5
At one point, both the courts and public opinion reached “some-
thing resembling a conclusion.” The case of Roe v. Wade had legal-
ized abortion in a way that established a kind of balance in favor
of the pro-choice side. But then some years later, the pro-life side
took the controversy in a different direction by redefining what
was formerly called “intact dilation and extraction” as “partial-birth
abortion.” The effect of this redefinition was to direct the focus of
public attention to a “gruesome procedure” that invoked a power-
ful image to the public of the “baby” being torn to pieces. (Zarefsky


1998, pp. 3-4)


The rhetorical effect of this redefinition redirected the dialogue from an
abstract level to an emphasis on concrete details of a kind that proved to
be powerfully persuasive to the public audience. Careful analysis of case
studies of public controversies of the kind found in Zarefsky (1998) can
awaken one from a dogmatic slumber about the power of definition.

It has been quite clear in the abortion debate that the issue turns
very much, from a point of view of argumentation, on how the fetus is
classified and defined. Legally, the fetus in the womb is not a person. It
does not have the rights of a person until it is born. Pro-choice advocates
avoid the use of “person” terminology when describing the fetus. Pro-life
advocates insist on framing the debate in such a way that the unborn
fetus is classified as a “person.” They often describe it as a “baby.” And as
indicated above, they use argumentation that tries to get public opinion
to assume that the fetus should be viewed in person-like terms as a baby,
with human qualities and a human appearance. Thus the debate, as indi-
cated above, often turns on the implicit but key prior issue of how the
fetus is to be defined or classified. The debate about terminology is, of
course, not purely ethical or even purely political. It has all kinds of legal
implications and dimensions. At bottom, the debate, in practical terms,
often seems to turn on whether abortions will be paid for by government
agencies.

On February 1, 2002, CBS News announced that the Bush adminis-
tration “will make embryos and developing fetuses eligible for health
care under the State Children’s Health Insurance Program, saying they
qualify from the moment of conception” (“White House: It’s Not about
Abortion” 2002). This move is based on the implicit assumption that the
unborn fetus can be or should be classified as a child. Thus as a definition


296 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


or classificatory move it has highly significant implications for argumen-
tation in the abortion debate. It would also have legal implications, for
by beginning to treat the fetus under the classification of “child,” it could
be used later to bring public pressure influencing subsequent legal rul-
ings. However, Bush administration officials denied these implications,
as quoted in the CBS News report (p. 1).


But the White House maintained that the decision had nothing to do with abor-
tion or establishing the rights of a fetus. The administration heralded the plan
as a way to provide prenatal coverage to the 10.9 million women of child-bearing
age who don’t have insurance. . . . “All we’re doing is providing care for poor
mothers so their children are going to be born healthy,” Health and Human Ser-
vices Secretary Tommy Thompson said. “How anybody can now turn this into a
pro-choice or pro-life argument, I can’t understand it.”


This denial is part of a clever strategy of not only making an argumenta-
tive move, but at the same time of putting a positive terminological spin
on it. The wording “providing care for poor mothers” makes the deci-
sion sound good. How could anyone be against providing aid for poor
mothers? But that is putting a spin on a spin. It is not too hard with even a
little reflective critical analysis of the argumentation to see what the impli-
cations are of this move of definition and classification with respect to the
abortion debate. Participants on both sides were quick to see it. Advocates
on both sides quickly labeled the decision a “victory for the anti-abortion
movement.” Thus it is not hard to see how, at every turn in the abortion
debate, argumentation turns pivotally on how the fetus is to be defined
and classified.

A typical reaction to realization of the rhetorical power of definitions
has been to swing to the opposite extreme of essentialism, called post-
modernism. According to postmodernism the meanings of all existing
words and phrases have emotive connotations built into them that are up
for grabs by those in a position to manipulate them for political purposes.
Thus the way commonly used terms are defined serves special interests
of certain groups through both persuasion and coercion. For example,
meanings of some commonly used words and phrases may serve the inter-
ests of traditional groups that have been in power in the past. Arguing
from these premises, the postmodernist concludes that redefining terms
to wrest political power from older groups by persuasion or even coer-
cion is justifiable. The postmodernist does not see persuasive definitions
as logically unacceptable or fallacious. She sees them as inevitable, and
so they might as well be turned to your own advantage.


Proof of Legitimacy of Persuasive Definitions 207


The new dialectic takes a view of definitions that is somewhere in
between the more extreme essentialist and the postmodernist views of
them. The new dialectical view recognizes the emotive and political spin
that already exists in many commonly used terms, and appreciates how
this spin can be redirected by the use of persuasive redefinitions. The
new dialectical view recognizes the argumentative function of many def-
initions, unlike the essentialist view, which sees meaning as fixed and
objective. But the new dialectical view does not draw the postmodernist
conclusion that all definitions, even highly loaded, persuasive, or coercive
ones used to promote special interests, are equally justifiable. Accord-
ing to the new dialectical view, a definition can be evaluated, and some
properly judged to be better than others, depending on the purpose the
definition is supposed to fulfill. When definitions are argumentative, as
they often are, then according to the new dialectic they should be judged
as arguments, in the way that other arguments are evaluated dialectically.

A problem for the new dialectic is how to define persuasive defini-
tions (the self-reference in the problem notwithstanding). Are all defi-
nitions persuasive? Or are lexical definitions different from persuasive
definitions? According to the postmodernist view, all lexical definitions
have an argumentative spin or bias to favor special interests or viewpoints.
Acentral problem then is how to define the expression “persuasive defini-
tion” itself so that some new dialectical classification system of the various
kinds of definition can be given. So far, this problem is unsolved.


5. Proof of Legitimacy of Persuasive Definitions


Logic textbooks have often warned about the potential for deception in
persuasive definitions, but they tend to stop somewhere short of con-
demning them as fallacious or illegitimate. Copi and Cohen (1998,
Pp. 133) write that because “emotional coloration may be slyly injected into
the language of a definition that purports to be accurate and appears to
be objective,” we must “be on our guard against persuasive definitions.”
This advice steers a middle way between outright condemnation and
acceptance of persuasive definition. It is implied that persuasive defini-
tions could be reasonable in some cases, but we are warned that they can
also be dangerously deceptive. The basic problem is to find some basis for
sorting out these two categories of cases. The prior theoretical problem
behind the basic problem is to find some systematic theory for grasping
what persuasive definitions are all about. What is their supposed purpose
as a type of definition? And what are the conditions under which this


298 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


purpose can be fulfilled in a given case, so that it can be judged that the
use of the persuasive definition in that case was reasonable? These ques-
tions are, so far, unanswered. But itis only once the first question has been
answered that we can even begin to investigate the second. Only when
the first question is answered can it be understood why persuasive defi-
nitions are wrong or logically defective or deceptive. The analysis of the
speech act of persuasion presented above in chapter 2 offers an answer
to the first question. Let us reflect on this answer, letting its implications
sink in. Then in the next section the investigation required to begin to
answer the second question can be launched.

The speech act of persuasion shows what the goal is in a persuasion
dialogue, and shows what should be the proper means for achieving that
goal. Before the advent of the speech act of persuasion, the notion of a
persuasive definition seemed hard to grasp as a coherent or legitimate
notion in argumentation. Persuasion tended to be linked to the “mob
orator,” and even now it is often thought to belong to the realm of “spin
doctors” and public relations experts. Persuasion, after all, had histori-
cally been associated with rhetoric and the Sophists. From a logical point
of view, it seemed like a suspicious notion that could be at odds with
truth or even dangerous. But once the speech act of persuasion has been
defined, and its place in persuasion dialogue clarified, it begins to seem
like persuasive definitions could be legitimate, under the right condi-
tions. Of course, they can also be deceptive and tricky, as Stevenson rightly
pointed out. But once the speech act of persuasion has been defined, we
are now in a better position to understand the sorts of conditions under
which persuasive definitions are misleading, and how they can be used
as argumentation strategies to exploit the conventional meaning of a
word. Thus the theory of definitions as a branch of argumentation stands
to benefit greatly from a classification of the speech act of persuasion
that shows it as a clear notion that has a central place in argumentation
theory.

What the speech act of persuasion shows is that persuasive definitions
can be legitimate where the context of a discussion is properly that of
persuasion. For example, in a philosophical discussion, such as a Socratic
dialogue, a persuasive definition of a key term like “virtue” might be put
forward. The other party in the discussion might question the defini-
tion, and perhaps even attack it by making objections against it. This use
of a persuasive definition could be perfectly legitimate, as long as the
respondent in the discussion has the right to raise questions, and the


Proof of Legitimacy of Persuasive Definitions 209


proponent is open to revising or even giving up the proposed definition,
in response to these critical questions. In such a case, the persuasive def-
inition can be part of a sequence (chaining) of argumentation on one
side. The proponent uses the definition as part of his attempt to prove
his thesis in the dialogue. As part of such a chain of argumentation, the
persuasive definition could be considered legitimate, on the grounds that
it meets the proper requirement for the speech act of persuasion as set
out in the last chapter.

But the problem is that there are different kinds of definitions, with
different purposes. The purpose of a persuasive definition is to persuade
rationally, in the sense laid out in the conditions for the speech act of
persuasion. But the purpose of a lexical definition is to explain the mean-
ing of a word that already has a conventional meaning accepted by native
speakers ofa language. Of course, the persuasive definition, too, although
it may purport to be stipulative, may be of a term that already has an estab-
lished usage. Thus a potential for confusion exists. If the respondent to
the persuasive definition continues on with the same conventional mean-
ing of the word, with its positive or negative connotations, there may arise
an ambivalence or confusion of the kind explained by Stevenson’s the-
ory of emotive language. For example, the positive connotations that the
word already has in the language may be carried over, casting a mislead-
ing aura of approval over the newly defined concept. And yet the newly
defined concept may be taken by the proponent’s argumentation to be
something quite different from the traditional lexical meaning of the
term in common speech.

The problem can be compounded by several other factors. Suppose
the proponent is a member of an interest group, and the group has some-
thing to gain through getting wider acceptance for their view. Suppose
also that this interest group is advocating a cause, and they place a higher
value on advocacy for the cause than they do on really throwing light on
the issue being discussed. In other words, suppose the advocacy group,
although they make a show of engaging in a critical discussion of the
issue, is never really willing to concede in the discussion. In other words,
the group is not really open to critical questioning of its viewpoint, even
though their advocates may insist that they are. Let’s suppose that the
past history of the dialogue shows that they continue to advocate their
chosen viewpoint in a single-minded way, even when presented with good
evidence that raises critical questions about their arguments defending
that viewpoint. It is at this point, in a given case, that there is evidence


3,00 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


of a dialectical shift. The evidence of the dialogue could indicate that
the advocacy group is really engaging in interest-based negotiation, as
contrasted with persuasion dialogue. In this type of case, there would be
evidence that the advocacy group was biased. Bias, or advocacy, is not in
itselfa bad thing. But it can be deceptive. The purpose of a persuasive def-
inition should be to persuade rationally. If its purpose is to promote the
interest of a group by advocating a cause, as opposed to merely discussing
the issue in a free and open way characteristic of persuasion dialogue,
then the definition should be questioned. The problem with this kind of
definition is that it makes what is supposedly a persuasive definition too
much like a stipulative definition. The thing abouta stipulative definition
is that it is not open to objections or to critical questioning at all. Once
it is stipulated, it is laid down axiomatically, so to speak, and no evidence
counts against it. Mathematical definitions in axiom systems can be of
this type. The definition is laid down stipulatively as a beginning point.
You can question whether a theorem follows from the axiom. But it not
appropriate to question the axiom itself.

Theoretically, then, persuasive definitions can be reasonable when put
forward under the right conditions. If the context of a case is supposed
to be that of a persuasion dialogue or critical discussion, a proponent
is supposed to be an advocate for his viewpoint, putting forward argu-
ments that meet the requirements for the speech act of persuasion. He
is allowed to put definitions forward as well. Indeed, we can say that a
proponent is obliged to put forward arguments meant to be rationally
persuasive to the respondent, in order to fulfill requirements of burden
of proof in a persuasion dialogue. At some points in such a dialogue, he
will also be obliged to define his terms. The putting forward of persuasive
definitions is thus reasonable in a persuasion dialogue. And we can go
even further than merely saying that persuasive definitions are allowed or
that they are legitimate. Under the right conditions, they can be moves
that are required in order to contribute to the proper progress of the
dialogue.


6. Argumentation Schemes Relating to Definitions


Having established that it is legitimate in principle to put forward a per-
suasive definition in a persuasion dialogue, itis now necessary to approach
the formal problem of how such a definition should be put forward. What
form should it take as a legitimate move in a dialogue? The literature on
this subject is scarce. It is a question that appears to have been rarely asked.


Argumentation Schemes Relating to Definitions 301


To get at least the beginnings of an answer, it is necessary to go back to
the Ph.D. thesis of Arthur Hastings at Northwestern University (1963).
Hastings set out forms for a number of common types of arguments. He
explained the form of each argument using a Toulmin model, which iden-
tified its premises and the conclusion. One premise, called a “warrant,”
is expressed in the form of a defeasible generalization that is subject to
exceptions. Typically, the warrant combines with a more factual or spe-
cific type of premise to generate the conclusion. Although such forms
of argument can be deductively valid in some instances, generally they
are not. They are defeasible forms of argument that are best evaluated
by asking critical questions. Matching each argumentation scheme, Hast-
ings set out a list of appropriate critical questions. Thus the argument,
when put forward in an actual case, has a certain standing. Or, as we might
say, it temporarily occupies a ground. But then, if an appropriate critical
question is asked, the standing of the argument is temporarily held in
abeyance until the critical question has been satisfactorily answered.

Of all the various argumentation schemes, the one most applicable to
arguments that are based on a proposed definition is called “argument
from definition.” Argument from definition is used when it is maintained
that some object a has property F because a falls under category C, and
every object falling under category C, by definition, has property & For
example, consider the following argument.


The Kangaroo Argument
Bob (this animal I am pointing to) is a marsupial. How do I know
that? Because Bob is a kangaroo, and all kangaroos are marsupials.
How do I know that? Because a kangaroo is defined as a herbivorous,
leaping marsupial mammal.


There are two aspects of this type of argument requiring comment
right away. First, it seems like a deductively valid argument, because one
premise is the universal claim that all kangaroos are marsupials. Also, it
is an argument that might be further supported by appealing to a source,
like a dictionary. If asked to support or justify the definition of “kanga-
roo,” the arguer might cite a dictionary entry, for example. This example
is a very simple one, perhaps making the form of argument seem almost
trivial. Other examples will reveal that the argument can be far from
trivial in some instances.

The following example is from a speech of Abraham Lincoln, quoted
by Hastings (1963, p. 48).


302 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


The Contract Argument
If the United States not be a government proper, but an association
of States in the nature of a contract merely, can it, as a contract be
peaceably unmade, by less than all the parties who made it? One
party to a contract may violate it — break it, so to speak, but does it
not require all to lawfully rescind it?


This argument is quite a powerful one. It gives a reason why it should not
be lawful for the southern states unilaterally to secede from the union.
The backing for the argument comes from a definition. It is argued that
by the definition of the term “contract,” a contract can be peacefully
rescinded only by all the parties who made it. Therefore, if one party
to the contract tries to undo it without the agreement of the others,
that party “violates” the contract. He “breaks” it, as opposed to lawfully
rescinding it. One can easily see from this example how common this
form of argument from definition must be, in both legal and political
argumentation. Weaver (1953) has cited many instances where Lincoln
used this form of argumentation in his speeches.

In addition to argument from definition, there is another argumenta-
tion scheme that is important to know about when examining arguments
based on definitions. The importance of this type of argument is more
subtle, because it is a type of argumentation that is based on a definition
that has not been stated or made explicit as part of the argument it occurs
in. This type of argumentation can easily be illustrated using the case of
the abortion dispute as represented in case 8.5 above. Suppose that one
side in such a dispute argues, “Abortion is wrong because it is murder of
the fetus.” In this case, it is unclear whether the arguer has defined or
is defining “abortion” as “murder of the fetus.” That is possible. But it is
also possible that he is merely classifying the act of abortion under the
category of murder of the fetus. The pro-choice respondent, of course,
when confronted with this sort of argument, would react to it vigorously.
She might reply, for example, that to classify abortion as “murder” of
the fetus implies that the fetus is a person. She might argue that this
assumption is unwarranted. She might even argue that it begs the ques-
tion. She would certainly (and should) react to it strongly, for in this case,
the issue is extremely controversial. However, in many cases, argument
from classification is not this visible. It often passes unnoticed in an argu-
ment, perhaps because it tends to be assumed that definitions and ver-
bal classifications are trivial and unimportant. But argument from verbal


Argumentation Schemes Relating to Definitions 303


classification is extremely important, most clearly in legal argumentation,
but also in mass media argumentation.

Argument from verbal classification is so common in everyday argu-
mentation that the typical arguer is not aware that his argument is relying
on it. It is typically implicit in a line of argument. It is for this reason that
the burden of proof attached to argument from verbal classification tends
to be invisible. It can slip into the argument without an audience being
aware of it. And yet it can have a powerful persuasive impact, even deter-
mining the direction a chaining of argumentation in a discussion will
take. Hastings gave the first structured analysis of this form of argument
as an argumentation scheme with a matching set of critical questions. He
called the form of argument “argument from criteria to a verbal classifi-
cation” (p. 36). To explain this form of argument, it is best to begin with
an example. A good example would be the following simple argument:
“Ten percent is an excellent rate of return on a fixed-term investment,
so this bond is a good investment” (this example is based on Hastings
1963, pp. 36-37). The form of argument can be made more explicit by
identifying its premises and conclusion as follows.


Classificatory Premise: Ten percent may be classified as an excellent
rate of return on a fixed-term investment.

Major Premise: Any fixed-term investment that has an excellent rate
of return is a good investment.

Minor Premise: This bond (a fixed-term investment) has a 10 percent
rate of return.

Conclusion: This bond is a good investment.


The reason that argument from a verbal classification can so often be
deceptive, as noted above, is that the classificatory premise is unstated,
and hence no visible burden of proof is attached to it by the respondent.
Thus arguments based on verbal classification, although highly signifi-
cant in many cases, tend to merge unobtrusively into a line of argumen-
tation, without being challenged or even noticed.

As noted above, Hastings analyzed argument from a verbal classifica-
tion using the device of a Toulmin warrant diagram. A more abstract for-
malization of the argumentation scheme has been presented in Walton
(1996, p. 54). The argumentation scheme presented below is a modified
version of this earlier abstract formalization. Below, the argumentation
scheme for argument from verbal classification (Walton 2006, p. 129) is
presented, showing the premises and conclusion of this type of argument,


304 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


and labeling each premise by giving a name indicating its function in the
argument. In this argumentation scheme, individuals and properties are
represented as constants, while the variable x ranges over individuals
a,b,c6,..., n. A set of critical questions matching the argumentation
scheme is presented below it. The critical questions represent appropri-
ate questions that can be used in a dialog to probe into weak points of
any argument that fits the argument scheme for argument from verbal
classification that can be questioned or criticized. Thus the set of critical
questions matching a scheme provides a device that can assist in the eval-
uation of an argument fitting the scheme by suggesting to a critic some
of the most important kinds of questions that should be asked when
responding to this type of argument in a dialogue. The two devices of the
argumentation scheme and the matching set of critical questions work
together to provide a dialog structure that can be used both to analyze
and to evaluate argumentation used in a text of discourse in a given case,
provided the argument fits a scheme.


Argument from Verbal Classification
INDIVIDUAL PREMISE: ahas property F.
CLASSIFICATION PREMISE: For all x, if x has property F, then x can
be classified as having property G.
CONCLUSION: ahas property G.


Critical questions
CQ,: What evidence is there that a definitely has property F as
opposed to evidence indicating room for doubt on whether it
should be so classified?
CQ,: Is the verbal classification in the classification premise based
merely on an assumption about word usage that is subject to
doubt?


The persuasive definition in Stevenson’s culture example is used as an
argument to refute a prior implicit argument that works by classifying
some particular thing into a verbal category. The counter-argument
based on the persuasive definition is put forward as a refutation of a
prior argument based on the existing conventional meaning of a word
in natural language discourse. The counter-argument postulates a new
invented meaning that goes against the existing conventional meaning.
We can now see that both arguments have a particular structure, based on
the argumentation scheme for argument from verbal classification. This


Argumentation Schemes Relating to Definitions 305


analysis is quite revealing, as far as it goes, but Stevenson’s example is
highly complex, because of the implicit argumentation existing under
the surface of the explicit text of discourse. Much more remains to be
discussed in attempting to analyze it. The first point remaining to be
discussed is that each of the counter-poised arguments from verbal clas-
sification is based on a definition. This type of argumentation is quite
common, especially in legal reasoning where an argument is defended
by supporting it by means of classifying a particular term, like “contract”
or “wetlands,” and then backing up the classification by definition that is
accepted in law, generally in a statute or in a previous court ruling. If the
verbal classification is in question, it can be supported by invoking a def-
inition that has, on some grounds or other, been previously accepted. As
shown in Stevenson’s culture example, one common ground for accep-
tance is that of conventional meaning. Another common ground could
be a redefinition of the term, perhaps for example based on a scientific
meaning that has been accepted in a domain of knowledge or a legal
meaning that has been accepted by a court that has jurisdiction over the
case being tried. Thus we can see from considering such examples how
argument from verbal classification can be backed up by citing a defini-
tion that has some grounds for acceptance supporting it. Such consider-
ations lead us to consider a new argumentation scheme called argument
from definition to verbal classification.


Argument from Definition to Verbal Classification
DEFINITION PREMISE: a fits definition D.
CLASSIFICATION PREMISE: For all x, if afits definition D, then xcan
be classified as having property G.
CONCLUSION: ahas property G.


Critical questions
CQ,: What evidence is there that D is an adequate definition, in light
of other possible alternative definitions that might exclude a’s
having GP
CQ,: Is the verbal classification in the classification premise based
merely on a stipulative or biased definition that is subject to
doubt?


According to this argumentation scheme, the reason offered for classi-
fying a particular entity as having a particular property is that the entity
fits a definition. Thus the classification premise is a kind of conditional


306 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


or generalization that links a classification to a definition. The defini-
tion premise makes the claim that some particular thing fits under the
definition that is cited in the classification premise. In a given case the
structure represents a linked type of argument in which the definition
premise and the classification premise function together to support the
conclusion that the particular entity cited has the property in question.
So far so good, but if we are to better understand how the argumentation
works in a typical case, like Stephenson’s culture example, we have to
probe more deeply into how the argument from persuasive definition
is related to emotive language as well as to definitions. Let’s tackle this
problem next.

The problem now confronted is to try to figure out how argument from
definition to verbal classification supports the argumentation in a kind
of case, like the one cited in Stevenson’s culture example, by linking
a persuasive definition to values. In Stevenson’s example we have two
counter-poised definitions, each of which supports an argument from
verbal classification. One is grounded on a conventional definition in
existing usage, while the other, the counter-argument meant to refute
the first one, is grounded on a new definition. The new definition is
supported by reasons that appeal to positive or negative values. The argu-
mentation scheme representing the structure of this part of the argument
is that for argument from values. In the standard example (Bench-Capon
20034, 2003b) diabetic Hal needs insulin to survive, but cannot get any
in time to save his life except by taking some from Carla’s house without
her permission. The argument from positive value for preserving life is
weighed against the argument from negative value of taking someone’s
property without his or her permission. Now the problem is to see how
all three schemes — argument from definition, argument from values,
and argument from verbal classification — are related in cases where a
persuasive definition has been used.

Let’s go back to considering the scheme for argument from verbal
classification. In Hastings’s analysis of this type of argument, he made it
clear that normally the argument is based on some sort of definition that
may or may not be stated. But typically, the definition is not stated. Hast-
ings (pp. 42-45) cited seven critical questions that should be considered
when evaluating any instance of argument from a verbal classification.


1, What is the implicit definition being used?
2. Is the definition acceptable, or are the criteria acceptable?


Argumentation Schemes Relating to Definitions 307


3. Are there exceptions or qualifications to the definition and
criteria?

Are other criteria necessary for an adequate definition?

Do the characteristics described meet the criteria?

Are there enough characteristics described to justify inclusion in
this category?

7. Could the object fit better into another category?


aoe


The device of listing critical questions is also used in Walton (1996,
Pp- 54), but only two critical questions are given.


1. Does a definitely have F, or is there room for doubt?
2. Can the verbal classification be said to hold strongly, or is it one of
those weak classifications that is subject to doubt?


It would seem that Hastings’s list is a bit too long, while my list is a bit
too short. As a compromise, I would suggest the following list attaching
to the argumentation scheme for argument from a verbal classification
above.


1, What definition backs up the classification of a under category C?
2. Is the definition acceptable?
3. Should alternative definitions be considered?


This list of critical questions emphasizes the importance of some sort of
definition, whether implicit or explicit, as backing the argument from a
verbal classification. You could say that one main function of the set of
critical questions is to bring the need for a definition to the surface, in
order to back up the argument.

Both argument from verbal classification and argument from defini-
tion are, in principle, reasonable forms of argumentation in all the types
of dialogue. It follows that they are reasonable forms of argumentation
in persuasion dialogue. On the other hand, they can be illegitimate or go
wrong in various ways if they are used inappropriately or in such a fashion
as to impede a persuasion dialogue, perhaps by deceiving the respondent.
This much can be established, as a matter of theory. But what happens
when we apply this theory to actual tricky and controversial cases, of the
kind introduced above? A number of more specific questions are raised.
These are specific questions about how these two types of argumenta-
tion are used in different types of dialogue. As shown below, problems,


308 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


deceptions, and fallacies tend to arise when there has been a problematic
or tricky dialectical shift from one type of dialogue to another.


7. The Speech Act of Defining


Argument from a definition involves appealing to a definition as one
premise of an argument. Argument from verbal classification is a more
subtle and more common strategy in argumentation. The use of lauda-
tory or vituperative terms in argumentation sets the language of a dispute
by using emotive spin to favor one’s own side. Of course, this strategy
depends on a verbal classification that, once the argument has been ana-
lyzed, can be shown to rest on a prior covert definition. When argument
from a verbal classification is properly challenged by a respondent by
raising critical questions, the dialogue should then shift to a verbal dis-
pute about competing definitions. In such a dispute, opposed definitions
may even be put forward by the opposed sides, and then the argumenta-
tion will ascend to a different level, that of a so-called verbal dispute. But
in many cases, that doesn’t happen. As illustrated by Zarefsky’s example
of the War on Poverty, the opponents may not recognize how the dis-
pute has been covertly framed to tilt the playing field against them even
before the game begins. Thus they go on and on fighting an uphill bat-
tle. At least in the short term, the definer tends to win. This tactic must
surely be well known to public relations experts in mass media today, and
routinely exploited as a fundamental part of any attempt to influence
public opinion. But how does it really work? What are the mechanics of
argumentation underlying its structure? These questions have not been
systematically investigated in argumentation theory, apart from the grow-
ing body of case studies that bring out their importance.

Observing how common this sort of phenomenon is in mass media
argumentation, the basic questions remain. What is the structural plat-
form of this argument strategy? When laudatory or vituperative catego-
rization is deployed as a tactic of mass media argumentation, how is it
based on a form of argument? When a definition is put forward, to defend
an argument from verbal classification or for any other reason, what form
does it have as an argument? How are these argument forms used as plat-
forms to drive a chain of argumentation forward, enabling an opponent
to be hemmed in or even silenced? The answers to these questions can
be given only by recognizing the underlying forms of argument repre-
sented by the argumentation schemes for argument from definition and
argument from verbal classification. But there is an underlying question


The Speech Act of Defining 309


as well. It is even harder to answer, and the best we can do here is to
advocate a new direction for research. To take this direction, the act of
putting forward a definition in a dialogue needs to be seen as having
a rhetorical function, but having an underlying dialectical function as
well. Putting forward a definition is not an argument, in itself, although
it certainly can be part of a chain of argumentation. Putting forward a
definition needs to be seen as a special kind of speech act in its own right.
When I say, “I define term Tas meaning X,” where X is a so-called
definiens, or string of words offered as a definition, what sort of action
am I undertaking? The answer is that I am making a proposal to the
respondent. I am proposing that both of us, in future moves in the dia-
logue, should always plug in X as the meaning of T whenever T occurs
in any argumentation in the dialogue. The speech act here is less like
an argument than a recommendation. It is a recommendation that the
respondent should be free to accept or reject. The speech act of putting
forward a definition can be compared with the speech act of persuasion.
It is similar because it also has implications for the rest of the dialogue. In
other words, there is a kind of chaining forward involved. Once the pro-
ponent has put forward a definition, and the respondent has accepted
it, then both parties are bound to accept that definition for the rest of
the dialogue. This clause of the speech act of definition has implications
with respect to the cases studied above. For suppose the proponent puts
forward a certain definition for a key term but then later uses the term
in a different way. This chain of argumentation displays a kind of incon-
sistency. The respondent should have a right to challenge or criticize
the inconsistency. The problem, as noted in the cases above, is that the
change may slip by unnoticed. It may even be covered up by the propo-
nent. Here then is a key problem with persuasive definitions, and with all
kinds of definitions used in argumentation. The problem is the shifting
to a different meaning from one proposed in an earlier definition.
Another basis for comparison is also interesting to pursue. In the
speech act of persuasion, the respondent must be free to challenge the
persuasion attempt by asking critical questions or by bringing forward
counter-arguments. But what about the kind of case where a definition is
offered? Should the respondent be free to reject the proposed definition
or even to offer a contrary one in its place? Normally, the answer in a
persuasion dialogue should be affirmative. This capability is one of the
freedoms both parties should have in a persuasion dialogue. It should
even be possible for the proponent to offer a persuasive definition that
supports her viewpoint while the respondent offers a contrary persuasive


310 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


definition (of the same term) that supports his viewpoint. This situation
in a persuasion dialogue should not be seen as inconsistent or contradic-
tory in a way that makes it wrong or requiring resolution by getting rid
of the inconsistency right away, even banning it altogether. Such conflict
is all part of the normal conflict of opinions in a persuasion dialogue.
But in actual cases of argumentation, reality may not be so simple or so
free. What may happen is that the proponent may insist on both parties
accepting the definition.

Cases in point routinely occur in legal and scientific argumentation.
Once a term has an accepted legal meaning, you can propose a new
definition that goes against the old one. But the reply may be that well,
that’s just the way the term is legally defined in law. You’re not a judge,
and you don’t have the power to change the law. So although you may
advocate a new definition of some term with a legally accepted meaning,
you can’t change the accepted meaning of the term. Similarly, in the case
of a term having an accepted scientific meaning in a certain discipline,
you may try to argue against this definition or propose a different one. But
ifyou are not an expertin this field, what you say will have little effect. Even
if you are an expert, if the majority in the field accept the given scientific
definition, your proposing a new definition will not be an acceptable
move in argumentation. It’s more or less the same with public opinion. If
a certain term is conventionally defined in a certain way, and this way of
defining it is widely accepted and approved in the public opinion, your
public audience is not going to be persuaded by your moving to a different
definition of the term. The reality is that in many mixed cases, there
isn’t the same freedom that is there with respect to definitions that are
characteristic of a pure persuasion dialogue. Mass media argumentation
being what it is, the freedom to put forward a persuasive definition is
not always there. And perhaps even more significantly, the freedom to
question or reject an existing definition is not always there. The problem
is that in many cases of mass media argumentation, the dialogue is not
simply that of a persuasion dialogue. Persuasion is centrally involved, but
there are often other types of dialogue mixed in, making the analysis of
the definition in the case more complex.


8. Evaluating Persuasive Definitions


According to the analysis of the speech act presented in chapter 2, per-
suasion dialogue is a legitimate type of framework of argumentation, and
there is nothing inherently fallacious or deceptive about persuasion in


Evaluating Persuasive Definitions 311


itself. The speech act of persuasion that sets the goal for argumentation
in a persuasion dialogue aims at a kind of rational persuasion, provided
the appropriate rules for persuasion dialogue are followed. But the cases
noted above pose more specific questions. Is legal argumentation a kind
of persuasion dialogue? Is political argumentation, for example, in an
election campaign in a democratic system, a kind of persuasion dialogue?
Is scientific argumentation best seen, as Kuhn seems to suggest, as a
kind of persuasion dialogue, or perhaps even as a kind of interest-based
negotiation dialogue? Some of these questions are addressed in Walton
(1g98b), but some are still under investigation. Until they are answered,
the study of persuasive definitions will remain an open subject. But some
provisional remarks can be made on evaluating the use of persuasive def-
initions in the cases cited above. The new dialectical approach suggests
a new perspective on how to judge the use of persuasive definitions in
these four cases and in other comparable cases.

Let’s go back to Stevenson’s original case of the dialogue on culture
(case 8.1 above), and try to reconstruct the chain of argumentation in
it. We begin by identifying all the propositions in the argument in the
following key list of them.


Key List for the Culture Example

He has had but little formal education.

His sentences are often roughly cast, his historical and literary refer-
ences rather obvious.

His thinking is wanting in that subtlety and sophistication which mark
a trained intellect. He is definitely lacking in culture.

The characteristics I mention are the antithesis of culture, contrary to
the very meaning of the term.

He is not a man of culture.

I should call him a man of culture notwithstanding.

In the true and full sense of the term, “culture” means imaginative
sensitivity and originality.

These qualities he has.

He is a man of far deeper culture than many of us who have had
superior advantages in education.


Using this key list, we can now construct an Araucaria argument diagram
representing the chain of argumentation in Stevenson’s culture exam-
ple. There has been an implicit conclusion, “He is not a man of culture,”
inserted into the argument. Even though this implicit assumption was


312 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


not present explicitly in the argumentation in Stevenson’s dialogue, it
appears on the diagram in Plate 3 in the darkened box with the dashed
borderline. The arguments supporting this proposition are shown on
the right side of the diagram under the proposition, “He is not a man
of culture.” Shown to the left of this text box is another one, also in
a darkened box, “I should call him a man of culture notwithstanding.”
This proposition is opposed to the proposition “He is not a man of cul-
ture” and is diagrammed as a refutation, indicated by the double arrow
joining it to the proposition it is put forward to refute. Underneath the
refutation, on the left, is the sequence of argumentation supporting it.
Thus the diagram falls into two parts. On the right is shown a linked
argument pattern supporting the proposition that he is definitely lack-
ing in culture, which in turn supports the ultimate conclusion that he
is not a man of culture. On the left the refutation of this argumenta-
tion is leading to the conclusion that he is a man of far deeper cul-
ture than many of us who have had superior advantages in education.
This conclusion is then used as a premise to support the conclusion, “I
should call him a man of culture notwithstanding.” To some extent, then,
the argument does display both the original argument and the counter-
argument in Stephenson’s dialogue and culture, bringing out the opposi-
tion between the pro and contra argumentation, and showing its dialogue
structure.

Notice that in the argument diagram in the figure, both the argu-
ment on the right hand and the counter-argument on the left have
a shaded area surrounding them, indicating which propositions are
joined together in the argument structure, and marked on the shaded
area is an expression indicating the type of argument. Both arguments
are labeled by the expression “argument from verbal classification.”
This label represents the argumentation scheme for the argument
from verbal classification. This form of argument concludes that some
particular object has a property in virtue of its falling under a verbal
classification of some particular type. Thus the argument diagram in
Plate 3 is instructive in that it shows, for the first time, how Stephenson’s
key example used to illustrate how persuasive definitions work can be
modeled as a sequence of argumentation with specific premises and
conclusions joined together in an argument structure.

The argument diagram in Plate 3 only begins to probe into the struc-
ture of the culture dialogue, however. We still have to see how argument
from definition to a verbal classification, as well as argument from val-
ues, are involved. The first point to be made is that we can easily see how


Evaluating Persuasive Definitions 313,


argument from definition to a verbal classification is involved. It is used to
support the premise shown in the lowest left text box of Plate 3. It is used
to redefine the term “culture” originally used in the part of the argument
shown on the right side of the figure. The problem is that this argument
is based on argument from values in a curious way. To see better how it
works, we turn back to case 8.1a.

In case 8.1, B is trying to persuade A to have a better opinion of Rod-
ney. She is trying to persuade A to give up the “superficial” view that
Rodney is uncultured and move to the more favorable view that, in the
“true” sense of the word, he can be seen as a cultured person. In this case,
the persuasive definition seems pretty harmless. It is fairly obvious what
B is up to. And A can always disagree, if he wishes, by arguing that he
takes a different view of culture, and would define the term in a different
way than A has. The remaining three cases are different. In the Reagan
case, the redefinition of the term “safety net” took place gradually in a
way that made it appear that Reagan was keeping his pledge to retain
benefits for the “truly needy.” Zarefsky et al. (1984, p. 114) describe this
rhetorical tactic as a species of what is called “dissociation” in Perelman
and Olbrechts-Tyteca (1969). In dissociation, a seemingly unitary term
is split in two by pairing it with opposed terms, one favorable and one
unfavorable. Then the speaker’s position is linked to the favorable term
and opposed to the unfavorable term. But is dissociation a rhetorical tac-
tic that is fallacious, or somehow represents an unfair or deceptive kind
of argumentation that ought to be condemned as illegitimate? Zarefsky
et al. seem to stop short of this claim. They see the use of this tactic by
the Reagan administration as involving ambiguity and subtle shifts in def-
inition (p. 119). But surely in the persuasion dialogues characteristic of
political rhetoric, a good deal of ambiguity and subtle shifts in definitions
should be expected and accepted as reasonably normal for this kind of
argumentation. The opposition can offer critiques of what they perceive
as deceptions or logical shortcomings in such tactical redefinitions, but
redefining the terms of a debate is not a logical defect or error in every
case.

What needs to be seen in this kind of case is that both sides have a
right to put forward an argument from verbal classification that puts its
own viewpoint in a favorable light. Why? The answer, as shown above,
is that argument from verbal classification is an inherently reasonable
form of argumentation. You have every right to put it forward. And, as
also shown above, the speech act of persuasion represents a legitimate
move to make in a persuasion dialogue. Hence in a persuasion dialogue,


314 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


you even have a right to put forward a persuasive definition, using the
form of argument called argument from definition. It should be accepted
that there is nothing wrong, in principle, with making this sort of move
in a dialogue. But the problem is, typically, that the buck does not stop
there. Both forms of argumentation should be seen, following Hastings’s
schemata representing their structures, as open to critical questioning.
As noted in the cases above, too often the proponent of the argument
adopts specious tactics designed to prevent the asking of critical questions
by the respondent in a dialogue. For example, in the abortion dispute,
the side who has defined abortion as the murder of the fetus might simply
deflect critical questioning by arguing that scientifically and medically,
the fetus has to be classified as a human being or patient. She might
argue that these classifications cannot be questioned by a layperson who
is not a scientist or physician. For the argument would then be merely
“anecdotal” and worthless as scientific evidence. The problem here partly
arises from a dialectical shift. The original dispute was supposed to be
a persuasion dialogue, but somehow the imputation crept in that only
arguments appropriate for a scientific or medical investigation or clinical
study have any further worth in the discussion. The tactic is meant to shut
the respondent up and prevent him from taking any further meaningful
part in the dialogue.

In the wetlands case, there are more problems, because the initial per-
ception, which seems to be right, is that “wetlands” is a scientific term
that ought to be defined by the scientific experts. But then, in case 8.3,
there was a dialectical shift, when the term was redefined (evidently) for
political purposes. Schiappa (1996, p. 227) sees the problem as a “dream
of escaping politics altogether” by letting the scientific experts define
terms for us. He sees this “dream” as one that “potentially ends in dis-
aster”(p. 227). But from a new dialectical perspective, the shift from a
scientific context to that of a political debate on policies is not necessar-
ily a bad thing. For in many cases (Walton 1998b), such a shift can be
constructive. For example, a shift from an information-seeking dialogue
to a persuasion dialogue could improve the quality of the persuasion dia-
logue by making it better informed on the issue. On the other hand, the
redefinition in case 8.3 can be criticized as deceptive, on the grounds
that the tightening up of the criteria for “wetlands” was introduced in
such a way that what was really going on was not widely realized by the
public.

Case 8.4, about the term “rape,” seems different from the previous
three cases. It was a legal redefinition proposed by an advocacy group,


Evaluating Persuasive Definitions 315


and the issue was given much publicity at the time. It is harder to see in
this case how deception was involved, if it was. But case 8.4 is similar to
cases 8.2 and 8.3, because, unlike case 8.1, the redefinition was a matter
of public policy that served identifiable interests. If it is hard to argue
that the redefinition was logically illicit in cases 8.2 and 8.3, however, it is
even harder in case 8.4. According to Burgess-Jackson, the redefinition in
case 8.4 is not an “objectionable” form of persuasive definition, because
the word “rape” is vague and ambiguous to begin with, and because it
represents a feminist point of view that is legitimate as a “theory” of rape
(p. 433). Based on his analysis of this case, Burgess-Jackson has argued
for the general thesis that putting forward a persuasive definition should
not be regarded as an inherently objectionable or disreputable move in
argumentation. What needs to be noted in this case is that the intellectual
discussions about the term “rape” by feminists and others could be seen as
persuasion dialogue. If so, the redefinition of the term “rape” advocated
by some at that stage could be seen as a persuasive definition. By the
same token, the old definition opposed by the feminists could also be
seen as a persuasive definition. Once the speech act of persuasion has
been clearly defined, and we can see how persuasion can be rational in
argumentation, there is surely no real objection to seeing argumentation
about the redefinition of even something as controversial as rape in this
light.

Surely, the postmodernists are right to make the following argument.
Because virtually all terms used in everyday discourse already contain
emotive connotations that reflect existing values and traditions, arguing
for a new ethical view that redefines such a term should be seen as, in
principle, a reasonable kind of move to make in ethical argumentation.
Because this argument does seem to be reasonable, it signals caution in
condemning all use of persuasive definitions.

The objection to persuasive redefinitions, when they should properly
be regarded as objectionable, seems to center more on the potential for
confusion and deception. And as Stevenson’s analysis brought out, that
potential is certainly there. But an even more worrisome aspect of per-
suasive definitions was brought out quite clearly by cases 8.2, 8.3, and
8.4. Once they are lodged into place, in law, government regulations, or
public policies, the capability for critically questioning them undergoes a
shift. Now the legal experts take over. As a layperson, you as an individual
can’t realistically decide any more whether you will accept this definition
or not. Legally, you are bound to accept it. Of course, you can still argue
against it or question it as a private citizen, as long as we have freedom to


316 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


engage in philosophical discussions on public issues. Of course, the legal
definition is supposed to somehow be based on some underlying commu-
nity acceptance and on moral thinking that reflects what is acceptable or
not in light of the changing times. But it is important to note that once we
enter the legal area, there is a sharp shift in the rules for putting forward
definitions and for dealing with argumentation based on definitions and
accepted meaning of terms.


g. What Should the Rules for Persuasive Definitions Be?


Persuasive definitions have not been studied very much. We have not
really advanced far beyond the point reached by Stevenson’s investigation
of them, and there are many unanswered questions. Presumably, persua-
sive definitions are closely related to stipulative definitions, and possibly
they should be treated as a species of them, as Robinson (1950) proposed.
Rules for stipulative definitions, as opposed to other kinds of definitions,
tend to be more permissive. In a dialogue, a participant should generally
be free to offer a stipulative definition at any point, and there are few
restrictions on stipulative definition that apply to other definitions. For
example, a stipulative definition can ignore previous lexical usage. This
same freedom seems to attach to persuasive definitions. But the degree
of freedom certainly should vary contextually. For example, if one party
offers a persuasive definition in a persuasion dialogue, then it is up to
that party to defend it and to stick to it, while it is up to the other party to
accept it or not. The other party should be free to propose an opposed
persuasive definition and to argue against the persuasive definition put
forward by the first party. The rules might be quite different in a scientific
or legal context, however. In law, statutes and rulings of various kinds lay
down definitions of significant legal terms. While such definitions can
sometimes be disputed, they have a certain standing. Thus an attorney
arguing a case in court is far from free to start basing her arguments on
stipulated or persuasive definitions that she herself has invented. Sim-
ilarly, in a scientific discipline, certain definitions, like those of “mass”
and “force” in physics, are accepted generally in the field. They have a
firm standing. Such definitions can be challenged, but not by just pulling
a new persuasive definition out of a hat. The rules for putting forward,
challenging, and accepting definitions clearly vary with the type of con-
versational exchange an argument is supposed to be part of. So there are
no easy or pat solutions to the problems of when definitions should be
judged proper and when not.


What Should the Rules for Persuasive Definitions Be? 317


In an interesting study of collegiate debating, Shepard (1973) showed
that stipulative definitions are freely allowed in these debates and that this
possibility offers debaters a creative freedom to exploit persuasive defini-
tions and other stipulated definitions that are fanciful in departing from
lexical usage. The problem is that the audience will simply not accept a
proposed definition that is too fanciful, and because the debater’s argu-
ment is based on the definition, the audience will simply not find the
argument persuasive. The problem is that proposing a stipulative defini-
tion may be proper or acceptable as a move in a debate, but it may be
self-defeating as a strategic move. What is suggested is that the following
two questions should be distinguished. When is using a stipulative def-
inition proper or acceptable as a move in a dialogue? When is using a
stipulative definition a good strategy to help you achieve your goal in a
dialogue?

In all four cases above, the move to redefine a key term by introducing a
persuasive definition would seem to be a proper or acceptable move in the
argumentation in the case. Arguments supporting this way of evaluating
the cases were presented above. But the question of whether these redefi-
nition attempts were good strategy is another matter, not yet discussed. In
case 8.1, the redefinition of “culture” might have been a good argument
strategy for B. For all we are told about the details of the case, it seemed
that B’s argument was a good strategy in helping her to persuade A that
Rodney was a good guy. In cases 8.2 and 8.3, the strategy seemed like a
good one, because by the time the public became aware of what was going
on, the budget had been cut and the wetlands had been developed. The
deception was successful. But what happened when the public realized
that they had been duped by a persuasive redefinition? It is much harder
to say about long-term effects. Possibly, it could be just this kind of decep-
tion that makes the public cynical about politics. On the other hand,
because a considerable segment of the public presumably supported the
side of the developers, the effect was more diluted. In case 8.4, one long-
term possible effect may be the trivialization of the crime of rape. The
public thinks of rape as a horrible and intolerable assault that demands
a very strong penalty. The emotive connotation of the word “rape” in
previous usage is that of a horrific, repellant kind of crime. But suppose
that lesser offenses describable as “verbal coercion” are widely publicized
as rape convictions. The strong emotive connotations in public opinion
attached to the word “rape” may become diluted. As long as the public is
unaware of the redefinition and its implications, the strategy of women’s
rights advocates could be successful, if the law is changed to a wider


318 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


definition of “rape.” But once the public gains a wider awareness of what
is going on, the redefinition could have other effects that go against that
strategy.

In all these cases, the problem with the persuasive redefinition resides
in the awareness of the audience, the other party in the dialogue, or
the general public, in making the adjustment between the new mean-
ing and the emotive connotations of the old meaning. The problem is
the potential for confusion, dissociation, and ambiguity created by the
failure of matching between these two things. The persuasive redefiner
can get a temporary advantage from this ambiguity, making it a power-
ful rhetorical device of persuasion. The long-term effects may not be so
good, however. Thus the strategic trade-off may be between a temporary
gain and potential long-term problems. Zarefsky (1986) in his study of
President Johnson’s War on Poverty observed that Johnson’s persuasive
definition strategy was extremely successful in the short term. It enabled
him to get his Economic Opportunity Act passed. But in the long term, it
made failure inevitable by setting up the goal of winning a war that could
never be won. As Zarefsky analyzed the case, the reason for the defeat was
not economic but rhetorical. The temporary gain that can be achieved
makes the use of persuasive definitions very attractive as a rhetorical tac-
tic, especially where the redefinition can be lodged long enough into
legal, governmental, or some form of public acceptance long enough to
have the effects its advocates want. On balance, what is called for is recog-
nition of the use of persuasive definition as an argumentation tactic that
is, in principle, legitimate. In the right context of dialogue, at the right
point in the development of a line of argumentation, the putting forward
of a persuasive definition can be a reasonable move. But the potential for
deception is there, as soon as the redefinition of the old term departs
from the existing usage of the audience or respondent of the argument.
So from a logical point of view, we should be wary of persuasive defini-
tions, and treat them with caution. Definitions, especially those affecting
public policies, are often a lot more complex from a viewpoint of argu-
mentation than they seem. They need to be thoroughly discussed by both
sides. Freedom of speech is vitally important, for if the respondent is pro-
hibited from asking critical questions, long-term consequences can be
problematic; once a definition hardens into legal rulings, it cannot be
easily changed.

From a logical point of view, the most important thing about handling
cases like those considered above is that a persuasive definition should
be treated as an argument. It should be regarded as open to critical


Conclusions 319


questioning and to the posing of counter-definitions. It should be
regarded as having a burden of proof attached. It should be recognized
that the audience or respondent of the redefinition should have the right
to argue for retaining the existing usage, if it seems to them to better
represent their views on the matter. When a proponent puts forward a
persuasive definition, she should be held to it, unless she changes to a
redefinition, and she should also have that option. But at the same time
she should be open to criticism if she argues in such a way that presumes
or exploits the previously existing usage in a way that could be deceptive,
inconsistent, and confusing. The dialectical problem posed by such cases
is one of retraction of commitment to definitions to which one was previ-
ously committed in argumentation, either by posing explicit definitions
or by presuming the existing usage of a term. It is not possible to make
up any one set of rules to govern all such cases, because, according to
the new dialectic, the rules will vary depending on the type of dialogue
in which the parties are supposedly engaged.


10. Conclusions


Very little if any advance has been made on studying persuasive defini-
tions since Stevenson first began the systematic study of them as tools
of persuasion. Precise determination of when their use is legitimate or
illegitimate in the kinds of significant cases studied below is too much
to hope for at this point in the development of the subject. In this con-
cluding section, it is good to begin by recapitulating what we don’t know
about definitions in mass media argumentation, at this point in the study
of the subject. First, it needs to be emphasized, in agreement with Schi-
appa (2003), that essentialism has historically been a bad influence on
the study of definitions and that this ancient doctrine does not stand up
to critical scrutiny. Schiappa’s extensive case studies in his new book show
that definitions are always political. By analyzing the structure of argu-
mentation schemes and types of dialogue, this chapter has shown that
definitions are always inherently persuasive in nature, in ways that have
not been fully recognized. On the other hand, I continue to think that
there is some place for something like the notion of an essential attribute
in a definition. When defining a term by genus and difference (a good
method in at least some instances), one needs to differentiate between
the more important or central attributes and those that are less impor-
tant or central to the meaning of the term. Some notion of essentiality is
useful, I think. But maybe instead of talking about “essential” attributes,


320 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


we should talk about “important” attributes. Even if essentialism is a bad
old doctrine that is no longer useful or plausible, there may still be a
role for some doctrine that is like essentialism but much less absolutistic
and Platonic. What this role is remains to be determined. The study of
definitions in argumentation has scarcely begun.

There are also a lot of unanswered questions about the changing role
of philosophy as a discipline. In the older Platonic view, the philosopher
investigated the truth, and thus he opposed the Sophists who merely
engaged in persuasion. But is this a realistic view of critical discussion in
philosophy, or is it only a stance that philosophers like to adopt as a pre-
sumption that they somehow have a privileged access to the truth? What
Perelman and Olbrechts-Tyteca (1969) would add is that a philosopher
who claims to know the truth and who claims that only sophists engage
in persuasion is using the tactic called dissociation. This tactic divides
any question into a yes-no choice, implying that the opposed viewpoint
is the negative side. One can see that dissociation represents part of the
strategy of persuasive definition on Stevenson’s analysis. But one can also
see that dissociation is a natural part of advocacy in discourse, resembling
philosophical argumentation. When a philosopher argues for a certain
view, naturally he is expected to accept that view as the “right” one, and
the opposed view as the “wrong” one. Of course, he is also supposed to
be open-minded and to look at the evidence on both sides. And he is
also expected to speak or write with some conviction. In line with these
reasonable expectations, you would expect him to use dissociation. Of
course, it isa bad thing if a philosopher goes too far, and sees only his own
view or definition as “real,” refusing to consider the opposed views at all
because they are “illusory” or whatever. But you expect the philosopher
to take the position that his own view is right or represents reality better
than any opposed view. Otherwise, the rational thing for him to do is
to change his mind, and embrace one of the opposed views, once it has
been supported by enough evidence to warrant acceptance.

Posing your own definition of a key term in a philosophical discus-
sion as “real” or “essential” might be quite normal, expected, and even
reasonable (to a degree). This practice might not be quite so bad as it
may initially appear. Much of the issue turns on what one takes a philo-
sophical discussion to be. Is it an objective investigation into the truth
(what is called an inquiry in chapter 1)? Or is it a discussion with two
opposed theses where each side tries to persuade the other using rea-
soned argumentation? The first view is positivistic, and might have been
quite acceptable to Stevenson and the philosophers of his era. But it does


Conclusions 321


not seem very plausible in this era, when many are now using the term
“postphilosophy.” If the second view is the right one, then you would
expect the participants to use persuasive definitions. You would even
expect them to contend that the persuasive definitions they advocated
to be “right” represent the real essence of the thing being defined. The
question that is raised turns on one’s view of what philosophical discus-
sion is or should be. This is the area often called metaphilosophy. I like
to think of philosophy as a kind of persuasion dialogue, and according
to this view, you expect the proponent of a view to argue strongly for his
view and adopt the stance that it is the “right” view of the matter being
discussed. Of course, you should also expect the philosophical discussant
to be open to conceding that his view was not the right one, if ratio-
nal arguments presented evidence to justify that conclusion. The worst
problem with essentialism is that it appears closed to possible refutation,
dismissing all opposed views as “unreal.” None of these questions can
be answered at the present time, but this chapter offers a new basis for
discussing them.

What can be said about positive conclusions that can be drawn from
the new approach to persuasive definitions? The case studies above cast
light on how persuasive definitions work rhetorically and how they ought
to be evaluated from a logical point of view. The new dialectical approach
required to cope with these rhetorical phenomena needs to overcome
the old, but still widely accepted viewpoint of essentialism, and the newer
and recently more influential viewpoint of postmodernism. According
to the new dialectical view, a definition should always be evaluated in
light of the purpose it was supposedly put forward to fulfill in a context
of conversation. It has also been shown why definitions should often be
presumed to be argumentative in nature, even though in some cases the
purpose of putting forward a definition is supposedly that of explana-
tion rather than argumentation. The hypothesis suggested by our anal-
ysis of these cases is that putting forward a persuasive definition should
be treated as a speech act, but also as a particular kind of persuasion
attempt.

What has been revealed more than anything is the incredible rhetori-
cal power of the persuasive definition in media argumentation. The study
of definitions has languished in logic, because it has not really advanced
beyond its ancient Aristotelian framework. In particular, logic has not
known how to handle persuasive definitions. On the other hand, recent
studies of persuasion have shown that the power to define is the power
to frame a whole debate and to dictate the direction the argumentation


322 Persuasive Definitions and Public Policy Arguments


in it will take. But without a dialectical structure of types of dialogue and
argumentation schemes, rhetoric by itself is powerless to study systemati-
cally how arguments based on definitions are persuasive. It takes a dialec-
tical analysis to really see what is going on, by identifying the types of
argument used, the argumentation strategies, and how these arguments
and strategies are used to influence mass media persuasion. Zarefsky
(1986) linked the three subjects of rhetoric, persuasion, and definitions
together in a way that brings out how all three are vital to mass media
argumentation. He defined rhetoric as “the study of the process of pub-
lic persuasion” (p. 5). He added that rhetoric “encompasses a concern
for the terms in which issues are defined, since a definition will high-
light some aspects of an issue while diminishing others, and the choice
of what is highlighted will make the issue more or less persuasive.” Thus
the new approach to the study of definitions in argumentation needs to
get beyond the essentialism of logic and to stop thinking of a definition
as a merely lexical entry in a dictionary. Argumentation is heavily based
on definition and verbal classification, and that includes persuasive def-
initions most emphatically. Persuasive definitions must come to be seen
as inherently legitimate, and even normal, in a context of persuasion
dialogue. On the other hand, the use of persuasive definitions is such a
powerful technique partly because we understand so little about how it
works, and partly because persuasion dialogue is so mixed in with other
types of dialogue. We still understand very little about special contexts of
argumentation, like scientific and legal argumentation, where different
communities of arguers are involved. This chapter has shown that how
the important notion of persuasive definition works in media argumen-
tation needs to be much more firmly based on dialectical tools, especially
the argumentation schemes and argument diagramming methods that
show how the schemes apply over extended chains of argumentation.
But at the same time they also need to be grounded in the application of
these tools to real cases of media argumentation.


9


The Structure of Media Argumentation


The cases studied in the previous chapters have suggested how dialecti-
cal and rhetorical methods need to be combined to reveal tactical argu-
ment moves and strategies underlying media argumentation. But the
respondent-to-dialogue problem posed in chapter 4 remains unsolved.
In this chapter, a solution to the problem is presented, using some tech-
nology from AI. We begin by reviewing the RTD problem and other
unsolved problems brought out in the preceding chapters. These prob-
lems continue to be exacerbated by the troubled relationship between
rhetoric and dialectic, and one problem is how to integrate the methods
of each approach with the other. There is an inevitable tension between
them, but paradoxically, one is not much good without the other when it
comes to grasping how mass media argumentation works and getting
better insights into both the strengths and weaknesses of this impor-
tant type of argumentation. Solutions to these problems are proposed
by putting forward several hypotheses that form a theory of how a pro-
ponent attempts to persuade an audience using argumentation across
media.

The main elements of the theory are the following propositions. Both
the audience and the arguer need to be seen as agents that share com-
mon knowledge that enables them to communicate. But some cases are
more dialectically complex. In these cases, three agents are involved. Two
basic types of media argumentation are distinguished. In direct media
argumentation, only the proponent and the audience have the roles
of agents. In indirect media argumentation, there is a proponent who
argues with a respondent in order to influence a third-party audience.


323


324 The Structure of Media Argumentation


Five stages in the rhetorical/ dialectical structure of media argumentation
are distinguished. The invention stage is especially important, both for
bringing out the role of strategy and for clarifying the difference between
rhetoric and dialectic. I show how strategy, in the invention stage espe-
cially, needs to be based on a capability for what was called simulative rea-
soning in chapter 4, section 5. Simulative reasoning allows one agent to
grasp how another thinks. The capability for combining practical reason-
ing and simulative reasoning is shown to rest on a multi-agent structure of
communication based on a technology called plan recognition. By using
these hypotheses as parts of a new theory, this chapter offers a new way of
articulating and clarifying the mutually supportive roles of rhetorical and
dialectical methods of argumentation. A new way of integrating rhetoric
and dialectic is proposed. At the end there is a summary of the methods
developed through the whole book, presenting a list of the fifteen basic
components of media argumentation.


1. Rhetoric and Dialectic Reconfigured


Acentral problem brought out in the previous chapters is the fundamen-
tal difficulty of somehow reconciling the tension between rhetoric and
dialectic in a coherent and theoretically well-organized model of argu-
mentation. Dialectic is an objective structure, based on argumentation
schemes and types of dialogue, for critically identifying, analyzing, and
evaluating argumentation and fallacies. Its critics would say, among other
things, that it is a purely abstract subject, a branch of logic that cannot tell
an arguer how to persuade any actual audience or how to use arguments
that are effective for persuasion. Persuasion has often been portrayed in
the past as either a literary style of presentation or a psychological subject
that requires empirical methods to measure the impact of a message on
an audience, for example, by using polls or other scientific techniques.
This dichotomy leaves no room for seeing rhetorical argumentation as
based on dialectical strategies of argumentation used in persuasion, delib-
eration, and other frameworks of communication. Why does it seem so
hard to get to get over this dilemma? It is hard to say. It may be because
popular opinion, and also the widely accepted opinion of the scientific
experts, just accepts a positivistic view of academic research in which all
that matters is “the facts” — for example, a collection of empirical data
by scientific methods, such as polling. The whole thrust of this book has
been to try to crack that monolithic and pervasive endoxon by moving


Rhetoric and Dialectic Reconfigured 3


No


5


forward in a direction that goes between the horns of the dilemma posed
by public perceptions.

What has emerged from the cases of rhetorical argumentation studied
in the previous chapters is a new approach. This approach freely con-
cedes the importance of empirical research and the collection of data.
But it counsels against a blind acceptance of these methods as applied to
mass media argumentation and points up the need for using dialectical
methods to identify the biases and fallacies inherent in these methods.
Especially, itidentifies and analyzes the abuses of these methods as rhetor-
ical strategies that commit fallacies and use dubious arguments for mass
persuasion to make corporate profits, to manipulate public opinion for
purposes of cause advocacy, and even to use argumentation as propa-
ganda. Many in the fields of rhetoric and mass media influence will think
that this dialectical approach is too negative because it stresses fallacies
and criticisms. It even seems to make rhetoric and mass influence in com-
munication look deceptive and guilty of a Sophistic kind of fraud, which
this field has for so long been accused of perpetrating. Is there some way
the new dialectic can be fitted in with the positive aims of rhetoric in a
middle way that overcomes the existing dilemma and the negative aspects
associated for so long with the Sophists as tricksters and con artists? The
answer is yes, that there is a very good way.

The approach taken in the previous chapters has shown time and
time again how dialectic and rhetoric can work together and, when so
integrated, can benefit greatly from each other. Rhetoric can take actual
cases of mass media argumentation, like those studied by David Zaref-
sky and Edward Schiappa, and show how they are based on persuasive
definitions and other forms of argumentation. Dialectic can study these
cases as well, identifying the argumentation schemes and common struc-
tures, like appeals to fear and pity, used in them. These cases show that
audiences are successfully persuaded by arguments they think are reason-
able. For example, fear appeal arguments, even though they are emotive
in nature, were shown in chapter 4 to have a structure that takes the
form of practical reasoning. In other words, the audience is persuaded
by the argument because it is essentially reasonable, based on premises
that accurately represent their commitments and goals, their hopes and
fears, and their normal means-end ways of thinking about practical affairs
of life. The audience is persuaded because it thinks the argument is a
good one. It appeals to them because it has premises that represent their
commitments, and it gets them to draw inferences to the recommended


326 The Structure of Media Argumentation


conclusion by forms of argument or argumentation schemes that prop-
erly represent rational thinking. In other words, there is a cognitive ele-
ment involved. The audience is not misleadingly regarded as just a raw
mass of positive or negative emotions like fear and greed that can be
manipulated like Skinner’s rats. Persuasion does in part work in that way.
But the more significant part is how the proponent’s strategy of persua-
sion, appealing to both positive and negative emotions, can be channeled
into specific responses, persuading an audience to come to a conclusion
about how to act or what to accept as an opinion. This process of chan-
neling, and how argumentation strategies can be based on it in successful
mass media persuasion, is the cognitive part revealed by the new dialec-
tic. It is the structure underlying the argumentation schemes and types
of dialogue used.

But in the previous chapters there has been a central problem that
leaves a gap between dialectical theory and the reality of mass media
argumentation. The RTD problem was posed by the apparent mismatch
between dialectical models of argumentation and what happens in most
cases of mass media influence attempts. In dialectic, the proponent and
the respondent take turns making moves (speech acts) that form a dia-
logue by connecting up into an orderly sequence of argumentation. This
continuity is lacking in typical cases of mass media argumentation. The
proponent sends out a message directed to a mass audience. But he
doesn’t normally then engage in dialogue with the mass audience. The
communication seems to be a one-shot event. As shown in chapter 1,
Leff (2000, p. 247) also noted this very difference, but considered it
a characteristic of difference between rhetoric and dialectic. Dialectic
proceeds by question and answer, whereas rhetoric proceeds through a
longer sequence of continuous discourse. Participants in dialectic take
turns, whereas in rhetoric discourse is continuous. In dialectic, the pro-
ponent makes a move, and then the respondent replies with a following
move. But in traditional rhetoric, the speaker makes a presentation to
an audience, and the audience passively takes it in. In mass media pre-
sentations and in written rhetoric, the audience doesn’t reply as part of
the interaction. When a politician makes a televised speech in an elec-
tion campaign, there may be various reactions. The crowd may shout
“Hurrah!” Commentators may be interviewed after the speech. Reports
and editorials on the speech may appear the next day in the media. But
these reactions are not normally part of the rhetorical presentation of
the speaker’s argumentation. The speaker has delivered his persuasive
appeal with a mass audience in mind, using what he takes to be their


The RTD Problem Revisited 327


beliefs or opinions into account. But they do not actually intervene or
raise questions during the phase when the speech is being written or
prepared.


2. The Respondent-to-Dialogue Problem Revisited


Many instances of rhetorical argumentation, as shown by the RTD prob-
lem first formulated in chapter 4, section 4, do not appear to fit the dia-
logue model. The reason is that in the paradigm case of a dialogue, there
is an exchange of questions and replies (so-called speech acts) between
two participants. In some cases of mass media arguments, for example,
in televised political debates, this turn-taking exchange of verbal moves
between the two parties actually exists. But there are many cases of mass
media arguments where the role of the respondent is diffuse or even
appears to be absent. Consider a speech given at a national convention
or by a president. There may be no reply by a commentator. Because
the speech was televised, presumably it had an impact on an audience.
But who was that audience, and how did they react? What questions or
criticisms did they have? We may not know. Or consider the case of an
advertisement for a product in a magazine or TV commercial. There may
have been arguments in it, but who were the respondents, and how did
they react? Did the arguments influence them? Of course, there are many
ways of testing hypotheses on the answers to these questions. If sales shot
up after the ad aired, that may be a pretty good sign that the argument in
the ad reached the target audience and successfully persuaded them to
buy the product. But the answers in such a case are provided only by the
testing of the hypothesis. The case is different from one in which there
is a dialogue in the sense of a verbal exchange between speech partners.
The proponent can perhaps be identified as the one who put forward
the argument in the ad, and the discourse in which the argument was
expressed may be available in the form of a tape or transcript. This part
of the dialogue is reproducible. But there may be nothing corresponding
to the response move as a speech act in the dialogue.

The solution to the RTD problem of mass media argumentation has
several components. One is the breaking down of the typical dialectical
model of a sequence of turn-taking, question-reply moves into a different
sequence. This sequence is the modified dialectical sequence for rhetor-
ical argumentation. Let us call it the rhetorical argumentation sequence
(RAS). The following five stages are characteristic of an RAS. First, the
proponent goes through an argument invention stage in which he devises


328 The Structure of Media Argumentation


an argumentation strategy to persuade the audience or respondent. Sec-
ond, there is a construction stage, where he builds the message. For
example, the message could be a TV commercial. The construction stage
would consist of the work of preparing the commercial. Third, there is
a sending stage in which the message is printed or broadcast to a mass
audience. Fourth, there is a message processing stage where the audience
takes in the argument. Each member of the audience does this individ-
ually and, depending on format, in different ways. The message may be
printed or stored on a tape, and each person who reads or sees it individ-
ually processes the message. Fifth, there is a feedback stage, where some
results of having sent the message are fed back to the proponent. These
results represent the supposed impact of the message on the audience.
The five stages constitute a normative model of mass media argumenta-
tion. They do not necessarily represent the actual temporal sequence of
how things proceed in a real case. For example, an early version of the
commercial could be televised, and viewers might make it clear by phone
calls that they do not like the commercial for some reason. Let’s say, for
example, that viewers find that the commercial is distasteful or think that
it portrays them in a bad light. In response to this feedback, a new version
of the commercial may then be constructed and broadcast. Notice also
that each stage is not necessarily a discrete or continuous single event in
time. For example, a commercial may be run for a few days, and then run
again a month later for a few days.

The profile of dialogue is a technique used to represent a connected
sequence of speech acts that are moves in a local segment that is part
of a longer sequence of argumentation in a dialogue. The profile is a
short selected sequence of moves that represents only a fragment of a
longer sequence of moves comprising a lengthy exchange between two
participants who have taken turns arguing in a dialogue. More correctly
(Krabbe 1999), a profile of dialogue is not always just a single sequence.
It may also exhibit several sequences organized as branches in a tree
structure. Thus Krabbe (1999, p. 25) described a profile as a tool that
“is supposed to give us some general features of such sequences at some
intermediate level of abstraction” between an actual case and a formal
model of dialogue. Despite its incompleteness, a profile can be useful for
analyzing or evaluating an argument or argument strategy that was played
out mainly in certain moves in a dialogue. The profile technique is useful
in cases where bringing in additional lengthy parts of a dialogue in full
is not necessary or can be condensed. The term “profile of dialogue” was
first introduced in Walton (1989b, pp. 65-71) to analyze and evaluate


The RTD Problem Revisited 329


examples of question-asking strategies, and especially the fallacy of many
questions. A well-known example of the kind of question that is associated
with this traditional fallacy is, “Have you stopped abusing your spouse?”
The fallacy arises from the fact that no matter which way the respondent
answers, he automatically commits himself to the proposition that he
has abused his spouse at some time or other. Thus the question can be
used as a tactic to force even the non-spouse-abuser to concede that he
has abused his spouse. One might parenthetically note that such a ques-
tion would be not be fallacious if used to interview a defendant in court
who had just admitted that he had abused his spouse. The question could
be fallacious, though, where it represents an attempt by the questioner
to force the respondent to admit guilt without leaving him any room to
air his real opinions. Thus this tactic falls under the heading of the kind
of questioning tactic of forcing an answer studied in relation to polling
in chapter 7, section 4.

One diagnosis of the problem with some of the questions used in
polls, and with the fallacy of many questions, is that such questions do
not allow the respondent to give a proper answer because the question
is too complex. To deal with this problem, the questioner should break
the question down into several simpler questions that the respondent can
answer separately without being forced into concessions he does not want
to make. These simpler questions, once answered, can then lead to more
complex questions that can now be answered without committing any
fallacies or being forced to admit something that the respondent does
not want to admit. A profile of dialogue can be used to show what the
right sequence of questioning should ideally look like.


Profile 9.1
Q1: Do you have a spouse? (If answer is “no,” end of sequence.)
Qe: Have you ever abused your spouse? (If answer is “no,” end of
sequence.)
Q3;: Have you stopped abusing your spouse?


Suppose the respondent has already answered “yes” to both Q1 and Q2.
At the next move in the dialogue, it would not be inappropriate for the
proponent to pose the question Q3. In such a case, there is no forcing
of an answer that unfairly limits the respondent’s options. Although the
famous complex question would be asked at move Q3, it would not be
fallacious. To evaluate problematic cases, like the kinds of questions used
in polling studied in chapter 7, the profile of dialogue technique is the


330 The Structure of Media Argumentation


best method. This technique is normative. It is used to indicate how the
right sequence of dialogue should ideally go. Then this sequence or pro-
file can be compared with the real dialogue sequence of argumentation
in the given case being analyzed. The comparison of the two sequences
can reveal the evidence needed to judge whether the questioning in the
actual case should be seen as fallacious or not.

Nowwe come to the basic problem for using dialectical models to apply
to real cases of rhetorical argumentation. The problem is that when you
look at a real case of mass media argument, such as a commercial, there
appears to be no basis for building up a profile of dialogue that could be
applied to the case. For, as observed above, the RAS seems to be a one-shot
affair. There is not the same kind of more protracted sequence of ques-
tions and replies between the proponent and the respondent so typical
of dialectical argumentation. Thus it is questionable whether dialectical
models apply usefully to mass media argumentation. To deal with this
problem we need to take a closer look at how mass media argumentation
works, as shown by the case studies discussed in the previous chapters.


3. Direct and Indirect Media Argumentation


Two classes of media argumentation need to be distinguished. The first is
that of arguments based on the commitments of the audience. Typical of
this class are the appeals to fear and pity studied in chapters 2 and 4. For
example, in the appeal to pity, the proponent bases the argument on the
recognition that the audience will feel pity when a situation that seems
unfortunate to them is presented. He then uses this evocation of pity as
a premise in practical reasoning designed to get the audience to take a
recommended course of action. For example, he may recommend that
the audience send a check or credit card number. In this kind of case,
the proponent must devise his strategy of argumentation based on what
he takes to be the commitments and the presumed thinking of the target
audience. Chapters 2 and 4 showed some of the argumentation schemes
used in appeals to fear and pity, and showed how such arguments are
based on the presumed commitments of the target audience. The typical
ad hominem argument studied in chapter 5, has a different and more com-
plex dialectical structure. In the circumstantial ad hominem argument,
like the Gore example, the proponent bases his argument on the com-
mitments of the respondent. He finds a pair of propositions that are
commitments of that specific respondent and that are (arguably) incon-
sistent with each other. Then he uses this whole apparatus to try to get


Direct and Indirect Media Argumentation 331


Proponent’s Commitments Audience Commitments


Proponent Audience


FIGURE Q.1 Direct media argumentation.


the audience to draw a conclusion by inference from what has been put
before them. The audience is supposed to see that the respondent is
inconsistent in that he does not practice what he preaches. The audience
is expected to draw the conclusion that the respondent is a hypocrite.
By this means the proponent hopes to discredit the respondent before
the mass audience, and thereby get the mass audience to reject his argu-
ment. This class of arguments has a more complex dialectical structure
than the previous one. It is first directed to the commitments of the single
respondent, but then it uses this first segment of the argument to try to
influence a wider, often mass audience.

The strategies for these two classes of arguments are essentially dif-
ferent. In the first, the respondent is the mass audience. This class of
arguments could be called direct media arguments. The dialectical struc-
ture of direct media argumentation is displayed in Figure 9.1.

The direct class of media arguments is dialectically simpler. The pro-
ponent directly aims his strategy at the audience. His task is to try to
figure out what their commitments are likely to be, what their goals and
interests are likely to be, and how they are likely to feel about situations
that are familiar and evocative to them.

The second class of media arguments is rhetorically more complex.
The proponent has more work to do here. He must first figure out a
plausible account of what the respondent’s commitments are likely to be,
or at any rate how they can be plausibly portrayed. Then he must work
with these data using an argumentation scheme to try to influence the
audience. From the argument based on the respondent’s presumed com-
mitments, he must try to get the audience to drawa conclusion. To do this,
he needs to know something about the commitments and the thinking


332 The Structure of Media Argumentation


Proponent’s Commitments Respondent’s Commitments


Mass Audience


Proponent


Mass Audience
Commitments


Mass Audience Draws
Conclusion


FIGURE Q.2 Indirect media argumentation.


of the audience. So in the indirect type of media argumentation, the
proponent must base his argument first on premises that are (arguably)
commitments of the respondent. Second, he must direct this first stage
of the argument to the commitments of the audience. The dialectical
structure of indirect media argumentation is displayed in Figure 9.2.

This distinction between the two types of mass arguments is important
for the speech act of persuasion. The direct type of media argument can
be viewed dialectically as being based on the speech act of persuasion.
The indirect type does not fit the model of the speech act of persuasion
outlined in chapter 2, at least not without modifications. The speech act
of persuasion in the indirect mass media argument is one directed to the
audience as respondent. The aim is to persuade the audience to accept
a conclusion by using argumentation based on their commitments, or
what are taken to represent their commitments, as premises. But this
aim is pursued indirectly by means of argumentation in a prior con-
text of persuasion dialogue between the proponent and the respondent
who is attacked or otherwise confronted in argumentation. Thus what is
involved in the indirect type of argument is a double persuasion dialogue.
There is a shift from one persuasion dialogue to another. In this type of
argument, we can say that the speech act of persuasion is involved at two
levels. The distinction between direct and indirect media arguments is
essential to solving the RTD problem by matching the commitment-based
structure of media argumentation to the dialectical model.


Direct and Indirect Media Argumentation 333


In both direct and indirect argumentation, the audience plays a com-
plex role as both spectator and judge. The audience may seem to be
a silent spectator. But in many cases it is evident that the audience is
meant to be a participant. Tindale (1999, p. 66) noted that the dialecti-
cal approach may insist that a dialogue is involved whether you look at the
role of the audience the one way or the other. To appreciate this point,
it is useful to look at political arguments, such as ad hominem arguments
used in campaign ads. The audience appears to be a spectator, but the ad
works because the audience is invited to draw conclusions on a basis of
innuendo. It is in such cases that the Gricean notions of implicature and
rules for collaborative conversation come into play. The problem then
posed (Tindale 1999, p. 67) is to integrate the dialectical notion of rules
for a collaborative conversation with a rhetorically based account of the
role of the audience.

Another component necessary for the solution of the RTD problem
is a dialectical reconstruction of the invention stage. How is it that the
invention stage can be dialectical if the typical sequence of question-reply
moves in a dialogue is not there? The configuration of argument strate-
gies, set out as the explanation of appeals to fear and pity as fallacious
arguments in chapter 4, still seems very mysterious in certain respects.
How does the one agent “enter into” the mind of the other to anticipate
the objections or future argumentation moves of the other? It sounds
like what is involved is the rhetorical ability of persuasion called empathy.
How could empathy work in argumentation? How is ita part of the rhetor-
ical argumentation commonly used in mass media persuasion attempts?
When the proponent constructs the persuasive message, in order for
the argument to be successful, it must be based on premises that are
commitments of the target mass audience. But the problem is how the
proponent can find the right premises. How can he effectively know or
try to guess the commitments of the target audience? Answers to these
questions need to be based on the assumption that the proponent can
simulate the thinking of the audience on the issue that is the topic of
the persuasion dialogue. To do this, he must use what is called simulative
reasoning.

When the proponent goes through the invention stage, the first stage
in persuading a mass audience, he develops and acts on an argumentation
strategy. To devise the strategy, the proponent must try to judge what the
commitments of the audience are with respect to the matter at issue.
How does he do this? The key is simulative reasoning. The proponent
has to use empathy to try to put himself in the mind of the audience, so


334 The Structure of Media Argumentation


to speak. Then he can proceed to the construction stage, where he builds
the argumentation that will lead the audience from their commitment-
based premises to the conclusion the proponent wants them to accept. It
is this process of simulative reasoning, trying to anticipate the response
of the audience through prolepsis, that constitutes the main dialectical
element of rhetorical argumentation. The dialogue between proponent
and respondent is “mental,” so to speak. There is a profile of dialogue
there implicitly, but it may not be articulated verbally by the proponent.
Indeed, it is generally better for the proponent if his audience is unaware
of the rhetorical/dialectical mechanics of his argument strategy. And yet
to make the strategy work, the proponent needs to “think ahead” in a
dialogue to try to anticipate how the audience will react to each move in
his sequence of argumentation.


4. Star Trek: The Rhetorical Dimension


In presenting an argument, an arguer who is engaged in a public attempt
at rational persuasion typically has a social audience in mind. However,
as Vorobej (2006, p. 5) has shown, a speaker’s social audience is a socially
constructed entity. It represents not the actual audience a speaker is
addressing, but a kind of construct simulating the collective viewpoint
the speaker is aiming at as his persuasion target. To be successful in car-
rying out the speech act of persuasion in a dialogue, the speaker must use
arguments based on premises that are propositions the audience either
accepts or can be persuaded to accept (its commitments). Moreover, as
we now hope to show, to be successful in this enterprise the speaker must
base his arguments on the values of the audience or on the values of
particular groups of individuals comprising the audience.

In chapter 1, section g, the automated method of argument diagram-
ming called Araucaria was used to identify the premises and conclusions
in the argumentation in Captain Picard’s speech, showing how the chain
of argumentation fits together to support an ultimate conclusion. Impor-
tantly, we saw how each of these arguments is based on certain argumen-
tation schemes. One is the scheme for argument from values. Another is
the scheme for practical reasoning. A third is the argument from value-
based practical reasoning that combines the former two schemes, leading
to the ultimate conclusion that the three groups should go ahead with
a mission. The argument diagram in Plate 2 showed clearly how each of
the three arguments supporting this conclusion is based on an argument
from value that has an implicit premise based on what Picard takes to


Star Trek: The Rhetorical Dimension 335


be the value of each group. The argument diagram also represented the
refutation, or counter-argument, that went against the conclusion. This
part of the dialectical reconstruction of the argument could have been
developed further, but we did not attempt to do so in order to keep the
illustration reasonably simple. Once we constructed the argument dia-
gram, displaying the arguments for and against the conclusion, we are
then in a position to evaluate these arguments as weak or strong, based
on the argumentation schemes and the data we have concerning whether
the premises are true or false. The next step is to look at the same speech
with its three constituent arguments from a different viewpoint, that of
rhetoric. Our way of doing so will use the same tools identified during
the dialectical reconstruction of the argument, namely, argumentation
schemes, and the identification of the premises and conclusions in the
argument as propositions in argumentation chains leading to an ultimate
conclusion. We now return to the example of Captain Picard’s speech in
order to show how his rhetorical presentation of the argumentation to
the three groups can be shown to be an instance of value-based practi-
cal reasoning. To do this we have to take a different temporal viewpoint
on the argumentation. Instead of seeing it as a completed process in
which the arguments have already been set out, and where our aim is
to identify their premises and conclusions, including the implicit ones,
and see how they are parts of arguments leading to an ultimate conclu-
sion, we have to look at it in a future-oriented way. We have to look at it
from the point of view of Picard’s assignment set by Starfleet Command.
That assignment is to persuade the target audience to go ahead with the
mission that has been set. The rhetorical problem is that there are three
different groups, and three different kinds of arguments will be needed
to persuade them that they should go ahead. From the rhetorical point of
view, the three kinds of arguments needed for the purpose of persuasion
are separated not by their logical structure but by the different values
their premises need to be based on. As in the dialectical reconstruction
of the argument, the value-based nature of the argumentation, requiring
the argumentation schemes for value-based reasoning, and more specifi-
cally for value-based practical reasoning, is vitally important. But the way
these schemes are used is quite different. For this purpose, an argument
diagram is not very suitable, because it is based on the assumption that
the argument already exists, at least partially, so that it can be completed
by filling in unstated premises and conclusions. But from a rhetorical
point of view, at the beginning point where the speech first needs to be
made, the arguments do not yet exist, except in the mind of the speaker


336 The Structure of Media Argumentation


as topoi, or patterns of argument that could be used to invent sequences of
argumentation tailored to the needs of a specific audience. How could
such a structure be diagrammed? Here we propose that something sim-
ilar to an argument diagram, but in certain ways quite different from
it, can be used to represent the rhetorical structure of an argument. It
will use the same tools as the dialectical reconstruction of an argument,
as shown in Plate 2. But the tools will be used in a different way. They
will be used for the purpose of constructing an argument, a method
traditionally called argument invention. This structure is displayed in
Plate 4.

In Plate 4, the ultimate conclusion of the argumentation in the speech
is shown at the top, in a way comparable to the argument diagram in Plate
2. Below the top text boxes, the three arguments supporting the ultimate
conclusion are displayed. At the next level, just below the level where the
three arguments are displayed, one can see how each argument is based
on a specific goal attributed to an audience group. At the level below
that, it is shown how each, goal, in turn, is based on a value thought to be
specific to that group. The bottom level shows which group is thought to
hold that particular value.

Plate 4 is an example of a rhetorical structure that represents a
sequence of direct media argumentation based on premises supported by
values of specific target audience groups to be persuaded, leading to an
ultimate conclusion to undertake an action that requires collaboration
by all the groups involved. The format of the argumentation structure is
thus based on two types of dialogue. One is a persuasion type of dialogue,
while the other is a group deliberation to undertake an action requiring
collaborative action by all the groups involved. From this rhetorical point
of view we are looking at the argumentation structure from a viewpoint
of needing to persuade a group with diverse values to undertake a spe-
cific course of action. This perspective is a distinctively rhetorical one,
as contrasted with the dialectical one previously analyzed. Deliberation
uses the type of argumentation called practical reasoning, and this kind
of reasoning is central to planning. Picard has already adopted a plan, in
this case, and is trying to persuade those who will be involved in carry-
ing it out to accept it. To do this, he makes a proposal to the audience,
supported by his arguments in favor of it.

Recent research has shown that the speech act of making a proposal
has three essential components (Kauffeld 1998, p. 248). In this analysis,
what is proposed is a proposition that is addressed by the speaker to the
audience or hearer in a way in that meets three following conditions.


Star Trek: The Rhetorical Dimension 337


1. The speaker must present a statement of resolve, such as “We
should carry out his action,” and act as if this statement expresses
a conclusion that the speaker has reached. '

2. The speaker must give it to be believed that he is speaking with the
goal of answering doubts and objections regarding the statement
put forward.

3. The speaker must have acommitment to provide the audience with
reasons to raise questions, doubts, and objections with regard to
the proposition.


Kauffeld sees these three kinds of conditions as essential to some speaker’s
utterance as properly being classified as an instance of the speech act of
making of a proposal.

In Searle’s (1969) classification of speech acts, proposing lies between
a directive, a speech act in which the speaker tries to get the hearer to
carry out a course of action, and a commissive, a speech act that com-
mits the speaker to a course of action. In the analysis of the speech act
of making a proposal put forward by Aakhus (2006), there is a future
act that requires collaboration (joint action) between the speaker and
audience, and the speaker tries to get the audience to take part in it. It
is assumed that the two parties are acting together to solve a problem
and take turns in attempts to collaborate in doing so (p. 7). Kauffeld
(1995) proposes that the speaker’s purpose in such a context is to get
the audience to consider some proposition as worthy that the audience
has doubts about or would otherwise tend to dismiss or overlook. The
speaker and the audience are able to contribute to the accomplishment
of carrying out this action together, and it is not obvious that each can
do it of their own accord in the normal course of events. The speech
made by the speaker is an attempt to enlist the audience in this action,
taken to be mutually beneficial. In the Star Trek example, Captain Picard
puts forward the proposal to go to Dozaria, and he offers arguments for
this course of action. It is a course of action he is already committed
to, and he makes the speech to try to persuade his audience that they
can act together to solve the problem by participating in the proposed
venture.

The analysis of Searle, Kauffeld, and Aakhus shows how the speech act
of making a proposal contains potential for the speaker’s defense of the


' The exception would be during the early stage of a deliberation, say, a brainstorming
session, where the point is to collect alternatives to discuss, without committing the par-
ticipants to the suggested ideas.


338 The Structure of Media Argumentation


Speaker States That Action A Should Be Carried Out by Joint Action
A


Action A Is Put Forward as Means to Realize Joint Deliberation Goals


A


Conclusion to Action A


A


Goal Premise Means Premise


Audience Values Value-Based Practical Reasoning


FIGURE 9.3, Argumentation structure of the speech act of making a proposal.


proposal and potential for the audience to have doubts or reservations
about it. But what structure of argumentation underlies the making of
the proposal, framing the arguments that might be offered to support it,
as well as the rebuttals that might be used to attack it? This question can
be answered by using the scheme for value-based practical reasoning, as
shown in Figure 9.3.

The argumentation structure shown in Figure 9.3 shows how value-
based practical reasoning underlies the speech act of making a proposal
in a deliberation dialogue. The part of the diagram below the first box
displays the argumentation needed to support the proposal. The argu-
mentation needed to defend the proposal, if it is questioned or attacked,
is the scheme for value-based practical reasoning presented in chapter 1,
section 8. We can see, for example, how the structure of value-based
practical reasoning is embedded into the deliberation dialogue in the
Star Trek example.


5. Argumentation Strategies


In deliberation dialogue, each agent has a plan of action based on prac-
tical reasoning. A plan is based on a goal and a set of actions that are
connected to the goal (Russell and Norvig 1995, p. 339). Characteristic
of planning is a chaining forward of actions from a “start state” to a “goal
state” (p. 365). A plan is also based on plausible hypotheses about what is


Argumentation Strategies 339


likely to happen in the future. There is a useful literature on the theory
of action that can be applied to planning. Segerberg (1984) developed
a formal theory of action in which actions are composed of subactions
chained together in a way very similar to the way states form a plan in
planning theory in AI. The chaining takes the form of action sequences
of the kinds described by Goldman (1970). An example would be me
moving my arm to make a signal. The action of me moving my arm is
related to my action of making a signal in a sequence of actions. Such a
sequence of actions could be part of a plan. Segerberg (1985, pp. 185-
187) gave the example of using a recipe to make a meal. During the
sequence of actions required to make the meal, there are many so-called
routines or habitual actions that are “run.” For example, I might have
to whip the potatoes. The recipe could be thought of as representing a
plan. The connected sequences of actions in cooking the meal represent
routines that are connected together in a more complex sequence of
actions performed to carry out the plan.

Planning is closely related to the notion of a strategy in deliberation.
You could say that a plan is an action strategy, or represents a strategy
of deliberation. Hamblin (1987) constructed a formal theory of action
strategies based around the notion of a “deed.” In his logic of imperatives,
he defined a deed as an elementary independent action attributable to
a particular agent (p. 140). A partial allocation of deeds to an agent is
called a partial strategy (p. 157). Walton and Krabbe (1995, pp. 189-
195) presented a formal precis of Hamblin’s action-state semantics in
which a partial strategy specifies a sequence of actions with gaps in it.
The gaps can later on be filled in as events actually unfold in the given
situation in which the action is being carried out. It has also been shown
in Walton and Krabbe (pp. 15-21) how the notion of a partial strategy is
fundamental to understanding the notion of commitment. A person is
said to be “living up to a commitment” as long as his actions are based
on a partial strategy, his actions forming a sequence leading toward the
fulfillment of that commitment as a goal state. All these notions from
planning theory and action theory are extremely useful in helping us to
understand argumentation in the context of a deliberation. Each agent
has goals that represent commitments, and has plans or action strategies
that are hypothesized as means to lead to these goals.

In going through the five stages of presenting an argument to be sent
across media, whether the format is one of direct or indirect communica-
tion, the proponent has to use practical reasoning to devise a persuasive
message. The respondent has to use practical reasoning to comprehend


340 The Structure of Media Argumentation


the message and then act on it. But the proponent must use simula-
tive reasoning to anticipate the plausible response and thinking of the
respondent. What is at work is a simulative use of practical reasoning
by the proponent, especially at the invention stage. Simulation must be
used to try to devise an argumentation strategy that will achieve an action
goal, to persuade the respondent, or to achieve the goal of the dialogue,
whatever type of dialogue is involved.

When we examine the other types of dialogue set out in chapter 2, we
find the concept of strategy is different for each type of dialogue. In a
persuasion dialogue, each participant has a strategy for persuading the
other participant to accept the first party’s thesis. Van Eemeren and Hout-
losser (1999, p. 164) have described argumentation strategies as arising
from the balance between rhetoric and dialectic in argumentation. The
balancing of a resolution-minded dialectical objective with the rhetor-
ical objective of having one’s own position accepted tends to give rise
to strategic maneuvering. The capability to devise such useful strategies
demands the ability to think ahead in a dialogue and to judge proac-
tively how one’s respondent will react to future moves. In a persuasion
dialogue, a participant’s strategy can be modeled as a chaining forward
of inferences of the kind described in chapter g, section 3. This chaining
forward must meet all four requirements (Ri—-R4) for argumentation ina
persuasion dialogue set out in chapter 2, section 2. The respondent must
accept the premises. Each inference in the chain must be structurally
correct. The chain of argumentation must have the proponent’s thesis
as its end point (goal-state). And these three requirements are the only
means allowed as fulfilling the proponent’s goal. This notion of a per-
suasion strategy requires several abilities. One is the simulative ability to
judge what the respondent’s commitments are. Another is the ability to
think up chains of argumentation using these commitments as premises.
Still another is the ability to anticipate the future moves and sequences
of moves that will be used by the respondent in the dialogue. An agent
in a dialogue tries to extrapolate a line of argumentation forward aiming
at a particular end point that is his thesis to be proved in the dialogue.
This notion of the extrapolation forward of a chain of argumentation is
the basis of dialectical relevance. An argument should be judged to be
relevant in a persuasion dialogue if it can be extrapolated forward so that
it reaches, or at least aims at reaching, the conclusion the proponent is
supposed to prove. This normative and dialectical concept of relevance
is vitally important for modeling argumentation in persuasion dialogue
and especially for analyzing alleged fallacies of relevance.


Argumentation Strategies 341


Strategy in a persuasion dialogue is structurally similar to the notion
of action in a deliberation type of dialogue. Both are based on chaining
forward a sequence of argumentation aimed at an end point. But the
two kinds of strategy are qualitatively different. Strategy in deliberation
is based on goals, sequences of actions, and planning. It is aimed at a
goal state and is concerned with hypothetical sequences of actions that
represent alternative means for bringing about the action that is the goal.
Persuasion strategy is based on the four components (Ri—R4) that are
characteristic of argumentation in persuasion dialogue. In some cases, a
strategy has actually been played out, and we may try to figure out what the
arguer’s strategy was, based on the given text of discourse representing
his argumentation. But strategy is normally a future-directed notion that
is vital to the invention stage of a mass media argument. It is a sequence
of argumentation that exists in the agent in a simulative and partial rep-
resentation. It is a device that an arguer needs to deploy in a hypothetical
dialogue that he anticipates might be played out in the future. To devise
a strategy at the invention stage, what an arguer must do is to take the
commitments of the other party and to try to use them in a sequence of
argumentation leading the respondent to a designated conclusion. The
proponent must use structurally correct inferences in the chain. Mostly,
he must use plausible reasoning and implicature to try to get the other
party to incur new commitments that can also be used as premises. The
whole sequence should eventuate in the proving of the designated con-
clusion. Strategy in rhetorical argumentation characteristically requires
the ability to use simulative reasoning to judge what the commitments
of the audience are, and how they will draw conclusions based on those
commitments.

A system of argument invention of the following kind can be built on
the structure of persuasion strategy outlined above. The first component
of the system is a set of statements that are premises acceptable to an audi-
ence that can be used in arguments designed to persuade them to accept
the target conclusion. The second component is a set of argumentation
schemes that can be used inferentially to draw conclusions from these
premises. The third is a device like an Araucaria diagram that can be
used for constructing chains of argumentation recursively from the first
two components. How such a chaining device works can be illustrated
as follows. To use the chaining device, the argument inventor takes the
set of premises and applies each scheme to them generating a conclu-
sion. This conclusion is then added to the set of premises. The argument
inventor repeats the process, each time using the new conclusion as one


342 The Structure of Media Argumentation


of the premises in the new inference. Following this recursive procedure,
the statement formerly drawn as a conclusion becomes, during the next
round of argument invention, a premise in a new argument used to move
closer toward the conclusion to be proved.

To see more precisely how simulative “thinking ahead” needs to be
done as part of the process of rhetorical argument invention, there are
several technologies recently developed in AI that can be extremely help-
ful. One is the technology called plan recognition.


6. Plan Recognition


Plan recognition technology is an active area of research in artificial
intelligence, and many software packages have been developed. In plan
recognition, one agent attributes goals and planned actions to another
agent on the basis of observing that other agent carrying out actions.
What sorts of dialogue are involved in cases of argumentation based on
plan recognition? Obviously, deliberation is involved. The agent whose
actions were observed must be presumed to be engaged in deliberation.
The other agent must have the capability to understand how deliberation
works. But Carberry argued that there is also an information-seeking type
of dialogue involved. As she put it (1990, p. 3) the one agent is “seeking
information” and the other is “attempting to provide that information.”
She cited the example of apprentice-expert dialogues. The apprentice
begins by attempting to perform a given task. But then, if confronted
with a problem, he may discuss the problem with the expert teacher.
Generally, then, we can say that two types of dialogue are involved. One
is a deliberation, in which a primary agent uses practical reasoning to
solve a problem or carry outa plan. The other is an information-seeking
dialogue in which the secondary agent seeks information relevant to the
deliberation. But there are other types of dialogue that can be involved
as well in some cases. Chu-Carroll and Carberry have shown how nego-
tiation and persuasion dialogue often need to be involved as well. The
following case has been summarized from their more lengthy account
(Chu-Carroll and Carberry 1995, p. 111).


Case 9.1
The air-traffic control systems in a country have gone down. Two
neighbouring countries, X and Y, negotiate with each other on how
to track and deal with all affected flights. In this scenario, the agents
deliberating on how to solve the problem are the air-traffic control


Plan Recognition 343


systems representing countries X and Y. But in order to success-
fully deliberate, they have to exchange relevant information. For
example, they will have to give each other information about their
individual equipment to determine which terminal is more capable
of guiding which flights. But there is also another type of dialogue
required. The air-traffic controllers in countries X and Y will also
have to negotiate with each other on how to best divide the work
load. If one has a work load that is too heavy at some times, it will
have to try to trade off with other flights it could take on during less
busy times.


Based on cases like this one, Chu-Carroll and Carberry proposed a model
of plan recognition that includes negotiation as well as deliberation and
information-seeking dialogue. But their model needs to be extended
even further. In some cases persuasion dialogue needs to be involved
as well. Chu-Carrol and Carberry acknowledged this necessity (p. 121)
in their statement that there are intervals in communication where one
agent needs to justify beliefs to another agent. If the two agents have
a difference of opinion about some issue, they will have to engage in
persuasion dialogue to resolve that issue.

Multi-agent systems and other new advances in AI like computational
dialectics and plan recognition technologies can be applied to rhetorical
argumentation.” What they do is to give new structure to argumentation
that can be used to solve many problems that have been around for a
long time. Most importantly, they can be used to model the notion of
an arguer having a strategy of argumentation when communicating in
a dialogue with another arguer. Traditional dialectical models in argu-
mentation theory have seen the participant in the dialogue as a kind of
primitive, unanalyzed entity. Ifwe can model a participant as an agent, we
can see the agent as having a strategy, organized in advance in order to
interact in a dialogue with another agent. Thus, for example, if the pur-
pose ofa dialogue is for one agent to persuade another agent, then we can
see the first agent as building up a strategy, in the form of rhetorical argu-
mentation that can be used for this purpose. Exactly how such a strategy
can best be modeled is currently controversial. Some say that the agent
has to be seen as having beliefs, desires, and intentions. Others think that
the agent should be seen as having what are called commitments. These


° In fact, of course, the original motivation of the dialogue systems of Hamblin (1970)
was to study argumentation, and especially fallacies of the kind that commonly occur in
argumentation.


344 The Structure of Media Argumentation


are entities that can be reconstructed from a dialogue without necessarily
representing the beliefs, desires, or intentions of the agent.

Plan recognition is most directly applicable to argumentation in the
deliberation type of dialogue based on practical reasoning. As advocated
in the previous chapters, the structure needed to accommodate such
a communication is one of multi-agent dialogue. Both the proponent
and the respondent are agents, capable of action, of taking in informa-
tion, and of seeing the consequences of his or her own actions. Both are
capable of planning. Now we return to the question posed in chapter 4,
section 5, of how one agent can simulatively see into the “mind” or plans
of the other, based on external evidence. An agent is presumed to be
capable of receiving and processing information about its immediate
environment. The one agent can also presumably see the actions of other
agents. An agent can also receive messages from another agent in a dia-
logue. Using practical reasoning, an agent can draw inferences from this
information.

For practical reasoning to be used in mass media argumentation, the
message presenter has to be able to understand the thinking of the audi-
ence, especially the means-end reasoning the audience would presumably
use in trying to solve a problem. The proponent of an argument has to
figure out what the commitments of the audience are, as indicated above.
He also has to figure out which arguments can be used to influence the
audience, based on their commitments. But there is also another compo-
nent of strategy in mass media argumentation. The proponent must try
to figure out what line of argumentation is likely to be used by the respon-
dent. The situation here is similar to the kinds of simulative reasoning
used in chess as described by Gordon (1986) in chapter 4, section 5.
In the case of mass media argumentation, the proponent must try to
put himself into the position of the audience as if he were one of them.
He must, in effect, try to figure out what the strategy of the audience
would be. How would they respond? How would they think? Would they
have some further agenda that might lead them to oppose the argu-
mentation they are about to be faced with? In the case of a deliberation
dialogue, a proponent needs to figure out what the goals of the audi-
ence are and what sort of strategy they currently have for realizing these
goals. An argument will be ineffective if it fails to deal with this existing
strategy.

The message presenter, in the language of recent developments in
computer science, must have a capability for plan recognition. Carberry
(1990, p. 17) has defined plan recognition as the method whereby “an


Plan Recognition 345


agent attempts to reconstruct from the available evidence a plan that was
previously constructed by another agent.” The air controllers example
(case 9.1) can be used to illustrate plan recognition. But to see how
plan recognition can be applied to argumentation strategy, it is best to
use another simple example. Carberry (1990, p. 17) used the following
example from ordinary life to illustrate plan recognition, summarized
below as case 9.2.


Case 9.2: The Motorist Example

A motorist driving along the freeway sees an empty car parked along
the edge of the road. She sees that the car has a missing tire. As she
drives a little further, she sees a man rolling a tire along the edge
of the freeway. He is carrying a baby in one arm as he rolls the tire.
Three small children are walking behind him. By observing these
facts, the driver draws several conclusions. She concludes that this
man she saw rolling the tire was the driver of the empty car with the
missing tire. She concludes that the man was rolling the tire along
in order to get it repaired. She concludes that he did not want to
leave the three small children alone in the car along the highway.
The motorist did not see these conclusions as facts. They were all
conclusions drawn by inference from what she saw. She drew them
by attributing a plan of action to the man she saw rolling the tire.
This capability is plan recognition.


How does plan recognition work? One agent observes the actions of
another agent. So it is partly based on observations. But the observer
can’t see directly what is going on the other agent’s mind. How the pro-
cess works is that the observer attributes practical reasoning to the agent
whose actions she has observed. She then draws conclusions in the form
of hypotheses that seem to explain what she has observed. She attributes
goals to this agent, and hypothesizes that he sees actions and pursues
goals in much the same way she does. But of course, the conclusions
drawn by the motorist could be wrong. They are just plausible attribu-
tions or hypotheses. What sort of further evidence could be used to test
these hypotheses? Carberry (1990) built a system of plan recognition
called TRACK that uses a dialogue method to test inferences drawn by
plan recognition. Basically, the method is for the one agent to ask the
other questions about his observed actions. Carberry (p. 75) explained
how TRACK works as a dialogue system: “TRACK assimilates utterances
from an ongoing dialogue and incrementally updates and expands the


346 The Structure of Media Argumentation


system’s beliefs about the underlying task-related plan motivating the
information-seeker’s queries.” In other words, the agent who carries out
plan recognition engages in a dialogue with the agent whose actions were
observed. As the dialogue continues, new information comes in about
this agent’s plan. The other agent can then use this new information as
evidence to update his earlier hypothesis about the plan of this agent.

One agent has to grasp the practical reasoning of another agent in
plan recognition. But there is also a lot of domain-dependent knowledge
required. For example, in case 9.2, the observer agent needs to under-
stand that a tire is part of the wheel on the car, that a tire can go flat if
punctured, that a tire can be removed from the car, and so forth. She also
needs to understand that it would be dangerous to leave children alone
in a car at the side of the highway. Of course, we all know such things,
and we taken for granted that others know them. This so-called common
knowledge is the basis of all human communication. When you present
an argument in mass media communication, for example, you presume
that the audience already has much knowledge about the way things com-
monly work in daily life. However, when devising computer software, you
can’t take it for granted that a computer has such knowledge. To make
a computer reason like a human, it has to be programmed with many
factual assumptions representing common knowledge. The fact that a
computer lacks such knowledge presents a main problem for AI. One way
to deal with it is to restrict common knowledge to a particular domain
in a given case. For example, in order to make the computer capable
of plan recognition in case 9.2, many facts representing common knowl-
edge about cars, tires, leaving children in the car, and so forth could be
programmed into the computer’s data base. All these facts represent the
domain-dependent knowledge in that case.

Plan recognition is very important for understanding the structure of
simulative reasoning in mass media argumentation. When an agent con-
structs an argument through the five stages of mass media argumentation,
whether of the direct or indirect type, he needs to have an argumentation
strategy. To have a strategy, he needs to grasp the commitments of the
audience. He needs to use these commitments as premises of his argu-
ment. He also has to try to anticipate how the audience will use practical
reasoning to draw inferences from these premises. These tasks require
simulative reasoning. The arguer has to try to think like the audience
thinks and to try to see how they will be persuaded to arrive at the con-
clusion he wants to convince them to accept. Plan recognition can be a
useful tool for this purpose. If the arguer can get some grasp of the plan


The Solution to the RTD Problem 347


of action that can be attributed to the audience, this hypothesis could
be extremely useful for devising a strategy to persuade the audience or
influence them toward a particular course of action.

Plan recognition is especially important to understanding at the inven-
tion stage. Understanding how the invention stage works and relates to
the other four stages is vital to coming to a new and useful understand-
ing of how dialectic and rhetoric should be integrated. Dialectic is seen
primarily as a critical art of identifying, analyzing, and evaluating argu-
mentation already given in a text of discourse. Rhetoric is seen primarily
as a tool for the construction of argumentation to persuade an audience.


7. The Solution to the RTD Problem


A problem that loomed large throughout this book was the RTD prob-
lem of how media argumentation can be based on the speech act of
persuasion if, as it appears to be in many cases, it is a one-shot argu-
ment as opposed to a sequence of connected dialogue moves between
proponent and respondent. Now in this chapter, computational dialec-
tic has offered a solution to the problem. Media argumentation can be
amenable to the speech act of persuasion because the arguer has to inter-
act dialectically with the audience by using simulative reasoning, most vis-
ibly at the invention stage of the argument. The rhetorical arguer must
judge the commitments and values of the audience, as shown in the Star
Trek example. He must figure out how to use forms of argumentation to
persuade the audience based on their commitments. He must use value-
based practical reasoning and plan recognition to judge and anticipate
how the audience is thinking in the domain and on the issue of the case.
In a nutshell, the arguer must try to devise a rhetorical argumentation
trajectory that probes into the thinking of the audience. This strategic
task of argumentation (1) is commitment-based, (2) has its goal as the
speech act of persuasion, (3) uses value-based practical reasoning, as well
as other argumentation schemes, and (4) can shift from deliberation to
persuasion. The latter point brings out the importance of the traditional
distinction between deliberative argumentation and argumentation used
for persuasion, emphasizing that argumentation can be understood at a
deeper level only if different types of dialogue are recognized. Computa-
tional dialectic in AI is now widely based on this recognition.

Carberry, as shown above, used a dialogue technique in plan recogni-
tion. She studied many cases of plan recognition in dialogues between
two parties where one party was trying to understand the plan of another


348 The Structure of Media Argumentation


party whose actions had been observed. Central to her analysis of plan
recognition was the idea that the plan recognition process could be con-
ceived as a dialogue. The dialogue is initiated when one agent sees the
actions of another and forms a hypothesis to try to explain these actions.
But the dialogue process can, in many cases, be continued as an actual
dialogue between the two parties. The plan recognizer can ask the other
agent, for example, “What were you trying to do?” Similarly applying the
dialogue model can also work with cases of rhetorical argumentation.
The arguer is devising an argumentation strategy at the invention stage,
and is thus implicitly engaging in a dialogue interaction with the audi-
ence. But in some instances, the argumentation actually carries over into
a real dialogue. For example, the designer of a pilot for a television ad
may engage in discussion with a focus group to try to foresee likely reac-
tions to the ad. Or he may take a poll to see how viewers felt about it.
Or he may get e-mail from the viewers once the ad has been run. Or he
may collect data on whether sales of the product have increased after the
ad was run. All these interactions with the audience, or selected groups
in the mass audience, can be seen as instances of dialogue. Then, using
feedback, the ad designer can modify the ad or adopt a different strat-
egy, if he feels that the ad as presently constructed is not achieving the
desired effect. There are many possibilities of feedback of various kinds.
But they can all be seen as a kind of continuation of dialogue between
the proponent and the mass audience that the argument is designed to
persuade.

But the RTD problem, as posed above, is that profiles of dialogue
do not seem to apply to mass media argumentation, because there is no
sequence of questions and replies between the proponentand the respon-
dent, as required by the dialectical model. It can now be replied that there
is such a sequence, because the mass media argument presenter is inter-
acting with the audience dialectically when he uses simulative reasoning
to try to anticipate the audience’s response to the argument. And in fact,
for planning strategy in mass media argumentation, the profiles tech-
nique can be extremely helpful. The other useful dialectical tool is the
chaining forward of an argument. Both techniques are useful because
they enable the arguer to anticipate the responses of the audience
proactively. What is essential for the mass media arguer to do, according
to the commitment model, is to use the commitments of the audience
as premises. Using the Star Trek example as a simple model, the arguer
selects an argumentation scheme, or a chain of argumentation having
different kinds of arguments as links in the chain, and uses it to get by


The Solution to the RTD Problem 349


a rhetorical trajectory from the premises to the conclusion at issue. The
commitments of the audience are the data, subject to change by updating
as new information comes in through dialogue. Profiles of dialogue are
then used to infer new audience commitments. The inference engine
applied to these data is the set of argumentation schemes. They need to
be applied to the data one at a time and then sequentially. The result
of multiple applications is an argumentation chain. The argumentation
represents the arguer’s best strategy for persuading the audience to come
to accept the conclusion. Thus we can see that the procedure could be
automated and that it is inherently dialectical in nature.

Too late to be included for extensive commentary, a paper has just
appeared (Bench-Capon, Doutre, and Dunne (2007) that presents a for-
mal argumentation framework for modeling practical reasoning in which
values can be represented in such a way as to allow divergent opinions
for different audiences. In this framework, every argument is explicitly
associated with a value promoted by its acceptance. Consequently, the
formal model built to represent use of value-based practical reasoning to
persuade an audience is called a value-based argumentation framework
(VAF). In the model, whether an argument is acceptable or not depends
on how well it stands up to critical questions and counter-arguments
put forward in a dialogue with the audience to whom the argument is
directed. Another feature of the model is that rankings of values emerge
during the course of the dialogue as argumentation on both sides is
put forward (p. 43). The model is thus sensitive to preferences between
arguments with respect to particular audiences, and can account for dis-
agreements of values among different audiences (p. 66)

Of course, applying dialectical methods to rhetorical argumentation
is a new and undeveloped branch of argumentation theory. It has not
been automated yet, and in some respects it is still a crude technology
at the earliest stage of its potential development. For one thing, the cur-
rent analysis of argumentation schemes is still at a rough and prelimi-
nary stage. As noted in chapter 1, the list of presumptive argumentation
schemes in Walton (1996) is not complete, although it has identified
many of the most common forms of presumptive argument that would
apply in cases of mass media argumentation. Perelman and Olbrechts-
Tyteca (1969) have identified many of these forms of argument, and
many of them were also evident in Aristotle’s writings on rhetoric and
so-called topics. Arthur Hastings’s Ph.D. thesis (1963) made an even
more systematic taxonomy and analysis of the most important schemes
along with useful examples of them. Recently, Kienpointner (1992) has


350 The Structure of Media Argumentation


produced an even more comprehensive account of many argumentation
schemes, stressing deductive and inductive forms as well as presump-
tive forms. Among the presumptive argumentation schemes in Walton
(1996) are such familiar types of argumentation as argument from sign,
argument from example, argument from commitment, argument from
position to know, argument from expert opinion, argument from analogy,
argument from precedent, argument from gradualism, and the slippery
slope argument. Van Eemeren and Grootendorst (1992) have also ana-
lyzed important argumentation schemes. The existing formulations of
the argumentation schemes are not at a stage of precise formal develop-
ment yet. They have arisen mainly out of practical concerns arising from
studying real cases. However, there is currently a joint research project
under way that has the aim of formalizing argumentation schemes. And
the importance of argumentation schemes has been more widely recog-
nized in the field of computing. These new developments show the power
of computational dialectics as applied to media argumentation.


8. Fifteen Basic Components of Media Argumentation


The analysis of cases in the previous chapters has revealed the following
fifteen basic components of media argumentation. Each component rep-
resents an important normative characteristic of media argumentation
that helps us to properly analyze and evaluate it in particular cases. Thus
these fifteen components provide a summary of what has been achieved
so far in revealing the deep structure of media argumentation.


1, Media argumentation is basically made up of arguments that are
meant to be plausible. Although they can be deductive or inductive
in some cases, for the most part they are presumptive arguments
of the kind identified by Cialdini (1993) as cognitive short cuts, as
listed in chapter 1, section 5. They are arguments such as appeal
to popular opinion, appeal to pity, and the other forms of argu-
ment mentioned in the previous chapters and in the literature on
argumentation and fallacies.

2. To analyze and evaluate given cases of media argumentation, iden-
tification of the premises and the conclusion is an important step.
Another separate step is the identification of the link of inference
between the premises and the conclusion.

3. These arguments have a structure represented by argumentation
schemes. In the presumptive argumentation schemes so typically


Fifteen Basic Components of Media Argumentation 351


10.


used in arguments in media argumentation, the major premise is
a warrant that is not absolutely true but is defeasible and holds
presumptively, subject to exceptions.

Practical reasoning is a very important type of argumentation
scheme for media argumentation. It is ubiquitous in commer-
cial ads, for example. The structure of the ad is often in the
form, “Here is a problem. Buying this product (e.g., taking this
medication) is the solution.” Practical reasoning is also the basic
structure of media argumentation in political deliberation in a
democracy.

Argumentation schemes need to be evaluated in a context of dia-
logue by asking appropriate critical questions. Burden of proof
and turn taking in dialogue are very important in evaluating the
plausibility or doubtfulness of an argument.

The premises of such arguments are based on what the proponent
takes to be the commitments of the audience to whom the message
was directed. Very often the premises are endoxa, or propositions
generally accepted by the public and the experts.

One common way of trying to judge popular opinion on an issue
is the public opinion poll. These polls are ubiquitous. They can be
very valuable in some instances. They can also be very misleading.
They are often abused, or executed in an uncritical manner, and
subject to fallacies that can be highly deceptive. Having dialogue
with members of a target audience, for example, in focus groups,
can be a much more accurate and less misleading way of judging
popular opinion in some cases.

The formation of public opinion should be seen as a deliberation
process that goes through several stages. A problem is formulated,
ways and means of solving it are discussed, and solutions are arrived
at and evaluated. Along the way, further information is injected into
the deliberation at various points.

Media argumentation needs to be analyzed and evaluated in dif-
ferent contexts of dialogue, of the kind outlined in chapter 2,
section 4. Dialectical shifts need to be taken into account. For exam-
ple, as indicated in the point just above, an information-seeking
dialogue can be embedded in a deliberation dialogue.
Persuasion is central to media argumentation. Typically, the goal
of media argumentation is to persuade a mass audience to take
action or to accept a viewpoint. Persuasion can now be defined as
an objective of media argumentation much more precisely than


11.


12.


13.


14.


15.


The Structure of Media Argumentation


in the past through the analysis of the speech act of persuasion
presented in chapter 2.

Media argumentation takes the form of five stages in a feedback
cycle. The proponent devises and tries out an argument designed
to reach an interlocutor or mass audience. He gets feedback in the
form of polling, observing how sales go up or not, and by various
other indirect means of communicating with the audience. While
this process is under way, information often comes in, suggesting
a change or redirection of the argumentation. Thus the premises
in the original argument can be modified and corrected so the
argument is made more plausible.

Based on argumentation schemes, argumentation strategies are
very important to understanding the structure of media argumen-
tation. For example, the strategy called dissociation by Pereleman
and Olbrects-Tyteca and the strategy of contrast cited by Cialdini
are not themselves argumentation schemes or forms of argument.
Instead, they represent rhetorical trajectories used by a proponent
of an argument to put that argument within a longer sequence of
argumentation leading to a conclusion.

To model the notion of an argumentation strategy, both the propo-
nent and the respondent in a dialogue need to be seen as agents,
in the sense of the term now widely used in multi-agent systems. In
media argumentation, the proponent and the respondent share
information and knowledge about commonly accepted ways of
doing things. The proponent as agent can then devise a strategy
using simulative reasoning based on his anticipation of how the
respondent is likely to react to certain assertions or arguments.
When devising an argument strategy to persuade an audience,
Gricean implicature is vitally important. Plan recognition enables
each agent to anticipate the implicatures that the other agent can
reasonably be expected to draw. It is by these means that the propo-
nent structures the strategy of his selected line of argumentation
with missing assumptions so that the audience can draw its own
conclusions or fill in unstated premises. As shown in chapter 5,
section 8, suggestion and innuendo are vitally important tools of
mass media argumentation.

Bias is a central category for evaluating media argumentation.
Rhetorical argumentation is very often biased, because it is advo-
cacy, but that in itself is not necessarily a critical defect or dialectical
fault. An argument is biased in a sense implying a critical defect if


The Persuasion System 353


it purports to be a two-sided dialogue, whereas in reality it is one-
sided. Propaganda is hard to define, but following the analysis of
chapter 3,, argumentation in propaganda should not necessarily be
judged to be critically defective or fallacious. However, there is a
strong tendency for propaganda to be deceptive.


These fifteen components represent the basic characteristics of media
argumentation. All that remains is to show how they are tied together ina
system that displays their interlocking dialectical and rhetorical structure.


g. The Persuasion System


In this section we organize the components of media argumentation into
a structure called the Persuasion System that shows where the premises
come from, what type of reasoning is used to draw inferences from them,
and what the ultimate conclusion of the chain of reasoning is supposed
to be. The Persuasion System of media argumentation is a five-tuple {C,
T, A, D, K}. Cis the set of commitments of the audience; Tis a designated
proposition representing the conclusion (thesis) that the proponent is
trying to get the audience to accept as a new commitment; A is a set of
argumentation schemes (forms of argument), used to infer propositions
from other propositions; and D is a set of dialogues, of various kinds,
but deliberation dialogue, persuasion dialogue, and negotiation dialogue
are three of the most important types. Each dialogue contains a pair of
agents called the proponent and the respondent. The proponent is an
agent represented by an individual constant p. The audience is an agent
represented by a constant 7, meaning that the audience has the dialectical
role of respondent. K is a set of propositions representing the common
knowledge shared by the proponent and the audience. K breaks down
into two subsets. One is the domain-dependentset of facts of the case. The
other subset represents the common ways of doing things and common
knowledge broadly familiar to any audience and proponent who would
be involved in media argumentation.

What makes media argumentation possible is the simulative reason-
ing used by the participants. The proponent uses simulative reasoning
to judge how the audience is thinking, what their commitments are,
what inferences they are likely to draw, and generally, how they are
likely to respond. The proponent can anticipate the critical questions
the respondent will ask, and can judge in advance whether any answers
to these questions he may venture in his argumentation will be seen as


354 The Structure of Media Argumentation


plausible or implausible. Because both participants are agents, they will
tend to formulate and solve practical problems by the same process of
thinking. In particular, the proponent can use plan recognition to devise
an argumentation strategy that will fit the commitments and the think-
ing of the audience. Plan recognition is coupled with the use of argu-
mentation schemes in the chaining structure of reasoning described in
chapter 2, section 3. The proponent constructs an argument strategy by
chaining forward from the audience’s commitments, C, to his own con-
clusion T. Because of common knowledge K shared with the audience,
and argumentation schemes representing ways of reasoning shared with
the audience, the proponent can use simulative reasoning to persuade
the audience.

One of the most fundamental of these argumentation schemes is the
one called practical reasoning. The critical questions matching the argu-
mentation scheme for basic practical reasoning are reprinted below from
chapter 1, section 7.


(Q1) Are there alternative courses of action apart from B?

(Qa) Is B the best (or most acceptable) among the alternatives?

(Q3) Should goals other than A be considered?

(Q4) Is it really possible to bring about B, in the situation?

(Qs) What bad consequences of bringing about B should be taken
into account?


If the two premises of the practical inference above are commitments of
the respondent, and the conclusion follows, then it should also become
a commitment of the respondent. But if the respondent poses any of the
appropriate critical questions cited above, then his commitment to the
conclusion of the practical inference can be retracted. Using this argu-
mentation scheme, the proponent has the ability to foresee the inferences
the respondent is likely to draw when presented with the argumentation.
Thus argumentation schemes, in this case the one for basic practical rea-
soning, are an important element in simulative reasoning and strategy in
mass media argumentation. This simulative process of arguing by grasp-
ing the position of the other side mentally, and using this knowledge to
anticipate his reactions and counter-moves, may seem like the most mys-
terious aspect of mass media argumentation. But once the Persuasion
System exhibits the dialectical structure of mass media argumentation,
the mystery disappears. It becomes clear how the proponent can extrap-
olate the respondent’s line of argumentation forward, using chaining


Computational Dialectics for Rhetorical Invention 355


and profiles of dialogue, basing the extrapolation on the respondent’s
commitments.

Simulative reasoning of the kind used in mass media argumentation
in the past appeared to be subjective. But now it can be seen to be based
on evidence that can be extracted from a given case and then used in a
chain of logical reasoning. Plan recognition shows how such judgments
are based on a body of evidence that is verifiable or falsifiable. The data
are drawn from the proponent’s observing the actions of the respondent,
and also from his engaging in dialogue with the respondent. The pro-
ponent can construct a hypothesis about the respondent’s commitments
and goals based on this evidence. It can be strengthened or defeated
by new evidence that comes in as the dialogue proceeds. It can also be
challenged by questioning the inferences drawn in the logical reason-
ing used to hypothesize from the data in a case. This way of inventing a
strategy has traditionally been thought of as subjective. And, in a way, it
can rightly be called subjective, because the process of generating such a
hypothesis is simulative. One agent constructs a hypothesis about what he
thinks represents the thinking of another agent. Such an estimate can be
wrong. The possibility of deception is very real in argumentation. As has
been observed in philosophy under the heading of “the problem of other
minds,” you can’t get direct access to what is going on in another person’s
mind. But the Persuasion System reveals how simulative strategy can be
based on a testable assessment of objective and reproducible evidence. It
can be based on a process of logical reasoning originating from premises
that can be tested by the observed or documented evidence in a case.
As emphasized, this process is fallible. It is based on plausible reasoning,
because one agent can infer only indirectly what another agent is really
thinking. The evidence rarely tends to be conclusive, and simulative rea-
soning is hypothetical and conjectural in nature. But it can be analyzed
and evaluated by using objective criteria to apply to an actual case. Thus
what the Persuasion System shows is that, in theory at any rate, media
argumentation has an objective rhetorical/dialectical structure.


10. Computational Dialectics for Rhetorical Invention


We started out this book with describing the longstanding tension
between rhetoric and dialectic, especially stemming from the philoso-
phers’ perception of rhetoric as a sham and deception. Rhetoric was
portrayed as trading on the bias of an audience and as a device of manip-
ulative persuasion that has no regard for the truth of the matter being


356 The Structure of Media Argumentation


discussed. This view sees dialectic and rhetoric as opposed subjects, locked
into a conflict with each other. The Star Trek example, as treated first in
chapter 1 from a dialectical viewpoint, and then as treated in this chap-
ter from a rhetorical viewpoint, showed how both subjects simply repre-
sent different uses of the same argumentation technology. Dialectic is a
technology using tools like argumentation schemes and argument dia-
gramming for critical analysis and evaluation of a given argument that
already exists. Rhetoric is a technology that uses the same tools, adapted
to the Persuasion System, and thus used in a different way, primarily for
the invention of new arguments that might be used to persuade a target
audience, given what is known or can be reasonably assumed about the
beliefs and values of that audience.

The Star Trek example reveals how each of these views is a false por-
trayal. Both subjects are based on use of rational argumentation for some
purpose in a dialogue context, and on the same argumentation struc-
tures. The difference is that one uses argumentation in a reconstructive
way by beginning with the text of discourse of a speech that already exists,
while the other uses argumentation in a constructive way to aim it from
premises representing the presumed values of the target group to the
conclusion that they are to be persuaded to accept. The essential argu-
mentation technology is the same. The difference lies in the purpose the
technology is being used for and the way that argumentation tools are
applied to the task of carrying out that purpose.

Analyzing the Star Trek example using tools from argumentation the-
ory, such as argumentation schemes, and tools from artificial intelligence,
such as Araucaria, has revealed connections between computing and
argumentation. But recently there has been a convergence of research
efforts between the argumentation (informal logic) community and the
AI community in computing. Computing is coming to be based more
and more on dialogue exchanges in the form of speech acts between arti-
ficially constructed software entities that transfer information, negotiate
exchanges of information or commodities, and try to decide on a best
course of action to carry out common goals. Communication between a
user and a software entity is another form of dialogue that is vitally impor-
tant in computing technology. Argumentation is being increasingly seen
as extremely helpful in such interactive computer communications by
those in the field of AI. Formal logic is too rigid and too limited to model
such dialogue-based arguments in a flexible way — one that can model the
defeasible type of argumentation that is so ubiquitous in computing. AI
is moving to a social model of argumentation in which two parties called
agents reason together to try to carry out a project or attain a goal by


Computational Dialectics for Rhetorical Invention 357


collaborating. The best explored of these new technologies is a branch
of distributed computing called multi-agent systems.

Among the many recent research efforts in computing that could be
cited here are the series of papers by Singh (1991, 1997, 1999), which
develop a commitment-based approach to communication in multi-agent
systems, and the recent books on rational agents by Wooldridge (2000,
2002). The concept of a rational agent is defined by Wooldridge (2000,
p- 1) in terms of how the agent reasons. He offers the following sim-
ple example of agent reasoning: “if I have a goal of staying dry, and I
believe it is raining, then it is rational of me to take an umbrella when I
leave the house.” This human goal-directed action is a case of an agent
being rational. The agent engages in practical reasoning that leads from a
goal to an action. On the other hand, agents are often irrational. They go
against their own stated goals, and sometimes even contradict themselves.
Sometimes they even commit fallacies and try to deceive themselves and
other agents. Of course, the example of a rational agent represented by
Wooldridge is a case of an agent acting alone. The larger problem now
confronted in distributed computing concerns cases where two agents
(in the simplest) case are attempting to communicate with each other in
order to decide on a collaborative course of action. It has become evident
that the idea of two rational agents trying to reason together needs to be
based on the structure of rationality as a dialogue, developed by Ham-
blin (1970, 1971, 1987) in order to study fallacies in logic. The basic idea
behind a Hamblin dialogue is that the two participants can reason and
argue rationally together because each can identify and keep track of the
commitments of the other. This commitment-based approach is an alter-
native to the belief-desire-intention approach advocated by Wooldridge
(2000). Singh (1991, 1997) developed the commitment-based approach
of Hamblin into a formal theory of communication and collective ratio-
nal action for multi-agent systems. He bases his theory of multi-agent
communication around agents seen as having a limited rationality. An
agent is viewed as acting rationally under certain constraints that typically
involve uncertain and incomplete information that can change rapidly.
Thus a limited rational agent can make a mistake, but also has a (limited)
capability to correct its mistakes.

Persuasion and other types of dialogue that are important for comput-
ing come under the field now called computational dialectics? in artificial


3 There is a computational dialectics research group in Germany (Forschergruppe Kom-
munikatives Verstehen), whose stated goal is to combine results from argumentation
theory and AI to study the computational structure of argumentative dialogue. Tom


358 The Structure of Media Argumentation


intelligence, or the new dialectic in argumentation theory.* “Dialectic” in
this sense refers to the formal properties of speech acts as they occur in
different types of dialogue. Formal dialectic studies structured sequences
of speech acts in which two speech partners take turns contributing to
a goal-directed and rule-governed conversation.° Formal models have
now been developed for persuasion dialogue (Walton and Krabbe 1995),
negotiation dialogue (Sierra, Jennings, Noriega, and Parsons 1998), and
deliberation dialogue (Hitchcock et al. 2001). Another basic type of
dialogue that has been studied in plan recognition research in AT is
the information-seeking dialogue (Chu-Carroll and Carberry 1995). The
inquiry and the eristic dialogue are two other types that are recognized in
the literature on dialectical argumentation, as shown below. Obviously,
in the study of the speech act of persuasion, persuasion dialogue will
be prominent. But in realistic discourse containing argumentation, sev-
eral different types of dialogue are often mixed in together. Thus an
important task of argumentation analysis is to place a given argument
in a dialectical frame (Reed 1998). There can also be shifts from one
type of dialogue to another during an argument (Walton and Krabbe
1995).

When a practical logic of argumentation schemes is used for the inven-
tion of arguments in rhetoric, as well as for their analysis and evaluation
in dialectic, the result is a powerful fusion of rhetoric and dialectic. Tra-
ditional logic, like syllogistic logic, emphasized analysis of argumentation
based on context-free formal deductive systems of argument. Traditional
analyses of economic and political argumentation featured cost-benefit
analysis and decision theory based on Bayesian probability. The Persua-
sion System presents a new and quite different approach to mass media
argumentation that is truly liberating to those used to the confines of
the traditional approaches. Not only is it a more flexible and powerful
approach, but it has a clear and precise structure and useful guidelines
as applied to real cases of mass media argumentation in a democratic


Gordon, the leader of a project associated with this group (Project Zeno), is said to have
been the originator of the expression “computational dialectics.” I believe that the first
time I heard it was during a talk given in Bonn by Henry Prakken in 1994.

4 See Walton 1gg98b.

5 Formal dialectic as a method of studying fallacies was founded by Hamblin (1970), but
the Erlangen School of Lorenzen had earlier developed a system of formal dialectic as
a method of modeling the structure of philosophical and mathematical argumentation.
The history of how the subject came to life again in the twentieth century has been briefly
chronicled in Walton and Krabbe (1995).


Computational Dialectics for Rhetorical Invention 359


system with a free market economy. It is much more exciting and inter-
esting than traditional methods of argument analysis because the user
can so easily see how it represents the flow of real argumentation. It
yields real insight into techniques of rhetorical argumentation instead of
forcing them into narrowly defined, preconceived structures that abstract
away from the most interesting aspects of the clever way arguments are
used to persuade. It shows how to criticize an argument as well as how to
invent one.

The Persuasion System is the best tool to answer the worry that rhetor-
ical argumentation is a sham and a deception built on sophisms and
faulty reasoning. Rhetorical argumentation seems to have nothing to do
with truth or evidence, once it has been separated from the dialectical
argumentation underlying it. It could be equally said that dialectic is an
abstract and useless subject once it has been separated from its appli-
cations to rhetorical argumentation. The reintegration of rhetoric and
dialectic can lead to a rehabilitation of rhetorical argumentation along
Aristotelian lines. Of course, there is always a danger in using Aristotle to
support one’s own view of rhetoric. Leff (1993, p. 314) and Gross (2000,
p- 26) have shown how those with strong views about rhetoric tended
to cite Aristotle’s Rhetoric as supporting their quite different visions of
rhetoric as a subject. Aristotle is regarded as such a powerful theoretician
that he has been constantly reinterpreted over the ages to fit many differ-
ent conceptions of rhetoric as a discipline. But these past interpretations
have been the source of much of the problem. They have exacerbated
the tension between dialectic and rhetoric by distorting the aims and
methods of both subjects.

Sophistry, or antilogic, as it was sometimes called by the ancients, does,
after all, represent a very real danger of misuse in propaganda and other
techniques of media persuasion that tend to trade on deception where
it is effective. There should be a free marketplace of argumentation in a
democratic system that allows for free speech. Thus, mob rhetoric, propa-
ganda, and biased and fallacious argumentation will always be used delib-
erately to promote the causes of interest groups. Rhetorical and dialecti-
cal skills, however, can be used by both sides. If deliberative democracy is
to work as a useful and reasoned method of arriving at prudent conclu-
sions on how to act under conditions of uncertainty and disagreement,
the mass media audience must also learn how to use argumentation skills
to deal with the information and argumentation explosion due to both
traditional mass media and the Internet, by learning to judge what kind
of information is reliable and what kind of persuasion is fallacious.


360 The Structure of Media Argumentation


The Persuasion System can be extremely helpful in devising formal
models of media argumentation that not only are useful, but in fact are
already being used in computer science.° When we eventually automate
this type of argumentation more fully by implementing the formal mod-
els, they will be widely employed in developing new technologies for
deliberation and persuasion in media argumentation. As this happens,
they can be used to assist in the task of rhetorical invention of new argu-
ments in advertising, debate, and political controversy on public policy
issues. In having public input on policy issues, communication will be
improved by an increased capacity to identify, analyze, and evaluate argu-
mentation on an issue. Problems of public deliberation in law, ethics,
and democracy were the original motivation for the founding of both
rhetoric and dialectic as subjects by the Greeks, as noted in chapter 1.
Dialectic is a new field (or a new revival of an old field) that is only now
beginning to receive attention in the mainstream of academic research in
the humanities and social sciences. By providing new foundations for the
future development of software tools based on computational dialectics,
computing technology research will show others what can be achieved by
finding a better adjustment between rhetoric and dialectic.


5 Gordon (1995) used dialogue models of argumentation to pioneer computational dialec-
tic as applied to legal reasoning. An early project using these models was the application
of computational dialectic by Gordon and Karacapilidis (1997) to provide communica-
tion technology for public deliberation in choices of routes for the fast trains in Europe.
Reed (2006) has provided an overview of the many applications of dialogue-based argu-
mentation developed in recent computing technology.


Bibliography


Aakhus, Mark. 2005. “The Act and Activity of Proposing in Deliberation.” In
Engaging Argument: Selected Papers from the 2005 National Communication Associa-
tion/American Forensic Association Summer Conference on Argumentation, ed. P. Riley.
Washington, D.C., National Communication Association, 2006, 402-408.

Adler, Jerry. 1994. “The Numbers Game.” Newsweek, July 25, pp. 56-58.

Allossery, Patrick. 1999. “Anti-Tobacco Ads Go for the Throat.” Financial Post,
June 21, p. C4.

Aomi, Junichi. 1985. “Persuasive Definitions in Social Sciences and Social
Thought.” In Man, Law and Modern Forms of Life, ed. Eugenio Bulygin, Jean-
Louis Gardies, and Ilkka Niiniluoto. Dordrecht: Reidel, 187-190.

Aristotle. 1939. Topics, trans. E. S. Forster. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Aristotle. 1928. On Sophistical Refutations, trans. E. S. Forster. Loeb Classical
Library. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Aristotle. 1937. The Art of Rhetoric, trans. John Henry Freese. Loeb Classical Library.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Atkinson, Katie, Trevor Bench-Capon, and Peter McBurney. 2004. “A Dialogue
Game Protocol for Multi-Agent Argument over Proposals for Action.” In Argu-
mentation in Multi-Agent Systems, ed. I. Rahwan, P. Moraitis, and C. Reed. Berlin:
Springer, 149-161.

Barnes, Jonathan. 1980. “Aristotle and the Methods of Ethics.” Revue Internationale
de Philosophie 3,4: 590-611.

Barth, Else M., and Jan L. Martens. 1977. “Argumentum Ad Hominem: From Chaos
to Formal Dialectic.” Logique at Analyse 7'7—78: 76-96.

Bench-Capon, Trevor. 200g a. “Agreeing to Differ: Modelling Persuasive Dialogue
between Parties without a Consensus about Values.” Informal Logic 22: 231-245.

Bench-Capon, Trevor. 2003b. “Persuasion in Practical Argument Using Value-
Based Argumentation Frameworks.” Journal of Logic and Computation 13: 429-


448.


361


362 Bibliography


Bench-Capon, Trevor J. M., Sylvie Doutre, and Paul E. Dunne. 2007. “Audiences
in Argumentation Frameworks.” Artificial Intelligence 171: 42-71.

Bentham, Jeremy. 1969. The Book of Fallacies. In A Bentham Reader, ed. Mary Peter
Mack. New York: Pegasus. First published in 1824.

Bernays, E. 1923. Crystallizing Public Opinion. New York: Boni and Liveright.

Best, Joel. 2001. Damned Lies and Statistics. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Blair, J. Anthony. 1977. “What Is Bias?” In Selected Issues in Logic and Communication,
ed. Trudy Govier. Belmont: Wadsworth, 93-103.

Blair, J. Anthony. 1998. “The Limits of the Dialogue Model of Argument.” In
Argumentation and Rhetoric, ed. Hans V. Hansen, Christopher W. Tindale, and
Athena V. Coleman. CD-Rom. St. Catherines, Ontario: Ontario Society for the
Study of Argumentation.

Blair, J. Anthony, and Ralph H. Johnson. 1987. “Argumentation as Dialectical.”
Argumentation 1: 41-56.

Bloomer, W. Martin. 2001. “Topics.” In Encyclopedia of Rhetoric, ed. Thomas O.
Sloane. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 779-782.

Bratman, Michael E. 1987. Intention, Plans and Practical Reason. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.

Brinton, Alan. 1985. “A Rhetorical View of the Ad Hominem.” Australasian Journal
of Philosophy 63: 50-63.

Brinton, Alan. 1995. “The Ad Hominem.” In Fallacies: Classical and Contemporary
Readings, ed. Hans V. Hansen and Robert C. Pinto. University Park: Pennsylva-
nia State University Press, 213-222.

Burgess-Jackson, Keith. 1995. “Rape and Persuasive Definition.” Canadian Journal
of Philosophy 25: 415-454-

Burnyeat, Myles F. 1994. “Enthyeme: Aristotle on the Logic of Persuasion.” In Aris-
totle’s Rhetoric: Philosophical Essays, ed. David J. Furley and Alexander Nehemas.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 3-55.

Campbell, Stephen K. 1974. Maws and Fallacies in Statistical Thinking. Englewood
Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Cantril, Albert H., James Fallows, Leonard Garment, Robert B. Hill, and Paul
Warnke. 1990. “The User’s Perspective: A Round Table on the Impact of Polls.”
In The Classics of Polling, ed. Michael L. Young. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press,
374-388.

Carberry, Sandra. 1990. Plan Recognition in Natural Language Dialogue. Cambridge:
MIT Press.

“Changed Law Fuels Statistics.” 1992. Winnipeg Free Press, October 10, Ag.

Childs, H. L. 1965. Public Opinion: Nature, Formation and Role. Princeton, N.J.: Van
Nostrand.

Chu-Carroll, Jennifer, and Sandra Carberry. 1995. “Conflict Detection and Res-
olution in Collaborative Planning.” In Jntelligent Agents II: Agent Theories, Archi-
lectures and Languages. IJCAI ’95 Workshop. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 111-126.

Cialdini, Robert B. 1993. Influence: Science and Practice, 3rd ed. New York: Harper-
Collins.

Clark, Herbert H., and Michael F. Schober. 1992. “Asking Questions and
Influencing Answers.” In Questions about Questions: Inquiries into the Cognitive
Biases of Surveys, ed. Judith M. Tanur. New York: Russell Sage Foundation,
15-48.


Bibliography 363


Collingwood, Robin G. 1946. The Idea of History. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Copi, Irving M. 1982. Introduction to Logic, 6th ed. New York: Macmillan.

Copi, Irving M., and Carl Cohen. 1998. Introduction to Logic, 1oth ed. Upper Saddle
River, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Cragan, John F., and Craig W. Cutbirth. 1984. “A Revisionist Perspective on Polit-
ical Ad Hominem Argument: A Case Study.” Central States Speech Journal 35: 228—
237.

Crossen, Cynthia. 1994. Tainted Truth: The Manipulation of Fact in America. New
York: Simon & Schuster.

Dascal, Marcelo, and Alan G. Gross. 1999. “The Marriage of Pragmatics and
Rhetoric.” Philosophy and Rhetoric 32: 107-130.

Devereux, Daniel. 1990. “Comments on Robert Bolton’s The Epistemological
Basis of Aristotelian Dialectic.” In Biologie, Logique et Metaphysique, ed. Daniel
Devereux and Pierre Pellegrin. Paris: Editions du Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, 263-286.

Dillard, James Price. 1994. “Rethinking the Study of Fear Appeals: An Emotional
Perspective.” Communication Theory 4: 295-323.

Donohue, William A. 1981. “Development of a Model of Rule Use in Negotiation
Interaction.” Communication Monographs 48: 106-120.

Dray, William. 1964. Philosophy of History. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Dray, William. 1995. History as Re-enactment: R. G. Collingwood’s Idea of History.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ellul, Jacques. 1967. Histoire de la Propagande. Paris: PUF.

Elster, Jon. 1989. The Cement of Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Engel, S. Morris. 1976. With Good Reason: An Introduction to Informal Fallacies. New
York: St. Martin’s Press.

Evans, J. D. G. 1977. Aristotle’s Concept of Dialectic. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.

Feld, Karl G. 2001. “When Push Comes to Shove.” In The Public Perspective 12,
no. 5, p. 37. The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research.

Finocchiaro, Maurice. 1980. Galileo and the Art of Reasoning. Dordrecht: Reidel.

Finocchiaro, Maurice. 2005. Arguments about Arguments. New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Fisher, Roger, and William Ury. 1991. Getting to Yes, 2nd ed. New York: Penguin.

Fishkin, James S. 1991. Democracy and Deliberation. New Haven: Yale University
Press.

Fishkin, James S. 1995. The Voice of the People: Public Opinion and Democracy. New
Haven: Yale University Press.

Freeman, James B. 1995. “The Appeal to Popularity and Presumption by Com-
mon Knowledge.” In Fallacies: Classical and Contemporary Readings, ed. Hans V.
Hansen and Robert C. Pinto. University Park: Pennsylvania State University
Press, 263-273.

Freeman, James B. 2005. Acceptable Premises: An Epistemic Approach to an Informal
Logic Problem. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Freeman, James B. 2006. Acceptable Premises. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Garner, Richard. 1993. “Are Convenient Fictions Harmful to Your Health?”
Philosophy East and West 43: 87-106.


364 Bibliography


Garver, Eugene. 1994. Aristotle’s Rhetoric: An Art of Character. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Goldman, Alvin. 1970. A Theory of Human Action. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.

Goldman, Alvin I. 1995. “Empathy Mind and Morals.” In Mental Simulation: Eval-
uations and Applications, ed. Martin Davies and Tony Stone. Oxford: Blackwell,
185-208.

Gordon, Robert M. 1986. “Folk Psychology as Simulation.” Mind and Language 1:
158-171.

Gordon, Thomas F. 1995. The Pleadings Game: An Artificial Intelligence Model of
Procedural Justice. Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Gordon, Thomas F., and Nikos Karacapilidis. 1997. “The Zeno Argumentation
Framework.” In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence and Law, Melbourne, Australia, 10-18.

Govier, Trudy. 1987. Problems in Argument Analysis and Evaluation. Dordrecht:
Foris.

Govier, Trudy. 1999. The Philosophy of Argument. Newport News, Va.: Vale Press.

Graesser, Arthur C., Sailaja Bommareddy, Shane Swamer, and Jonathan M.
Golding. 1996. “Integrating Questionnaire Design with a Cognitive Computa-
tional Model of Human Question Answering.” In Answering Questions: Method-
ology for Determining Cognitive and Communicative Processes in Survey Research,
ed. Norbert Schwartz and Seymour Sudman. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 143-
174.

Grennan, Wayne. 1997. Informal Logic. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.

Grice, H. Paul. 1975. “Logic and Conversation.” In The Logic of Grammar, ed.
Donald Davidson and Gilbert Harman. Encino: Dickenson, 64-75.

Gross, Alan G. 2000. “What Aristotle Meant by Rhetoric.” In Rereading Aristotle’s
Rhetoric, ed. Alan G. Gross and Arthur E. Walzer. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
University Press, 24-37.

Hallden, Soren. 1960. True Love, True Humour and True Religion: A Semantic Study.
Lund: Gleerlup.

Hamblin, Charles L. 1970. Fallacies. London: Methuen.

Hamblin, Charles L. 1971. “Mathematical Models of Dialogue.” Theoria 37: 130-
155:

Hamblin, Charles L. 1987. Jmperatives. New York: Blackwell.

Harrah, David. 1984. “The Logic of Questions.” In Handbook of Philosophical Logic,
vol. 2, ed. Dov Gabbay and F. Guenther. Dordrecht: Reidel, 715-764.

Hart, Roderick P., and Courtney L. Dillard. 2001. “The Deliberative Genre.” In
Encyclopedia of Rhetoric, ed. Thomas O. Sloane. New York: Oxford University
Press, 209-217.

Hastings, Arthur C. 1963. “A Reformulation of the Modes of Reasoning in Argu-
mentation.” Ph.D. dissertation, Northwestern University.

Herbst, Susan. 1993. Numbered Voices: How Opinion Polling Has Shaped American
Politics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hitchcock, David. 1995. “Does the Traditional Treatment of Enthymemes Rest on
a Mistake?” In Analysis and Evaluation: Proceedings of the Third ISSA Conference on
Argumentation, vol. 2, ed. Frans H. van Eemeren, Rob Grootendorst, J. Anthony
Blair, and Charles A. Willard. Amsterdam: SicSat, 113-129.


Bibliography 365


Hitchcock, David, Peter McBurney, and Simon Parsons. 2001. “A Framework for
Deliberation Dialogues.” In Argument and Its Applications: Proceedings of the Fourth
Biennial Conference of the Ontario Society for the Study of Argumentation (OSSA 2001),
ed. H. V. Hansen, C. W. Tindale, J. A. Blair, and R. H. Johnson. Compact disk.
Also available at http://www.csc.liv.ac.uk/~peter.

Hohmann, Hanns. 2000. “Rhetoric and Dialectic: Some Historical and Legal
Perspectives.” Argumentation 14: 223-234.

Horty, John, and Nuel D. Belnap. 1995. “The Deliberative Stit: A Study of
Action, Omission, Ability, and Obligation.” Journal of Philosophical Logic 24: 583-
644.

Hurley, Patrick J. 1994. A Concise Introduction to Logic, 5th ed. Belmont, Calif.:
Wadsworth.

Hurley, Patrick J. 000. A Concise Introduction to Logic, 7th ed. Belmont, Calif.:
Wadsworth.

Ivison, John. 2006. “Afghanistan: A Liberal Mission.” National Post (Toronto),
June 17, p. Ai.

Jackson, Sally. 1996. “Fallacies and Heuristics.” In Logic and Argumentation, ed.
Johan van Benthem, Frans H. van Eemeren, Rob Grootendorst, and Frank
Veltman. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Jacobs, Scott. g000. “Rhetoric and Dialectic from the Standpoint of Normative
Pragmatics.” Argumentation 14: 261-286.

Jacobs, Scott, and Sally Jackson. 1983. “Speech Act Structure in Conversation.”
In Conversational Coherence: Form, Structure and Strategy, ed. Robert T. Craig and
Karen Tracy. Beverly Hills: Sage, 47-66.

Jacobs, Scott, and Sally Jackson. 1992. “Relevance and Digressions in Argumen-
tative Discussion: A Pragmatic Approach.” Argumentation 6: 161-176.

Johnson, Ralph H. 1987. “The Blaze of Her Splendors: Suggestions about Revi-
talizing Fallacy Theory.” Argumentation 1: 239-254.

Johnson, Ralph H. 2000. Manifest Rationality: A Pragmatic Theory of Argument. Mah-
wah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Johnstone, Henry W., Jr. 1952. “Philosophy and Argumentum Ad Hominem.” Journal
of Philosophy 49: 489-498.

Johnstone, Henry W., Jr. 1959. Philosophy and Argument. University Park: Pennsyl-
vania State University Press.

Johnstone, Henry W., Jr. 1981. “Toward an Ethics of Rhetoric.” Communication 6:
3057314.

Kant, Immanuel. 1961. Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith. Lon-
don: Macmillan.

Kapp, Ernst. 1942. Greek Foundations of Traditional Logic. New York: Columbia
University Press.

Kauffeld, Fred J. 1995. “The Persuasive Force of Arguments on Behalf of Pro-
posals.” In Analysis and Evaluation: Proceedings of the Third ISSA Conference on
Argumentation, vol. 2. Amsterdam: SicSat.

Kauffeld, Fred J. 1998. “Presumptions and the Distribution of Argumentative
Burdens in Acts of Proposing and Accusing.” Argumentation 12: 245-266.

Kennedy, George A. 1963. The Art of Persuasion in Greece. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.


366 Bibliography


Kennedy, George A., trans. 1991. Aristotle on Rhetoric: A Theory of Civic Discourse.
New York: Oxford University Press.

Kennedy, George A. 1994. A New History of Classical Rhetoric. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Kesterton, Michael. 1995. “Social Studies.” The Globe and Mail, June 8, p. A24.

Kienpointner, Manfred. 1992. Alliagslogik: Struktur und Funktion von Argumenta-
tionsmustern. Stuttgart: Fromman-Holzboog.

Kienpointner, Manfred. 1997. “On the Art of Finding Arguments: What Ancient
and Modern Masters of Invention Have to Tell Us about the Ars Inveniendi.”
Argumentation 11: 225-236.

Kienpointner, Manfred, and Walther Kindt. 1997. “On the Problem of Bias in
Political Argumentation.” Journal of Pragmatics 27: 555-585-

Kneale, William, and Martha Kneale. 1962. The Development of Logic. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Kock, Christian. 2003. “Multidimensionality and Non-deductiveness in Delib-
erative Argumentation.” In Anyone Who Has a View: Theoretical Contribu-
tions to the Study of Argumentation, ed. Frans H. Eemeren, J. Anthony Blair,
Charles A. Willard, and A. Francisca Snoeck Henkemans. Dordrecht: Kluwer,
157-171.

Kock, Christian. 2006. “The Domain of Rhetorical Argumentation.” Paper to
appear in the Proceedings of the ISSA Conference, Amsterdam.

Krabbe, Erik C. W. 1998. “Comments on Blair.” In Argumentation and Rhetoric, ed.
Hans V. Hansen, Christopher W. Tindale, and Athena V. Coleman. CD-Rom,
St. Catherines, Ontario: Ontario Society for the Study of Argumentation.

Krabbe, Erik C. W. 1999. “Profiles of Dialogue.” In JKAK: Essays Dedicated to Johan
van Benthem on the Occasion of His 50th Birthday, ed. Jelle Gerbrandy, Maarten
Marx, Maarten de Rijke, and Yde Venema. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press, 25-36.

Krabbe, Erik C. W. 2000. “Meeting in the House of Callias: Rhetoric and Dialec-
tic.” Argumentation 14: 205-217.

Krabbe, Erik C. W., and Douglas N. Walton. 1993. “It’s All Very Well for You to
Talk! Situationally Disqualifying Ad Hominem Attacks.” Informal Logic 15:'79-91.

Kravetz, Stacy. 1999. “A Fad Flames Out, and Retailers Get Burned.” Wall Street
Journal, January 21, pp. Bi and Bio.

Kuhn, Thomas S. 1970. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Lagerspetz, Eerik. 1995. “Ad Hominem Arguments in Practical Argumentation.”
Argumentation 9: 363-370.

LaTour, Michael S., and Shaker A. Zahra. 1989. “Fear Appeals as Advertising
Strategy: Should They Be Used?” Journal of Consumer Marketing 6: 61-70.

Le Bon, Gustave. 1896. The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind. London: T. Fisher
Unwin.

Leff, Michael. 1993. “The Uses of Aristotle’s Rhetoric in Contemporary American
Scholarship.” Argumentation 7: 313-327.

Leff, Michael. 2000. “Rhetoric and Dialectic in the Twenty-first Century.” Argu-
mentation 14: 241-254.


Bibliography 367


Leventhal, H. 1970. “Findings and Theory in the Study of Fear Communications.”
In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed. L. Berkowitz, vol. 5. New York:
Academic Press, 119-186.

Leventhal, Howard. 1971. “Fear Appeals and Persuasion: The Differentiation of
a Motivational Construct.” American Journal of Public Health 61: 1205-1224.

Little, Bruce. 1996. “Gap in Jobless Rates a Puzzle.” The Globe and Mail, February
12, p. Bi.

Locke, John. 1961. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. John W. Yolton.
London: Dent.

Maren, Michael. 1998. “The Faces of Famine.” Newsweek, July 27, pp. 12-13.

Marlin, Randal. 1989. “Propaganda and the Ethics of Persuasion.” International

Journal of Moral and Social Studies 4: 37-72.

Marlin, Randal. 2002. Propaganda and the Ethics of Persuasion. Peterborough,

Ontario: Broadview Press.

Martin, Rex. 1977. Historical Explanation: Reenactment and Practical Inference. Ithaca,

N.Y.: Cornell University Press.

McClurg, Andrew J. 1992. “The Rhetoric of Gun Control.” American University

Law Review 42: 53-113.

McKerrow, Raymie E. 1990. “Argument Communities.” In Perspectives on Argumen-
tation, ed. Robert Trapp and Janice Schuetz. Prospect Heights, Il.: Waveland
Press.

“The Microscope.” 2000. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, Marketplace.
February 29. Http://cbc.ca/consumers/market/news/oofebgg.html.

Mitchell, Catherine. 1995. “Federal Violence Report Dishonest: Academics.” The

Globe and Mail, April 11, pp. Al and B4.

Moore, David W. 1992. The Super Pollsters: How They Measure and Manipulate Public

Opinion in America. New York: Four Walls Eight Windows.

Moore, Robert C. 1985. “Semantic Considerations on Nonmonotonic Logic.”

Artificial Intelligence 25: 75-94.

Morgan, C. 1987. “Explicit AIDS Campaign Offends TV Watchers in Australia.”

Nature 326: 732.

Nolt, John Eric. 1984. Informal Logic: Possible Worlds and Imagination. New York:

McGraw-Hill.

Nuchelmans, Gabriel. 1993. “On the Fourfold Root of the Argumentum Ad
Hominem.” In Empirical Logic and Public Debate, ed. Erik C. W. Krabbe, Renee
Jose Dalitz, and Pier A. Smit. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 37-47.

Ogden, Charles Kay, and Ivor Armstrong Richards. 1959. The Meaning of Meaning.
New York: Harcourt Brace. First published in 1923.

O’Keefe, Daniel J. 1994. “Argumentation Studies and Dual-Process Models of
Persuasion.” In Logic and Argumentation, ed. Johan van Benthem, Frans H. van
Eemeren, Rob Grootendorst, and Frank Veltman. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

O'Keefe, Daniel, J. 1996. Persuasion: Theory and Research. Thousand Oaks, Calif.

O'Keefe, Daniel J. 2001. “Persuasion.” In Encyclopedia of Rhetoric, ed. Thomas O.
Sloane. New York: Oxford University Press, 575-583.

Payne, Stanley L. 1951. The Art of Asking Questions. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.


368 Bibliography


Perelman, Chaim, and Lucie Olbrechts-Tyteca. 1969. The New Rhetoric: A Trea-
lise on Argumentation, trans. J. Wilkinson and P. Weaver, gnd ed. Notre Dame:
University of Notre Dame Press. First published, as La Nouvelle Rhetorique, in
1958.

Pfau, Michael, and Michael Burgoon. 1989, “The Efficacy of Issue and Character
Attack Message Strategies in Political Campaign Communication.” Communi-
cation Reports 2: 53-61.

Pinto, Robert C., J. Anthony Blair, and Katherine E. Parr. 1993. Reasoning: A
Practical Guide for Canadian Students. Scarborough: Prentice Hall.

Plato. 1961. The Collected Dialogues of Plato, ed. Edith Hamilton and Huntington
Cairns. New York: Bollingen Foundation.

Premack, D., and G. Woodruff. 1978. “Does the Chimpanzee Have a Theory of
Mind?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1: 515-526.

Rawls, John. 1993. Political Liberalism. New York: Columbia University Press.

Reed, Chris. 1998. “Dialogue Frames in Agent Communication.” In Proceedings of
the Third International Conference on Multi-Agent Systems, ed. Y. Demazeau. IEEE
Press, 246-253.

Reed, Chris. 2006. “Representing Dialogic Argumentation.” Knowledge-Based Sys-
tems 19: 22-31.

Reed, Chris, and Glenn Rowe. 2002. “Araucaria: Software for Puzzles in Argument
Diagramming and XML.” Technical Report, Department of Applied Comput-
ing, University of Dundee. Available at http://www.computing.dundee.ac.uk/
staff/creed/araucaria.

Reed, Chris, and Douglas Walton. 2003. “Diagramming Argumentation Schemes
and Critical Questions.” In Proceedings of the Fifth Conference of the International
Society for the Study of Argumentation, ed. Frans H. van Eemeren, J. Anthony Blair,
Charles A. Willard, and Francisca Snoeck Henkemans. Amsterdam: SicSat,
881-885.

Regan, R. T. 1971. “Effects of a Favor and Liking on Compliance.” Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology 7: 627-639.

Reiter, Raymond. 1987. “Nonmonotonic Reasoning.” Annual Review of Computer
Science 2: 147-186.

Rescher, Nicholas. 1977. Dialectics: A Controversy-Oriented Approach to the Theory of
Knowledge. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Robinson, Richard. 1950. Definition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Robinson, Richard. 1953. Plato’s Earlier Dialectic. London: Oxford University Press.

Robinson, Richard. 1962. Plato’s Earlier Dialectic, 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Rogers, Richard W. 1983. “Cognitive and Physiological Processes in Fear Appeals
and Attitude Change.” In Social Psychophysiology, ed. John T. Cacioppo and
Richard E. Petty. New York: Guilford, 153-176.

Roper, Burns W. 1990. “Are Polls Accurate?.” In The Classics of Polling, ed. Michael
L. Young. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 218-232.

Russell, Stuart J., and Peter Norvig. 1995. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach.
Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall.

Schiappa, Edward. 1993. “Arguing about Definitions.” Argumentation 7: 403-417.

Schiappa, Edward. 1995. “Introduction” to Warranting Assent, ed. Edward
Schiappa. Albany: State University of New York Press, ix—xxix.


Bibliography 369


Schiappa, Edward. 1996. “Towards a Pragmatic Approach to Definition: “Wet-
lands’ and the Politics of Meaning.” In Environmental Pragmatism, ed. Andrew
Light and Eric Katz. London: Routledge, 209-230.

Schiappa, Edward. 2003. Defining Reality: The Rhetoric of Definition and the Politics
of Meaning. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.

Schuman, Howard, and Stanley Presser. 1981. Questions and Answers in Altitude
Surveys: Experiments on Question Form, Wording, and Context. New York: Academic
Press.

Searle, John. 1969. Speech Acts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Searle, John. 2001. Rationality in Action. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Sederberg, Peter C. 1984. The Politics of Meaning: The Construction of Social Reality.
Tucson: University of Arizona Press.

Segerberg, Krister. 1984. “Towards an Exact Philosophy of Action.” Topoi 3: '75-
83.

Segerberg, Krister. 1985. “Routines.” Synthese 65: 185-210.

Seligman, Daniel. 1961. “We’re Drowning in Phony Statistics.” Fortune, November,
pp. 146-171.

“Senate Impeachment Trial of President Bill Clinton —- Day 16.” CNN tran-
script. CNN AllPolitics.com Political Website for 1998. Www.cnn.com/allpolitics/
stories/1999/02/06/ transcripts.

Shepard, David W. 1973. “Stipulative Definitions and Elementary Logic.” Central
States Speech Journal 24: 131-136.

Sierra, Carles, Nicholas R. Jennings, P. Noriega, and Simon Parsons. 1998. “A
Framework for Argumentation-Based Negotiation.” In Jntelligent Agents IV, ed.
M. P. Singh, A. Rao, and M. J. Wooldridge. Berlin: Springer Verlag.

Simons, Herbert W., Joanne Morreale, and Bruce Gronbeck. 2001. Persuasion in
Society. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.

Singh, Munidar P. 1991. “Towards a Formal Theory of Communication for Mul-
tiagent Systems.” In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence (IJCAI). Available at http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/ MSingh/
papers/index.html.

Singh, Munindar P. 1997. “Commitment in the Architecture ofa Limited, Rational
Agent.” In Intelligent Agents Systems: Theoretical and Practical Issues, ed. Lawrence
Cavedon. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 72-87.

Singh, Munindar P. 1999. “A Semantics for Speech Acts.” Annals of Mathematics
and Artificial Intelligence 8: 47-71.

Stevenson, Charles L. 1938. “Persuasive Definitions.” Mind 47: 331-350.

Stevenson, Charles L. 1944. Ethics and Language. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Sycara, K. P. 1990. “Persuasive Argument in Negotiation.” Theory and Decision 28:
203-242.

Tanner, John F., Ellen Day, and Melvin R. Crask. 1989. “Protection Motivation
Theory: An Extension of Fear Appeals in Communication Theory.” Journal of
Business Research 19: 267-276.

Thouless, Robert H. 1942. Straight Thinking in War Time. London: Hodder and
Stoughton.

Tindale, Christopher W. 1999. Acts of Arguing: A Rhetorical Model of Argument.
Albany: State University of New York Press.


370 Bibliography


Tindale, Christopher W. 2004. Rhetorical Argumentation: Principles of Theory and
Practice. Thousand Oaks, Calif.: Sage.

Titsworth, B. Scott. 1999. “An Ideological Basis for Definition in Public Argument:
A Case Study of the Individuals with Disabilities in Education Act.” Argumenta-
tion and Advocacy 35: 171-184.

Tocqueville, Alexis de. 1966. Democracy in America, ed. J. P. Mayer and Max Lerner.
New York: Harper and Row. Originally published in 1835.

Tripp, Garwood, and Alix Davenport. 1988. “Fear Advertising — It Doesn’t Work.”
Health Promotion 27: 17-19.

van Eemeren, Frans H., and Rob Grootendorst. 1984. Speech Acts in Argumentative
Discussions. Dordrecht: Foris.

van Eemeren, Frans H., and Rob Grootendorst. 1987. “Fallacies in Pragma-
Dialectical Perspective.” Argumentation 1: 283-301.

van Eemeren, Frans H., and Rob Grootendorst. 1992. Argumentation, Communica-
tion and Fallacies. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

van Eemeren, Frans H., and Rob Grootendorst. 1995. “Argumentum Ad Hominem:
A Pragma-Dialectical Case.” In Fallacies: Classical and Contemporary Readings,
ed. Hans V. Hansen and Robert C. Pinto. University Park: Pennsylvania State
University Press, 223-228.

van Eemeren, Frans H., Rob Grootendorst, Francisca Snoeck Henkemans, et al.
1996. Fundamentals of Argumentation Theory. Mahwah, N.J.: Erlbaum.

van Eemeren, Frans H., and Peter Houtlosser. 1999a. “Delivering the Goods in
Critical Discussion.” In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference of the
International Society for the Study of Argumentation, ed. Frans H. van Eemeren,
Rob Grootendorst, J. Anthony Blair, and Charles A. Willard. Amsterdam: SicSat,
163-171.

van Eemeren, Frans H., and Peter Houtlosser. 1999b. “Strategic Manoeuvring in
Argumentative Discourse.” Discourse Studies 1: 4779-497.

van Eemeren, Frans H., and Peter Houtlosser. 2000. “Rhetorical Analysis within a
Pragma-Dialectical Framework: The Case of R. J. Reynolds.” Argumentation 14:
293-305.

van Eemeren, Frans H., and Peter Houtlosser. 2001. “Managing Disagreement:
Rhetorical Analysis within a Dialectical Framework.” Argumentation and Advocacy
37: 150-157.

van Eemeren, Frans H., and Peter Houtlosser. 2002. “Strategic Manoeuvring:
Maintaining a Delicate Balance.” In The Warp and Woof of Argumentation Analysis,
ed. Frans H. van Eemeren and Peter Houtlosser. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 131-160.

Vorobej, Mark. 2006. A Theory of Argument. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Walton, Douglas N. 1989a. Informal Logic. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Walton, Douglas N. 1989b. Question-Reply Argumentation. New York: Greenwood
Press.

Walton, Douglas. 1990. Practical Reasoning. Savage, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield.

Walton, Douglas. 1994. The Place of Emotion in Argument. University Park: Pennsyl-
vania State University Press.

Walton, Douglas N. 1995. A Pragmatic Theory of Fallacy. Tuscaloosa: University of
Alabama Press.


Bibliography 371


Walton, Douglas. 1996. Argumentation Schemes for Presumptive Reasoning. Mahwah,
NJJ.: Erlbaum.

Walton, Douglas. 1997a. Appeal to Expert Opinion. University Park: Pennsylvania
State University Press.

Walton, Douglas. 1997b. Appeal to Pity: Argumentum Ad Misericordiam. Albany: State
University of New York Press.

Walton, Douglas. 1998a. Ad Hominem Arguments. Tuscaloosa: University of
Alabama Press.

Walton, Douglas. 1998b. The New Dialectic: Conversational Contexts of Argument.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Walton, Douglas. 1999a. Appeal to Popular Opinion. University Park: Pennsylvania
State University Press.

Walton, Douglas. 1999b. One-Sided Arguments: A Dialectical Analysis of Bias. Albany:
State University of New York Press.

Walton, Douglas. 2000. Scare Tactics: Arguments That Appeal to Kear and Threats.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Walton, Douglas. 2006. Fundamentals of Critical Argumentation. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.

Walton, Douglas, and Chris Reed. 2005. “Argumentation Schemes and
Enthymemes.” Synthese 145: 339-370.

Walton, Douglas N., and Erik C. W. Krabbe. 1995. Commitment in Dialogue: Basic
Concepts of Interpersonal Reasoning. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Warnick, Barbara. 2000. “Two Systems of Invention: The Topics in the Rhetoric
and the New Rhetoric.” In Rereading Aristotle’s Rhetoric, ed. Alan G. Gross and
Arthur E. Walzer. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 107-129.

Warnke, Paul. 1990. “The User’s Perspective: A Round Table on the Impact of
Polls.” In The Classics of Polling, ed. Michael L. Young. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow
Press, 374-388.

Weaver, Richard M. 1953. The Ethics of Rhetoric. Chicago: Henry Regnery.

Wenzel, Joseph W. 1990. “Three Perspectives on Argument: Rhetoric, Dialectic,
Logic.” In Perspectives on Argumentation, ed. Robert Trapp and Janice Schuetz.
Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland Press, 9-26.

Wheeler, Michael. 1990. “How to Read the Polls.” In The Classics of Polling, ed.
Michael L. Young. Metuchen, N,J.: Scarecrow Press.

“White House: It’s Not about Abortion.” 2002. CBS News, Lye on Politics. February
1. Www.cbsnews.com/now/story/0,1597,327803-412,00.shtml.

Wilensky, Robert. 1983. Planning and Understanding: A Computational Approach to
Human Reasoning. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Witt, Evans. 2001. “People Who Count.” The Public Perspective 12, July-August,
pp. 1-5. The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research.

Wooldridge, Michael. 2000. Reasoning about Rational Agents. Cambridge: MIT
Press.

Wooldridge, Mike. 2002. Introduction to MultiAgent Systems. Chichester: Wiley.

Wooldridge, Michael, and Nicholas R. Jennings. 1995. “Intelligent Agents: Theory
and Practice.” The Knowledge Engineering Review 10: 115-152.

Yankelovich, Daniel. 1991. Coming to Public Judgment. Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse
University Press.


372 Bibliography


Yankelovich, Daniel. 1992. “A Widening Expert/Public Opinion Gap.” Challenge,
May-June: 20-27.

Young, Michael L. 1990. “Editor’s Introduction to the Basics of Polling.” In The
Classics of Polling, ed. Michael L. Young. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press, 47—
50.

Zarefsky, David. 1986. President Johnson’s War on Poverty: Rhetoric and History, Uni-
versity: University of Alabama Press.

Zarefsky, David. 1997. “Definitions.” In Argument in a Time of Change: Definitions,
Frameworks, and Critiques, ed. James F. Klumpp. Annandale, Va.: National Com-
munication Association, 1-11.

Zarefsky, David. 1998. “Definitions.” In Argument in a Time of Change: Proceedings
of the Tenth NCA/AFA Conference on Argumentation, ed. James F. Klumpp. Annan-
dale, Va.: National Communication Association, 1-11.

Zarefsky, David, Carol Miller-Tutzauer, and Frank E. Tutzauer. 1984. “Reagan’s
Safety Net for the Truly Needy: The Rhetorical Uses of Definition.” Central States
Speech Journal 35: 113-119.


Index


Aakhus, Mark, 33,7

abductive argument, 88, 215;
supportive, 213

abductive inference: supported, 216

abortion debate case, 112, 294, 295,
302, 314; terms in, 284

absurdity, 214

ad misericordiam fallacy: effective use
of, 136

Adler, Jerry, 242

advertisement: aim of, 41; commercial
speech, 42; deliberation
influencing, 159; emotional appeals
in, 150; goal of, 42; multi-agent
dialectical structure, 196; negative,
194; as a speech act, 41

advocacy arguments, 249

advocacy dialogue, 110

advocacy groups, 279; abusing polls,
259; argument forms used, 262;
attacks on, 250; use of statistics,
251; values of, 299

agent, 31, 32, 88; abilities of, 140,
344; ability to anticipate, 141;
characteristics of, 223;
commitments of, 339; goals, 33, 65;
group, 32; limited rationality, 357;
media argumentation, 352;
perceive consequences, 218;
practically rational, 39; properties,


141; public as, 216, 217, 223;
rational, 144; reasoning of, 357;
shared knowledge, 323

air battles case, 115

air-traffic control system example, 76,
34°

ambiguity, 188, 220, 278, 313, 318

anticipation, 140, 141, 142, 3.40, 352

antilogic, 359

Aomi, Junichi, 276, 279

appeal to fear. See also fear appeal
arguments; fear appeals

appeals to a conversational postulate,
189

appeals to emotions, 83, 96, 97, 993
legitimacy, 127; mass persuasion,
21; nature of, 110

appeals to enthusiasm, 104, 124

appeals to expert opinion, 25, 28, 217

appeals to fashion, 206

appeals to fear, 88

appeals to fear and pity, 135. See also
World Vision example

appeals to good evidence, 95

appeals to pity: and charitable
appeals, 129; basis of, 330;
classifying, 136; courtroom
relevance, 83; evaluation of, 137,
159; graphic display, 150; irrelevant,
83; judging relevance, 137;


373


374


appeals to pity (cont.)
public relations use of, 13.4;


reasoning structure in, 138; student
example, 136; successful, 152;
visual, 151

appeals to popular opinion, 97, 205,
208, 212. See also argumentum ad
populum; commitment assumptions
in, 224, 330; critical questions for,
262; dialectical view of, 216;
disentangling, 262; implicit, 167;
misplaced mistrust, 225; social
proof, 25; value of, 227

appeals to popularity, 204

appeals to the people, 100, 121

appeals to the relevant facts, 101

apprentice-expert dialogues, 342

Araucaria, 40, 311, 334, 341,
356

argumentum ad baculum, 78

arguer, 169; characteristics of, 89;
commitment, 50; community of,
279; credibility of, 165; intentions
of, 183

argument: defeasible, 301;
diagramming, 334. See also
Araucaria; dialectically relevant, 81;
evaluation, 123

argument from analogy, 27, 1953
Battalino case, 179

argument from commitment, 25, 171,
181; defeasible, 171

argument from consequences, 13, 33,
124

argument from criteria to a verbal
classification, 303

argument from definition, 301, 302,
308, 314

argument from definition to verbal
classification, 305, 912; critical
questions for, 305

argument from example, 27

argument from expert opinion, 28,
29, 60. See also appeals to expert
opinion

argument from persuasive definition,
306


Index


argument from plausibility. See
argument from sign

argument from positive values, 35, 36

argument from pragmatic
inconsistency, 167, 182, 185

argument from precedent, 181

argument from sign, 13,

argument from values, 35, 37, 312,
33,4; argumentation scheme, 36, 41

argument from verbal classification,
35, 308, 312; argumentation
scheme for, 304; burden of proof in,
3,03; critical questions for, 304, 306;
deceptive, 303; importance of, 3093,

argumentation: cumulative, 106;
deception in, 355; defined, 50;
evaluation, 125; irrelevant, 102;ina
persuasion dialogue, 340; in
science, 22; strategic task of, 3.4.7;
systematic tactic of. See also
argumentation scheme

argumentation scheme, 20, 26, 27,
36, 41, 164, 304, 305, 354, 3595
appeal to emotion, 21; defeasible,
20; importance of, 22; list of, 350;
origins of; presumptive, 27; simple
decision rule, 146

arguments. See also specific kinds of
arguments; Classification, 172;
critically weak, 159; deductive, 88;
deductively valid, 54; defeasible, 13,
29, 131; evaluation, 184, 190;
explicit, 40; fallacious, 157, 173,
211; identification, 350;
incomplete, 12; inductive, 88;
interest-based, 82; linked, 40, 3.06;
plausible, 350; sophistical, 86;
timing of, 145; weak, 158, 173

argumentum ad baculum, 71, 72, '74; 82,
83, 134

argumentum ad hominem, 88, 173, 1823
abusive, 164; in the Battalino case,
181; bias type, 168; circumstantial,
165, 166, 167, 171, 174, 175, 179,
181, 184, 193, 194; classifying, 163;
direct, 164; ethotic, 164; evaluated,
165, 169, 184; historical, 161, 170;


Index


humor in, 176; judging, 173; most
powerful, 189; necessity in, 172;
personal attack, 169; Plato’s use of,
16; poisoning the well, 168;
political, 200; posed by implication,
190; powerful, 176; pseudo type,
193; reevaluating, 163; tu quoque,
168; weak but persuasive, 192

argumentum ad ignorantiam, 145

argumentum ad populum, 95, 97, 99;
100, 101, 198, 202, 207, 262. See also
appeal to popular opinion; defined,
101; direct approach, 100; fallacy,
121, 203, 221; indirect appeal, 100;
propaganda in, 124; reasonable in
context, 206; relevance of, 103

Aristotle, 62, 170; appeal to pity, 129;
defined rhetoric, 19, 22; on
dialectic, 12, 214; dialectic vs.
rhetoric, 16; on endoxa, 213; on
enthymeme, 13, 22; framework of
rhetoric, 186; On Sophistical
Refutations, 12; practical reasoning,
217; reevaluation of, 359; Rhetoric,
12, 22, 23, 27, 359; Topics, 12, 13,
27; on topics, 20

artificial intelligence (AI), 34, 142,
187, 346; and argumentation, 356;
chaining in, 58; commitment-based
model, 50; computational dialectic,
34.7, 3573 critical questions in, 29;
deliberation studies, 257;
multi-agent computer systems, 76;
multi-agent systems, 258;
technology research, 360

assertion, 50

assumption: background, 59, 189;
closed-world, 15,4; fitting the case,
266; implicit, 295, 311; Microsoft
Office case, 219; reasonable, 156

Atkinson, Katie, 34

attack ads, 162, 170

attempts to persuade, 21, 52, 70, 323

audience: awareness of, 120, 318;
beliefs of, 111; characteristics of, 21;
commitments of, 108, 330, 3.46,
349, 3533 goal, 396; hypothetical


375


notion of, 139; information about,
157; moved to action, 159; passive,
17; target, 41, 42, 140, 155. See also
mob

authority, 24, 25


bargaining, 78

Barnes, Jonathan, 215; on endoxa, 213

Barnum, P. T., 21

Barth, Else M., 171

Battalino case, 177, 192, 193, 194,
195, 196; argument, 180, 183

begging the question, 302

belief, 51, '77, 88

belief-desire-intention approach
(BDI), 49; 52, 88, 143, 259, 357

Bench-Capon, Trevor, 3

Bentham, Jeremy, 283

Bernays, E., 120

Best, Joel, 232, 238, 249, 260

bias, 93, 115, 268, 297; accuracy
affecting, 228; allegation of, 85;
bad, 116; concealed, 272;
dialectical, 116, 325; due to wording
of question, 240, 24.4; hardened,
119; identifying, 271; indicators,
168; in public opinion polls, 224;
rhetorical argumentation, 352;
survey results, 230

bindingness, 154

Blair, J. Anthony, 116, 139, 239

bolster, 204, 210, 219, 220, 221, 227,
262; thesis, 209, 210

Boomareddy, Sailaja, 269

brainwashing, 71

British fishing trawler case, 118

burden of proof, 289, 319, 351; evade,
189; of proponent, 28; requirement
removed, 189; shift, 127, 131, 154,
158; tilting, 137; unsuccessful, 173

Burgess-Jackson, Keith, 286, 315

Burgoon, Judy, 194

Burnyeat, Myles F., 13, 23


call for action argument, 261
calm thinking, 113
Campbell, Stephen, 230, 232, 233


376


car negotiation example, 75

Carberry, Sandra, 76, 77, 342, 343;
344) 345> 347

Cardinal Newman example, 168

chain of argumentation, 86, 87, 88,
334

chain of reasoning, 82, 265

chaining, 32, 56, 57, 58, 60, 299, 303,
338, 341, 354; backward, 58;
forward, 58, 309, 340, 348

character, moral concept of, 172

charitable appeals, 129, 157

chess dialogue model, 143

chimp experiment, 142

Chu-Carroll, Jennifer, 76, 77, 342, 343

Cialdini, Robert B., 24, 25, 350, 352

Cicero, 20

circumstantial attack, 165-175.
See also argumentum ad hominem,
circumstantial

classification of speech acts, 33,7

coercion, 69, 70, 71, 296; negative
consequences, 70; physical, 286;
verbal, 286, 317

Cohen, Carl, 297

collaborative goal-directed dialogues,
188

collegiate debating, 317

Collingwood, Robin G., 143, 14.4

commercials, 42, 206, 210

commitment, 50, 51; attributed, 266;
common, 68; compared with belief,
88; defined, 259; incurring new,
341; living up to, 33.9; mass
audience, 202, 224; model, 348;
notion of, 54; of the masses, 102;
respondent’s, 106, 266; retraction
of, 57, 89, 319; rules, 50; store, 51

commitment-based approach, 49, 52,
143, 357

concealment, 293, 271

conclusion: acceptance of, 99, 102;
dawn by suggestion, 186; implicit,
166, 311; invited, 186; leaping to,
104, 128; ultimate, 39, 40, 56, 59,
80, 82, 83, 88, 89, 175, 180, 189,
312, 334+ 335» 339, 340, 353


Index


conditional, 32, 305

conflict of opinions, 55, 56

consequences, 33, 70, 257

consistency, 2

contract argument example, 302

contradiction, 214, 252

contrast, 24, 25

controversial issues, 247

convenient fictions, 129

conventional meaning, 230, 298, 299,
304, 305

conversation: argumentation, 279;
maxims, 188; postulates, 186, 189;
purpose of, 294; rules, 49

cooperative principle (CP), 188

Copi, Irving M., 101, 102, 103, 297

Cragan, John F., 170

credibility, 120, 185, 191

critical discussion, 107; goal of, 61;
propaganda in, 115; rules of, 59, 71;
as a subtype, 61; ten rules for
conducting, 61; violation of rules,
61

critical questions, 28, 33, 135, 164,
184, 217; absence of, 191;
appropriate, 157, 213, 301; correct,
293.4; openness, 160; poll
acceptance, 271; relevant, 153

Crossen, Cynthia, 228, 247

crowds, 96, 98, 99, 121

culture redefinition case, 317

Cutbirth, Craig W., 170


Dascal, Marcelo, 186

de Tocqueville, Alexis, 98, 106

death definition case, 290

death, definition case, 291

debate, 43, 44

deception, 120, 121, 315, 359

definiens, 2.09

definitions, 292; argumentative
nature of, 321; arguments about,
281; assumptions about, 288;
bound by, 309; codification, 285,
289; competing, 261; confusions
about, 294; conventional, 306;
counter-poised, 306; covert, 283; in


Index


criminal statistics, 235; deceptive,
288; deceptively employed, 235;
descriptive, 286; explicit, 283;
friendly, 230, 231; functioning as an
argument, 294; importance in
logic, 288; justification of, 297; key
terms, 260; lack of, 23.4, 238;
language, 297; legal, 280, 286, 287,
289, 290, 310, 315; lexical, 293,
297; mathematical, 3.00; overt, 284;
persuasive, 23,0; philosophical, 291;
political, 281, 290, 291; problem
with, 230; questionable, 256;
questioning, 280; rhetorical power
of, 296; rules for, 316; scientific,
284, 289, 290, 291; shifts in, 309,
319; Statistical, 291, 292; stipulative,
23,0, 300, 316, 317; term attributes,
319; theory of, 298; twisted, 253;
types of. See also redefinition

deliberation, 217, 248, 336, 342; basis
of, 3.7; formal model, 258, 259;
Greek notion of, 64; intelligent,
216; intelligent public, 226; moves
in, 258; ongoing, 257; process, 351;
reasoning in, 217; strategy in, 341

deliberation dialogue, 64, 141; basis,
272; decision making, 65; eight
stages of, 65; moves in, 258; need
for, 66; persuasion in, 64, 68;
problems encountered, 65; stages
of, 65, 66

deliberative poll, 256, 273; aim of,
257; method of conducting, 256;
purpose of, 256; stages of, 250

deniability, plausible, 186

Descartes, Rene, 15

dialectic, 324, 347, 358; Aristotle’s
view of, 12; framework of, 17; Greek
meaning of, 214; Greek origins of,
26; historical form. 5; linked to
public opinion, 14; method of
proceeding, 326; new, 292, 2973
Plato’s view of, 11; purpose of, 12;
and rhetoric, 17

dialectical argument, 12, 15

dialectical modeling, 269


377


dialectical shift, 75, 77, 82, 121, 300;
abortion case, 314; concealed or
covert, 85, 125, 263; deceptive, 269;
illicit, 117; negative, 77; from
negotiation, 79; positive, 79;
wetlands case, 314

dialogue: context, 194, 242, 204, 283,
288; described, 49; embedded, 67;
eristic, 63; five basic components of,
139; goals of, 117; identifying goals
in, 122; information-seeking, 63; on
culture, 311; opening stage, 61;
shift, 67; six basic types, 60, 105;
Strategy, 142; structure, 109

Dillard, Courtney L., 64

direct media argumentation, 323;
dialectic structure, 331; sequence
of, 336

dissociation, 25, 313, 320, 352

divorce mediation, 79, 82

double negative fallacy of question
wording, 243, 273

double persuasion dialogue, 332

Dray, William, 14.4

Dreyfus trial case, 118

dual process model of persuasion,
128, 146, 150, 156

dual process theory of persuasion,
151, 152

duty of civility, 96

dynamic information-based
argumentation, 218

dyslogistic terms, 284


elaboration, 146

election campaigns, 203; case study,
170

electronic democracy, 34

elenchus, 57, 214

Ellul, Jacques, 92

Elster, Jon, 78

embedding, 77, 79, 82, 217, 218, 257,
35!

emotion: appeals, 146, 158; in
appeals, 117, 145; in arguments,
13,7; emotive connotation, 286, 317;
language, 111; meanings, 296


378


empathy, 144, 150, 201, 249, 333;
proponent’s use of, 333

empiricism, 292

endoxa, 213, 351; endoxic arguments,
102; endoxon, 12, 14, 213, 215, 324

enthymeme, 12, 13, 23, 40

eristic dialogue, 62, 63, 105, 112, 117

escape routes, 149

essentialism, 292, 293, 297, 319, 321

ethos, 186, 193; ethotic ad hominem
argument, 175

eulogistic terms, 284.

euthanasia, 493

evidence, 83, 84, 159

evidence-based approach, 91, 125

explanation, 188, 216, 293

exploitation, 127

extrapolation, 340


fallacies, 21, 61, 272; dialectical
methods to identify, 325; informal,
78; intentional deception, 183; of
polling, 229, 264; of relevance, 101,
116. See also specific kinds of fallacies

fallacious argument, 173; persuasive,
147; value of, 263

fallacy of a double negative in
question wording, 229

fallacy of appeal to authority, 30

fallacy of black and white, 24.4

fallacy of broadening a definition to
dramatize a problem, 232

fallacy of dichotomous questions, 229

fallacy of false dichotomy, 244, 245,
248, 273

fallacy of forcing an answer, 244

fallacy of lack of proper qualifications,
206

fallacy of many questions, 245, 329

fallacy of meaningless statistics, 229,
233> 234, 273

fallacy of neglect of qualifications, 222

fallacy of question structure bias, 229,
240, 270, 273

fallacy of questioning, 245

fallacy of relevance, 101

fallacy of simplistic alternatives, 24.4


Index


fallacy of the concealed persuasive
definition, 2931, 272

fallacy of the inappropriate persuasive
definition, 229, 231, 272

fallacy of the use of a broad definition,
229, 233, 273

fallacy of the use of a narrow
definition, 233

fallacy of using an atypical example,
229, 238, 273

fanaticism, 98; fanatical
argumentation, 119

fear appeal arguments, 72, 153; basic
premises, 148; critical question for,
150; empirical investigations of,
133; evaluating, 148, 157; goals in,
148; practical reasoning, 325;
reasonable, 156; short-cuts, 158

fear appeals: ads, 131, 140, 148, 1553
drive theory, 133; parallel response,
1333 protection motivation model,
193

feedback, 141, 144, 218, 328;
argument modificaton, 348;
process, 201; stages in, 352

filtering out factor, 24.7

Fisher, Robert, 76, 78

Fishkin, James S., 256, 257

focus group, 351

forensic debate, 44

freedom of speech, limited, 212

Freeman, James B., 199


Galileo, Galilei, 170

Garner, Richard, 123

generalizations, 29, 230, 306;
defeasible, 19, 301; statistical, 295;
universal, 13

Georgias, 10

goal-directed conversational
exchange, 153, 207

goal-directed deliberation, 14.4

goal-directed structure, 110

goals, 341; achieving, 149; arguers’,
30; argumentation, 96, 109; in
commercials, 219; commonality of,
33, 68; conflict of, 31, 33, 155;


Index


consequences and, 65;
conversational, 105; general, 31; to
get action, 123; group, 38, 39, 62;
grudge articulation, 62; individual,
80; to judge argumentation, 105;
for propaganda, 110; proponents’,
106, 110; public opinion poll, 226;
specific, 31; supported, 40

Golding, Jonathan M., 269

Goldman, Alvin, 143, 339

Gordon, Robert M., 143, 3.44

Gore case, 173, 190, 196, 200;
argument evaluation, 190

Govier, Trudy, 90, 139, 183

Graesser, Arthur C., 269

Grice, H. Paul, 186; Gricean
conversational maxims, 187;
implicature, 175, 186, 191, 333,
3523 pragmatic theory of
conversational interaction, 186

grim reaper ad, 132

Gronbeck, Bruce, 48

Grootendorst, Rob, 61, 71, 224, 264,
35°

Gross, Alan G., 186, 359

grounds for doubt, 180

group deliberation, 336

guilt by association argument, 168

gun control cases, 130, 132-158;
appeals in, 157; NRA fear appeal
ads, 1553; rhetoric in, 137


Hallden, Soren, 279

Hamblin, Charles L., 164, 170;
action-state semantics, 339; on
argumentum ad populum, 202;
commitments, 49, 51; dialogue,
357; formal model of dialogue, 264;
partial strategy, 142

Hart, Roderick P., 64

Hastings, Arthur C., 301, 303, 314,
349; argument analysis, 3.06;
argument forms, 301;
argumentation schemes, 29

Hegel, G. W. F, 14

heuristics, 1, 128, 147, 157

historical reenactment, 143


379


Hitchcock, David, 65, 68, 258, 264

Hitler, Adolf, 101. See also propaganda,
Nazi

Hohmann, Hanns, x, 7, 8

Houtlosser, Peter, 30, 3.40

Hurley, Patrick, 100, 101, 103, 112,
203, 230

hypocrisy, 185

hypothesis: drawn from conclusions,
345; general, 209; plausible, 338;
subjective, 355

Hypothesis on the Cognitive
Component of Persuasion (HCCP),
86


imperatives, 339; logic of, 142;
prudential, 33

implications, 184; negative ethical, 94;
persuasive, 268

implicature, 174, 186, 188, 190, 341;
conversational, 186; decoding, 49;
difficult to quantify, 208

incentives: interest-based, 82

inconsistency, 175, 309; allegation of,
172, 175, 179; apparent, 185;
explained away, 175; explicit
practical, 184; practical, 165, 167,
184; pragmatic, 166, 174

indirect media argumentation, 323,
93,2; dialectical structure of, 332

inducement, 47, 69, 723
interest-based, 73; negative, 72, 73;
offering, 73, 84; positive, 70, 72;
psychological form of, 72

inference, 149; based on
inconsistency, 166; to the best
explanation, 187, 208, 215; chain
of, 77, 217; defaulted, 154;
distorted, 239; drawn from
premises about popular opinion,
205; engine, 349; erroneous, 198;
forseen, 354; inductive, 251; link of,
36, 350; misleading, 271; modus
ponens, 58; productive sampling,
2553 questioned, 355; testing, 34.5;
to a mass audience, 186; unjustified,
273


380


information-seeking dialogue, 62, 77,
106, 120, 189, 342; argumentation
standards in, 272; in mass media
argumentation, 222; purpose, 63

initial situation, 63

innuendo, 188, 189, 269; importance
of, 186; political, 225

inquiry, 62, 63, 207; goal of, 106

insincerity, 191

interest-based bargaining, 42, 44

interest-based negotiation, 300

interests, 43, 73

invention stage, 333, 340, 3413
argument strategy devised in, 3.48;
understanding, 34.7


Jackson, Sally, 79, 82, 146, 157
Jacobs, Scott, 19, 21, 79, 82
Jerry Lewis Telethon case, 136
Johnson, Ralph H., 30, 127
Johnstone, Henry W. Jr., 163,
justification, 67, 129, 211, 250


kangaroo argument example, 301

Kant, Immanuel, 14

Kauffeld, Fred J., 337

Kesterton, Michael, 250

Kienpointner, Manfred, 20, 3.49

King, Susan, 252

knowledge: background, 157;
changing, 218; common, 3, 4, 14,
15, 23, 29, 38, 39, 65, 92, 131, 143,
147, 157, 162, 170, 199, 201, 209,
214, 218, 240, 242, 269, 305, 323,
345, 352, 353» 3543 imperfect, 225;
lack of, 256

Kock, Christian, 30, 31

Krabbe, Erik C. W., 139, 264, 328, 339

Kuhn, Thomas, 289, 311


language, 236; biased, 228;
descriptive meaning, 276; dispute,
308; emotive, 111, 116, 228, 235,
236, 242, 254, 276, 277, 283, 306;
judging, 225; natural wording, 268;
negative, 112, 212, 236; persuasive
definitions, 112; persuasive function


Index


of, 242; positive, 278; question
wording, 228, 235; rhetorical
flourish, 175; suggestive, 256; word
meaning, 276; word usage, 105

law: leading questions in, 240

Le Bon, Gustave, 21, 97, 105

Leff, Michael, 17, 326, 359

legal argumentation, bound by
definitions, 280

Leventhal, Howard, 133

liberal case, 112

lie, ethically justified, 124

liking, 24

Locke, John, 170

logical reasoning, 110

logical relevance, failure of, 101

Lotus Sutra case, 123


manipulation, 127, 159

Maren, Michael, 152

marketing, 198, 203

Marketplace case, 210, 221, 225

Marlin, Randal, 93, 94, 113, 114

Martens, Jan L., 171

Martin, Rex, 14.4

Marx, Karl, 14

mass audience, 42, 326; emotional,
97, 211; influencing, 199;
persuading, 14.1; target, 138, 199

mass media, 155; appeals, 142, 222;
marketing, 205; poll reporting,
240; rhetoric, 127

mass media argumentation: appeals
in, 147; definitions in, 319; five
stages of, 3.46; goal of, 351; lack of
continuity, 326; lack of freedom in,
3,10; legal definition of terms in,
279; persuasive definitions in, 271;
plan recognition in, 3.46; successful,
224; tactic of, 308; televised
political debates, 327; term
evolution in, 285,

maxim of quantity, 189

maxims, 49, 187, 188

McBurney, Peter, 3.4, 65, 258, 264

McClurg, Andrew J., 130, 132, 148,


153,157


Index


McKerrow, Raymie E., 280

media argumentation, g1, 188, 270;
components of, 350; fallacies in, 21;
persuasive definitions in, 321;
stages, 324

message content, 109

metaphilosophy, 321

Microsoft Office case, 204, 205, 210,
219, 225

Miller-Tutzauer, Carol, 319,

mob: appeal, 211; mentality, 100;
orator, 97, 298; rhetoric, 359

mob appeal argument, 92, 100

model of plan recognition, 3.43

Moore, David W., 23,7, 241

Moore, Robert C., 14.4

Morreale, Joanne, 48

motorist example, 3.45

multi-agent structure of
argumentation, 173


Nayirah case, 128, 136, 138, 145, 159,
160, 199

negative campaign, 170, 333

negotiation, 62; goal of, 106;
principled, 76

negotiation dialogue, 52, 82;
argumentation in, 77, 78;
computerized model of, 77;
concession in, 75; formal model of,
68; goal of, 76; interest-based
bargaining, 106; interests in, 78;
issue in, 74; persuasion in, 64, 74,
75; shift from, 76; threat in, 73,

neutral terms, 284

no-fault insurance example, 67

normative model of dialogue, 4.4

normative model of mass media
argumentation, 328


O'Keefe, Daniel J., 2, 47, 48, 146

Ogden, Charles Kay, 276

Olbrechts-Tyteca, Lucie, 27, 291, 313,
320; 349) 352

one-sided argumentation, 110

one-sided dialogue, 138

ontology, 37


381


paradigms, 238, 327

Parr, Katherine E., 239

Parsons, Simon, 65, 258, 264

partial strategy, 339

participant, 343, 353

partisan argumentation, 110

pathos, 186

Payne, Stanley L., 242, 246, 247

peirastikoi logoi, 170

Perelman, Chaim, 27, 291, 313, 320,
349> 352

perjury, 185

personal credibility, 169

persuasion, 15, 23, 42, 47, 71, 108,
146; attempt, 47, 55; cognitive
component of, 85; covert tactic of,
283; deceptive wording, 251;
definition of, 54, 59-88; effective,
30; elements of, 54; empirical, 48,
85, 86; historical analysis, 324;
inducement in, 73; legitimate, 263,
271; measuring impact, 18;
objection, 56; peripheral route,
146; psychological, 85; rational, 43;
research, 48; rhetorical, 19;
short-cut, 150; speech act of, 85,
140; strategy, 158; successful, 55,
8g; techniques of. See also
persuasion dialogue; persuasive
definitions

persuasion dialogue: characteristics
of, 58; goal, 80, 105, 106, 298;
involvement of, 111; irelevance in,
47; shift to, 76; strategy, 3.40, 341;
threat irrelevance in, 74

Persuasion System, 3,53; flexible, 358;
quality of, 359

persuasive definitions, 90, 95, 104,
111, 234, 236, 271; categorizing,
297; characteristic of propaganda,
112; characteristics of, 278, 291;
contrary, 310; deceptiveness of, 288;
exploited, 317; legitimate, 276;
legitimization, 298; methodology,
277; recognition of use, 318;
requirements of, 279, 286; static,
916; voter reassurance, 282


382


persuasive redefinitions, 281, 315,
318

Pfau, Michael, 194

Pinto, Robert C., 239

pity appeal arguments, 153

plan recognition, 342, 344; defined,
344; as a dialogue, 348;
implicatures, 352; proponent’s use,
3543 verifiable evidence, 355

planning, 142, 341; characteristics of,
338; strategy, 339

Plato, 11, 46, 62; on dialectic, 11, 214;
dialectic vs. rhetoric, 16; dialogues
of, 57; rationality, 15; on rhetoric,
16; on Sophistry, 16

plausibility, 164, 169

plausible deniability, 189

plausible reasoning, 3.41

polite discourse, ethical rules of, 186

politics: argumentation, 169; debate,
194; deliberation, 3,4, 351; issues,
g6; partisan commentary, 174; push
polls, 225; rhetoric in. See also mass
media; media argumentation

polls, 87, 92, 103, 201, 203, 225, 245,
248; abuse of, 229, 273; and appeals
to popular opinion, 103; biased,
249, 250, 254, 272; confusing, 243;
deliberative. See also deliberative
poll; fallacies of, 229, 240, 261, 264,
270, 273; Gallup poll, 237; Harris
survey, 237, 252; judged, 224; lack
of precision, 208; loss of confidence
in, 253; misleading, 254; misuse of,
251, 274; Pew Research Centre,
253; Princeton Survey Research
Associates, 253; problem with, 78;
public education about, 259;
purpose of, 257; push polls, 250;
questioning reports of, 260;
reporting, 246; respondents
judged, 265; simplistic result, 253;
social indicators, 259; and social
policy, 103; stages of, 239; asa
statistical generalization, 295
a Stl of, 226; a
207, 229, 255; traditional, 257;


Index


used by advocacy groups, 261;
variance in. See also questions

pop scheme, 205, 210; abductive, 209;
conclusion of, 220; premise, 220;
type of argument analysis, 209;
versions of, 208

popular opinion: fluctuation in, 98;
Greek ambivalence about, 215;
going against, 212; initial premise,
214

postmodernism, 290, 296, 297, 315,
321; views on definitions, 291

poverty: definition of, 233

practical inference: Aristotelian, 149;
evaluation, 39; premises in, 31;
structure of, 32

practical ought-statement, 32

practical reasoning, 31, 32, 217, 3363
Aristotelian, 131; context of, 37,
218; critical questions for, 354;
defeasible, 33; instrumental, 32;
multi-agent, 32; simulative, 14.4

pragmatic inconsistency, 193

premise, 39, 40, 86; audience
accepted, 21; based on popular
opinion, 103, 214; classification,
306; conditional, 32, 151, 1523
critical questions for, 151
definition, 3.06; explicit, 40; false,
156, 159; goal, 149; implicit, 40;
key, 149; missing, 13, 123

Presser, Stanley, 293.7, 249, 265

presumption, 190, 191, 211, 283

presumptive arguments, 28, 86;
presumptive argumentation
schemes, 349

Prior Analytics, 12

process of channeling, 326

profile, 328

profile of dialogue, 328

prolepsis, 141, 142, 161, 33

proof, 22, 63

propaganda, 91, 109, 111, 117, 211,
212, 251, 259, 288, 325, 353, 3593
aim of, 107; ambivalence toward,
123; based on argumentum ad
populum, 101; basis of, 104;


Index


characteristics of, 119; classified
definitions of, 94; closed to
refutation, 119; connotations of;
covert use of, 125; critical
discussion, 115; deceptiveness of,
112, 120, 121; definition of, 94, 95,
106, 108, 114; see also other definitions
below; dialectical relevance, 122;
eristic characteristics, 117; essential
part of, 111; evaluation of, 107, 116,
117, 125; evidence-based approach,
123; fallacious, 101, 102, 104; goals
of, 94, 106, 107, 108, 110, 111, 122;
historical origins, 92, 93, 943
influence of, 99; informative, 114;
inherently defective, 107;
inherently wrong, 101; justified,
111; language of, 112; logical
reasoning in, 110; methods of, 109;
mixed dialogue, 108; mobilizing
crowd, 105; Nazi, 119, 120; negative
connotations, 93; negative
connotations of, 92, 93, 943
negative definition of, 94, 114;
neutral definition of, 93, 95;
one-sidedness, 119; and persuasion,
102, 108; persuasive definition of,
95, 113; positive definition, 94;
positive definitions, 95; positive use
of, 114; and props, 109; psychology
of, 113; public opinion about, 104;
rhetoric in, 106; skepticism about,
124; strength of, 198; ten
characteristics of, g1, 109, 122;
truth in, 108; twisting of evidence,
119; type of dialogue, 107; value of,
g6, 115, 118; and war, 112, 114

propagandists: beliefs of, g5, 120;
discourse of, 122, 124

proponent, 53, 59, 109, 139, 153;
anticipatory character, 353;
argument evolution, 202; collection
of evidence, 161; commitments, 50;
defining terms, 300; definition as
proof, 299; goals of, 79, 81, 111; in
mass media argumentation, 222

proportionality, 179, 180, 184, 195


383


propositions: inconsistent, 330;
logical relevance of, 103,

psychologism, 183

psychology: empirical, 48

public debates: context of, 3

public deliberation, 105, 254

public discourse, 96, 97

public opinion: deliberation, 216;
importance of, 203; influencing,
200; manipulators, 226; refutation
of, 215

public opinion polls. See polls

public policy, 64, 273, 315, 360; basis
for, 255; opinion influenced in,
251; oversimplified in polls, 254;
persuasive definitions in, 275; use
of rhetoric in, 132

public relations experts, 134, 162,
226, 298, 308

push polls, ethics of, 250


quality of character, 164, 166

QUEST, 243, 269, 270

question: wording, 268, 271

question-asking strategies, 329

question-reply dialogue, 264

questions: bias of, 264; bidirectional,
240; Closed, 208, 245; dichotomous,
245, 248, 279; filtering of, 249;
inappropriate, 264; judging, 270;
loaded, 225, 253, 254, 256, 264,
265, 266; multiple choice, 245;
negative form of, 242; open, 208,
245; in polls and surveys, 243, 268;
presuppositions of, 270; structure
of, 299; underlying function, 271;
unidirectional, 24.0; why-questions,
244; wording, 260, 271; wording
effect, 236; yes-no. See also polls

question-wording effect, 236

quid pro quo, 70


rape: definition, 286; redefinition
case, 286, 314

rationality, 104; scientific, 289

rave pants case, 205, 220, 225

Rawls, John, 96, 97, 98, 99, 105


384


Reagan tax cuts case, 313

reasoning: autoepistemic, 144, 1453
chain of, 106; deductive, 187;
defeasible, 35; dual agent, 144;
fallacious, 263; goal-directed, 39,
128, 217; inductive, 187;
means-end, 39, 130, 344; practical,
39; simulative, 143, 324, 333

rebuttal: burden of, 154

reciprocity, 24

redefinition, 278, 280, 282, 305;
abortion terminology, 295; by
interest group, 291; feminist, 286;
justifiable, 296; legal, 314; for
political reasons, 314; of rape, 287;
verbal, 288

reductio ad absurdum, 214

refutation, 170; defined, 41;
diagrammed as, 9312; leading to
conclusion, 312; of a prior
argument, 304

relevance: argument for, 183; defined,
81; dialectical, 81, 83, 103, 121,
122, 125, 340; failure of, 13.7; Grice
on, 188; judging fallacies, 103;
judging persuasion, 84; logical, 101,
103; political, 176; text for, 82

religious preaching rhetoric, 119

respondent, 59, 109, 139, 1533
background resumptions about,
164; bias charge, 168; commitments
of, 50, 88, 89, 161, 331, 3545
confusion of, 243; critical questions
of, 308; freedom to ask questions,
288; goal of, 80; ignorance of, 257;
inability to ask critical questions,
159; lack of role, 327; reaction of,
1553 right to question, 298;
strategies, 269

respondent-to-dialogue (RTD), 140,
326; nonverbal audience, 139;
problem, 138, 160, 200, 201, 323,
327, 332; solution, 333, 347

retraction: rules for, 89

rhetoric, 34.7, 3553 aim of, 15;
audience, 18; deceptive capability,
16; defined, 22, 23, 322; and


Index


dialectic, 17; emotional, 130, 191;
empirical art of, 19; framework of,
17; Greek origins of, 26; in law, 26;
method of proceeding, 326;
negative implications, 16; in
politics, 26, 48; superficial, 192;
technology of, 356; value of, 325

rhetorical argumentation, 19, 20, 324,
3,59; rhetorical argumentation
sequence (RAS), 327, 330

rhetorical mass media arguments, 138

rhetorical trajectories, 352

Richards, Ivor Armstrong, 276

Robinson, Richard, 316

Rodney’s bad grammar case, 278, 313

Rogers, Richard W., 133

Roper, Burns W., 240, 243

routines, 339. See also scripts

rules: for collaborative conversation,
33,3; of evidence, 96; move binding,
258; move governing, 66; move
permitting, 65


safety net case, 282-289

scarcity, 25

scary ads, 150

scheme for practical reasoning, 35,
334

Schiappa, Edward, 19, 284, 289, 314,
319, 325; death definition, 290;
rape definition, 287; wetlands
definition, 285

Schuman, Howard, 237, 241, 249, 265

science and dialectic, 13

scripts, 269

sealers example, 156, 167, 168, 226,
33°

Searle, John, 33,7

secundum quid fallacy, 222

Sederberg, Peter C., 281

Segerberg, Krister, 32, 339

Seligman, Daniel, 23.4

Senator Smith’s election campaign
example, 42

sequence of questioning, 205

sequences of actions, 3.41

Simons, Herbert W., 69, 71


Index


simulation, 142, 143

simulative reasoning, 144, 355

Singh, Munindar P., 53, 357

skepticism, 124, 215

smear tactic, 188, 191, 192

smoking example, 165-166, 181,
199

Snoeck Henkemens, Francisca, 264

social groups: involvement of, 110

social proof, 24, 25

Socrates, 16, 214, 215; Socratic
dialogues, 58

Sophistry, 62, 359

Sophists, 15, 16

speaker, commitment of, 337

speech act of making a proposal,
essential components of, 336

speech act of persuasion, 298, 332;
freedom to change definitions, 309;
legitimize persuasive definitions,
298; requirements for, 300

speeding up of the decision process,
247

spin, 174, 233, 2543; argumentative,
297; concealed persuasive, 231;
control, 272; “doctors” of, 159, 298;
emotive, 238, 283; factor, 228;
nauseating, 191; negative
persuasive, 230; persuasive, 220;
positive, 275, 278; positive
terminological, 296; redirected,
297

split respondent effect, 222

spouse abuse example, 265, 329;
profile of dialogue for, 329

Star Trek example, 37, 90, 334, 337;
347) 355

state of affairs, 32, 149, 155

statistical methodology: limitations of,
271

Stevenson case, 170

Stevenson, Charles L., 112, 236, 298,
305, 319, 320; cultural example,
304, 305, 306, 312; emotive
language, 236, 299; persuasive
definitions, 275, 276, 312

strategic thinking, 143


385


strategy of contrast, 352

strategy of public relations, 199

straw man fallacy, 61

strong opposition, 55

student’s appeal to pity case, 145, 151
Swamer, Shane, 269

Sycara, K. P., 78

syllogism, 22; incomplete, 13
syllogistic logic, 358


tactics, 151; advocacy, 232;
argumentation, 221, 281; concealed
persuasion, 231; courtroom, 136;
covert, 283; deceptive, 136, 272;
dialogue blocking, 249; discussion
ending, 314; fallacious, 251, 263;
forced answer, 329; high-risk, 73;
manipulation, 159, 160; misleading,
273; mutant statistics, 228; negative
campaign, 161, 162, 188; personal
attack, 161; rhetorical, 313, 318;
sophistical, 21, 151; specious, 3143
tricky, 189, 192, 206

terminology, implications of, 295

terms: judging, 270; negative, 35;
undefined. See also definitions

test for response effects, 266;
empirical technique, 270; question
wording, 268

theorem-proving machines, 20

theory of abductive inference, 209

theory of emotive meaning, 112

Thouless, Robert H., 113, 114, 115,
118

threat, 47, 72, 73, 79» 131, 134, 148;
credible, 71; defined, 71; direct, 83;
disguised, 72; explicit, 89; indirect,
72; irrelevance of, 74, 82; three
conditions of, 71, 72

threat appeal arguments, 19.4

tilt. See also spin

timing, 160

Tindale, Christopher W., 13, 333

tipping example, 55,57, 74, 81

Titsworth, B. Scott, 282

topic-based systems, 20

topics, 27


386


topoi, 3.36

Toulmin model, 301, 303
toy truck example, 69-70
TRACK, 345

turn-taking, 351

Tutzauer, Frank E., 313,
two wrongs argument, 168


Ury, William, 76, 78


value-based practical reasoning, 37,
334+ 335» 347; components of, 34;
critical question, 35; scheme for, 34,
338; used in making a proposal, 338

values, 34, 35; audience, go;
Canadian, 35; comparative rating,
34; conflicting, 255; group, 40;
implicit, 40; positive, 36

van Eemeren, Frans H., 71, 224, 264,
3.50; argumentation strategies, 3,40;
critical discussion, 61; fallacies, 61;
rhetoric view, 30

violence against women poll, 251

Vorobej, Mark, 33.4


Index


war Cases, 212

War on Poverty case, 282, 284, 308,
318

Warnick, Barbara, 27

Warnke, Paul, 228

warrant, 301; defeasible, 351

Weaver, Richard M., 302

Wenzel, Joseph W., 26, 46

wetlands: case, 284; definition of, 285;
initial perception in, 314

Whatley, Richard, 16

Wheeler, Michael, 237, 247, 248

Witt, Evans, 253

Wooldridge, Michael, 357

wording. See definitions; questions;
terminology; terms

World Vision example, 135


Yankelovich, Daniel, 98, 216, 223,
226, 254, 255
yea-say effect, 240


Zarefsky, David, 282, 294, 308, 313,
318, 322, 325


BERSERKER


BOOKS
