-3-59}
Commission No.
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
FEDERALBUREAU OFINVESTIGATION
cr iutervished
Copy tos
Xeport of:
JAMES J. O'CONNOR
Omee:
MIAMI,FLORIDA
Dafe:
4/3/64.
Fieid Offlce Flle 
105-8342
105-82555
Bureau Flle bt
Tile:
LEE HARVEY OSWALD
Charactent
INTERNAL SECURITY -R -CUBA.
Synopsis:
JOx7 AN2oN1O MAkzrE2 So7O-boxn 2/15/28,in Cuba,
visited.che Paraot Jungle, a touzist attraction·at
liaci, Fla., about l1/1/63, and to have made remarks
chere.indicatinc possible acquaintance with OswAlD.
MRrinez denies any personal acquaintance or knowledge
of osvAiD.·He mcintained' that his remarks may have
becn misunderstood due to his imperfect English.
ceneluaieasc/ tho Fe1.itis tho property of the FBl anc ia loanec to
ouisiceyouaGncy

--- PAGE BREAK ---svAiD.·He mcintained' that his remarks may have
becn misunderstood due to his imperfect English.
ceneluaieasc/ tho Fe1.itis tho property of the FBl anc ia loanec to
ouisiceyouaGncy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MM105-8342
DETAILS:
The following investigation supplements that
contained on Pagas 1 to 15 in the.report of Special
Agent JAMES J. 0'CONNOR dated December 31, :1963, at
Mlami, Florida, captioned, "LEE HARVEY OSWALD, Aka.;
IS-R~CUBA
In that report, investigation was set
out reflecting that on or about November 1, 1963, an un-
identified male made remarks to an.employee at the Parrot
Jungle, a tourist attraction at Miami, Florida, which re-
marks led the employee to believe the unkncwm male was
acquainted with LEE HARVEY OSWALD..This unidentified male
was said to have made reference to President KENNEDy, and
"shooting between the eyes," and that he had a friend who
was an American,a Marxist, and was a sharpshooter and
could speak'several languages, ircluding Russian. The
Parrot Jungle employee related that the umidentified male,
'aat, omeu aun Aq puatay siu os patzeger 'oouensug auo ur
and remarked that the friend was either in Texas or Mexico.
On Mareh 6, 1964, Mrs.LILLIAN SPINGLER, the
mation concerning the afore-described unidentified male,
contacted the Miami Office of the FBI to advise that the
unidentified individual.had returned to the Parrot Jungle
on that date aud was observed by her to drive a blue and
white Chevrolet bearing 1964 Florida 1icense 1-143874.
Mrs. SPINGLER said that Mrs. .RY TrYSON, who operates the
ticket booth at the Parrot Jungie and speaks Spanish, as-
certained·that the unidentified male's name was MARTiNEz.

--- PAGE BREAK ---43874.
Mrs. SPINGLER said that Mrs. .RY TrYSON, who operates the
ticket booth at the Parrot Jungie and speaks Spanish, as-
certained·that the unidentified male's name was MARTiNEz.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

105-8342
Records of the^Dade County, Florida, Automobile
Registration 0ffice reflect that l964 Florida License
1-143874, was 1ssued to.JORGE SOTO MARTINEZ, 464 N. E.
3lst Street, Miami, Florida, for a 1954 Chevrolet four-docr.
On March 16, 1964, Mrs. ANNA FISHER, 464 N. E.
3lst Street, Miami,·stated she recailed JORGE MARTINEZ as
a tenant in one of her apartnents, for a period of abcut a
year, until approximately 1963. She said. she did not
know his current residence, but recalled that he worked
st the FontaineblcauHotel in Miami Beach.'She said she
did not lknow any of his associates, and that he resided
alone, although' she understood he had been married.
On March 17, 1964, Miss KAYE B0URBEAU, Personne1
Cffice, Fontainebleau Hotel, Miami Beach, advised that
 e 1    1   
the hotel, and had begun employment with the hotel on
Juiy 14,1961.:His record indicated thet he had worked
for th: Cuban Customs Service in Cuba. during the period
0ctober, 1949, to March, 1959. She stated that MARr1N22's
aadxess was 7ll S. W. 5th:Street, Miami, Florida, and
that'his Social Security Number was 262-70-6632. His em-
ployment references were reflected as MICHAEL J. McLANEY,
casino owner, known three years; JIM BYREs, Transportation
Manager, place xot Endicc.ced; EMILIo GARCiA, property owner,
place not indicated; and, MiGUEL A. GARCIA, Manager of the
Light Company in Cuba.
Inquiry conducted at 7ll S. W. 5th Street, re-
sulted in learning that JORGE MAnrINEZ was not knowm at that
address.

--- PAGE BREAK ---d; and, MiGUEL A. GARCIA, Manager of the
Light Company in Cuba.
Inquiry conducted at 7ll S. W. 5th Street, re-
sulted in learning that JORGE MAnrINEZ was not knowm at that
address.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M1105-8342
On March 18, 1964, Miss KAYE BoURGEAU, Personnel
Office, Fontainebleau Hotel, advised that the inquiry made
of JoRGE MARTINEZ resulted in obtaining his current address
as 30l N. E. 62nd Street, Miami, Florida.
On March 17,.1964, record at the office of U. S.
Immigration snd Naturalization, Service, Miami; Flemida,
Number A11 873 416, pertaining to Sc2c2
CYNEZ
SoTo reflaeted that he was born on Februury·15, 928, in
Havana, Cuba. He had been granted a U. S. resident visa
Et the U.S..Embassy, Havana, on June 28,1960, ar. cx-
rived dt Miami via Pan American Airways on July 21, l960.
His sponsor for immigration into the United States, who
furnished an affidavit promising employment
..keepof
MARTINEZ, was indieated as MxCHAEL J. MeLANEY, 4855 Pine
Tree Drive, Miami Beach, Florida.

--- PAGE BREAK ---igration into the United States, who
furnished an affidavit promising employment
..keepof
MARTINEZ, was indieated as MxCHAEL J. MeLANEY, 4855 Pine
Tree Drive, Miami Beach, Florida.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

5-6
JoRGs Arrorto MARrrNzz Soro volantarily appeared
hone
at the Kiami office ce che yBl in nnawer to a teley
cail placed to hia cc the Fontaincbleau Hotel cn Mrch 22,
a2d
1964..MARrTNEZ sai6 ke 1e.low as CORGS 1R2riS2
he felt he lad sufrleiert conpzehensicn of Bnglish to
permit conduct or the interview
caid he has on.occasieac fn cl.e past caken
visitors in his percozal car to tcuriot attraetie..s ia che
He recsllec che
Htani acea, fneiudirg the Pazrot Ja-gle.
1CC3
wzer·he took couzisus
to. the Pazzot.Junole,-end wiile tkare engcged is converea-
tien weth thc euployees in thie gttt chop and displayed his
Duzing ia-
alility to write with both hands sirultaneousiy.
tesview, he exkibited chis abzaity by writirg
MAKTIREZ
.with both hands siualcaneousty.
stated chat he had so perscs
ac
。
V GSTALD,
cuaintanceship wish, or knewledgo of, lrz
He sald chat if the Parzot Jusgle eaployes chosghe he had
erpressed an ascociation oz acguaintanccship wvith CelalD,
chis misunderstandl.s on the part of the enployae zuet
kave resulced fren his poor pronunclaelon of L.glist, end
lack of araamatical corzectness. Ho stated chat, in Xcet
le kaew no one.vith the first nane Lzb, and was et c less
to umderstand how che employee migit hare cbtained chis
misunderstandirg.
Re said, likewise, he.hsd no drierd
located eitller Kn Texas or Mexico, and that che incidenc of
his having allegedly spoken in this sense was coupleteiy
erroneous.
xez stated that he coes regard himeelf co
exeitabls, and
perticularly so wii. regard co the contrel
of Cuba.by viDeL cisrro, and chat he may have cada sone
teaarks rezated ts Casrro wieh weze misincerpreted by the
Perzot Jungle.eaployee as f. . -oted toward President
-5-
File#
722/
Dete dictotod
5y
Spacial_Agert_JAmrs-s.o
proportyof the
and
.nndtl
not1o bedi:tri:ezated ts Casrro wieh weze misincerpreted by the
Perzot Jungle.eaployee as f. . -oted toward President
-5-
File#
722/
Dete dictotod
5y
Spacial_Agert_JAmrs-s.o
proportyof the
and
.nndtl
not1o bedi:tri:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MM105-8342
2
F. KENNEDY.. He said he vaguely recalled having spoken
about' CAsrro and the Cubaa situation.  He said, by way
of explaining remazics actributed to him.by the Parrot
Jungle employee, that he may have said that he wished he
were in Washington, or that he were the President of the
United States so that he could exercise the power to. blow
up FIDEL CAsTRO. MARrINEz said he may also have expressed
some displeasure at what he regards as the failure'of che
United States to.rid Cuba of CASzRo, but it was not a
critieism of the United States Governnent,which he considers
to be the best in the world.. MARrrNzz denied that he would
of President KEMNEDy," and explained that if he made any
to FIDEL.CASTRO.
MARziNez stated that he is acquainted vith xo one
whonhe knows to be a U. S. citieen cnd liarxist, or suet: an
individual who had served in tne U. S. Armed Vosees.
stated that hes himself, specks Spenish and broken Engzish
end no other language, and he does not have any frienc
or acquaintance who can speak tlie Russian Language. MAR-
TiNEz said chat, likewise, he couid thi... of.no acquaint-
ance whon he knew to be a mszlksmas or sharpshooter, and ks
added that if he had mede sone zcscrk of chis naeuse to th2
Parrot Juagle eupioyce, it.was trquestionably in rt
C3
to the means by whieh he wouid like to see FiDel Cisrro
eliminated.
REz caid he did.nos recailwhat may htve
promptsd hin to taik slong these general lirss cazing
his visit co.the Parrot Jungle, but possibly sene develo

--- PAGE BREAK ---see FiDel Cisrro
eliminated.
REz caid he did.nos recailwhat may htve
promptsd hin to taik slong these general lirss cazing
his visit co.the Parrot Jungle, but possibly sene develo

--- PAGE BREAK ---

MM.105-8342
3
in the Cuban situatcon had recently cccurred which could
have upset him. He said that it was incredible tlat any-
one should.think that he would have any relationship
yith a pro-cAsrRo person, because, in fact, he has only
hate for CAsrRo syupathizeru. He related that he was
employed in the.Ministry of Finance in Cuba as of 1949,
and.continued in that department urtil che beginning of
1959, at wiieh time.he was the Customs Inspector ia Charge
of Havana Haxbor and the Colombia Air Base near Havana.
He said he was econcmically comfortable, in chat he wes
earning $c00.00.a month as of 1959, and resided xent free
and which he would eventually inherit.
law, CARLos FuJot., was a goverrnent adainistracoc dering
the regine of Caban President CAnLos PRio, cnd it vas
througi PuJoL chat MARriNEz originally obt..aed eaployeent
ix 1949.in.the Ministry of Dinance.
He said chat his owm father, Awrowro xARrzNEz
EsREz ABREU,:had been a successful and well-to-do attoraey
ia.Cuba prior to the advent of Frbel CAsrno to power, but
lad since lost t.s pzoperties through confiscation by
che
CAsTro xegiae. He. said he did not know the whereabouto of
his father, alcaoust the latter might still be in Cuba.
caid that his mother, CARzN soro UnquizA, had dlvorced his
father. yecrs ago, tnd married mILio GARoLA
.E2，wkad
lcst a lazce anount of incone property in Cube s che Cuben
Covernent:
He said his mother and.step-father concinue to
live.inCuba。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M105-8342
4
MARTINEZ said that his wife, CONCEPCION LUISAazce anount of incone property in Cube s che Cuben
Covernent:
He said his mother and.step-father concinue to
live.inCuba。

--- PAGE BREAK ---

M105-8342
4
MARTINEZ said that his wife, CONCEPCION LUISA

July; 1960, but they have since separated and are contem-
plating divorce.
MARTiNEz stated that his immigration into the
United States was sponsored by MICHAEL McLANEY, who had
operated the casino in the Nacional Hotel in Havana be-
fore the Government of' FIDEL CASTRO closed dowm such
operations. MARTiNEz said that. when he lost his job in
the Cuban Customs Service in the first part of 1959,
when: the CAsTRO Government removed the pre-CASTRO personnel,
he, MARrINEz, worked for McLANEY at the casino in'the gen-
eral capacity of handling Spanish-speaking clients.  He
said that as of July, 1960, he reached. the decision that
he could no longer accept the restrictions of freedom
being imposed by the'CAsTRo regime, and decided to move to
the United States. He said that very shortly after arrival,
he began employnent at the Fontainebleau Hotel at Miami
Beach as a "runner," handling cars, and with the exception
of about.three or four weeks during.l960 when he worked at
a motel on the 79th Street Causeway, Miami Beach, he has
been steadily employed at the Fontainebleau.
MARTINEz stated that he is a graduate of the
Belen College in Cuba, and had studied law for one year
at the University of Havana.He said he had not joined
the forces which. engaged in the Cuban irvasion of April,
196l, but subsequently volunteered for training in the
Cuban unit of the United States Army, but was not accepted,
possibly because he was overage.
He stated he has never
C/621

--- PAGE BREAK ---il,
196l, but subsequently volunteered for training in the
Cuban unit of the United States Army, but was not accepted,
possibly because he was overage.
He stated he has never
C/621

--- PAGE BREAK ---

NM105-8342
三
applied for nor zoceived assistance or ctd under the
Cuban Refugee Program.
In conelucicn,MARriNeZ·stated he would volun
teer to take a polygraph
n examination at any time if any
questien rcusined ae to possible acgucincanes with, cr
knowledge or,LEE EAxwEY oswALD or ary cthez -.dividual who
may be engaged in any plan or aetivity inimiea- to the
interests of the United Sta-es.
Physical .deseription of MARTiNEZ was noted as fol-
lows:
AgC
36, bora 2/15/28,
Havana Province, Cuba
Reight
5°8"
Hair
Black, straight
Lyes
Hacel-green
Complexion
0live