The Washington/Camp David Summit 30 Years Ago

Published: Jun 2, 2020 | Briefing Book # 707 | Compiled and edited by Thomas Blanton and Svetlana Savranskaya

Soviet and U.S. documents detail Gorbachev and Bush discussions on Germany, future of Europe, regional hot spots, and Moscow’s economic crisis
Soviet leader receives ceremony and symbolic trade deal, not economic aid or arms cuts
Award-winning Last Superpower Summits book forthcoming in paperback

[This remarkable cable from U.S. Ambassador Jack Matlock in Moscow just weeks before the Washington summit describes for the summit planners in Washington the severe “crisis of political power” facing Gorbachev, who seems “less a man in control and more an embattled leader.” The cable details the many signs of crisis, which is “of Gorbachev’s making, if not of his design” because “[f]ive years of Gorbachev’s perestroika have undermined the key institution of political power in the Soviet Union, the Communist Party” without replacing it with any coherent, legitimate governance system. Full of specifics about “the powerful social forces his reforms have unleashed” and prescient about the various possibilities to come, the Matlock cable implicitly signals that Gorbachev would be coming to Washington on the downward curve of his power and his ability to deliver any of the items on the American agenda. In effect, the arms race in reverse that had been on offer from Gorbachev at the previous summits with Presidents Reagan and Bush now would be slowed to a crawl.]

The Washington summit arrival on May 31, 1990, featured high ceremony on the White House lawn, here with formal greetings from President Bush for Mikhail Gorbachev, now president of the USSR. (Credit: George H.W. Bush Presidential Library, Р13298-18)

Inside the White House, in the private residence, First Lady Barbara Bush hosted а coffee for Raisa Gorbacheva on the first day of the summit, May 31, 1990. (Credit: George H.W. Bush Presidential Library, Р 13290-17)

The chandeliers in the East Room of the White House cast golden tones over the state dinner honoring the Gorbachevs on May 31, 1990. President Bush sat just to the right of the fireplace, talking through an interpreter to Raisa Gorbacheva, while the table to the left of the fireplace included Gorbachev with Barbara Bush and actor Morgan Freeman. (Credit: George H.W. Bush Presidential Library, Р 13341-21)

Gorbachev pulled Bush aside during the summit - here in the Red Room at the White House on June 1, 1990 - to make а personal plea for the trade deal the Americans had stalled over the issue of Soviet pressure on the Baltic states against their declared independence. Bush ultimately agreed to sign the deal, with some caveats. (Credit: George H.W. Bush Presidential

Library, Р13378-06)

Gorbachev had never been to Camp David, the American president's official dacha, so Bush made а point of moving the summit there via helicopter and then scrambling through the woods with interpreter Palazhchenko, Gorbachev and а coterie of security agents, June 2, 1990. (Credit: George Н. w. Bush Presidential Library, Р 13410-16)

The American president also gave golf cart driving lessons to Gorbachev, here with Pavel Palazhchenko in the back seat and some anxiety on the faces, June 2, 1990. (Credit: George Н.W. Bush Presidential Library, Р 13410-26)

The working sessions at Camp David met on the deck, outdoors, here clockwise from top left, interpreter Peter Afanasenko, Baker, Bush, Vice President Dan Quayle (the only one in а tie), Scowcroft, Shevardnadze, Gorbachev and Akhromeyev (back to camera), June 2, 1990. (Credit: George H.W. Bush Presidential Library, Р13412-08)

The principals gathered for а group photo at Camp David, all smiles except for the Soviet marshal at right. From left, Baker, Barbara Bush, President Bush, Raisa Gorbacheva, President Gorbachev, Shevardnadze, Scowcroft, Akhromeyev. June 2, 1990. (Credit: George H.W. Bush Presidential Library, Р 13437 -14)

The Gorbachevs were known for always taking long walks together at the end of the day, discussing everything that had come up, and Camp David's sidewalks and trees framed this characteristic scene, June 2, 1990. (Credit: George H.W. Bush Presidential Library, Р 1 3435-04)

Bush presented Gorbachev with this plaque holding the horseshoe Gorbachev had landed as а ringer on his first try at Camp David, June 2, 1990. (Credit: George H.W. Bush Presidential Library, Р13411-15)

Washington, D.C., June 2, 2020 – The Washington/Camp David summit 30 years ago today brought Presidents George H.W. Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev together for three days of intense discussions of the future of Europe, the unification of Germany that would happen later that year 1990, the economic crisis facing the Soviet Union, and the tense stand-off between Moscow and the independence-minded Baltic republics, according to declassified Soviet and American documents published today by the National Security Archive.

The newly published evidence adds fascinating detail to the most thoroughly documented account of the meeting, Chapter 7 (pages 571-703) in The Last Superpower Summits (CEU Press, 2016), which is forthcoming in a new two-volume paperback edition in 2020. [1] Today’s e-book combines the new material with a core collection on the Washington/Camp David summit published by the Archive on the 20th anniversary in 2010. [2]

Highlights of the new evidence include:

* President Bush’s own handwriting and underlining for emphasis on the highly classified transcript of Secretary of State James Baker’s Moscow conversation with Gorbachev on May 18 prior to the summit.

* Baker’s NODIS EYES ONLY cables from Moscow summarizing his talks with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze on May 17 and with Gorbachev on May 18.

* Background “theme papers” classified SECRET/EXDIS from the State Department’s briefing book for President Bush before the summit, covering the Soviet economy and the Baltics.

* Transcript of the telephone call from Bush to West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl on the second day of the summit summarizing the “play by play” with Gorbachev over the contentious issue of a unified Germany’s membership in NATO, and undercutting subsequent assertions that this was the moment when Gorbachev had effectively acquiesced.

* The astute CIA analysis only days after the summit that Moscow had no concrete plan for a new European security structure to replace the Cold War alliances, and that German unification in NATO would likely pre-empt any such replacement.

When Secretary of State Baker came in Moscow in May 1990 to prepare for the upcoming summit, he found Gorbachev under severe pressure – “less a man in control than an embattled leader” in the words of U.S. ambassador Jack Matlock (see Document 1). [3] The Baker discussions with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze and then with Gorbachev previewed most of the substance that President Bush would talk about with Gorbachev at the Washington/Camp David summit two weeks later. These notably included the economic crisis in the Soviet Union and Gorbachev’s request for aid: “We need some oxygen. We are not asking for a gift. We are asking for a loan.” (See Document 7)

Baker also cautioned the Soviets against their pressure tactics against the Baltic republics, already in the midst of their struggles for independence from the Soviet Union, and warned that this issue could very negatively affect relations with the U.S., in fact, that it would hold up any trade agreement along the lines discussed at Malta the previous year. Last but not least, the issue of German unification and its potential membership in NATO drew extended discussion, with Baker offering nine assurances about changing the character of NATO from a military to a political alliance not threatening to Moscow. As Baker reported to President Bush about Gorbachev’s views, “Germany definitely overloads his circuits right now.” (See Document 8)

The documents show that Gorbachev came to the Washington summit at the end of May 1990 under severe constraints from his own Central Committee (in marked contrast to previous summits). His marching orders (Document 4) reflect the dismay within leading Soviet circles over the loss of the Eastern European empire, resistance to Gorbachev’s demilitarization policy, and opposition to the unification of Germany.

Retrenchment on the Soviet side found an echo on the U.S. side, as a combination of the U.S. Air Force desire for thousands of air-launched cruise missiles (conventional warheads only, but the Soviets saw the possibility of nuclear conversion in a crunch) and U.S. Navy resistance to on-site inspections for mutual verification on ship-board nuclear warheads prevented real progress on major arms cuts proposals such as the 50% ballistic missile cut discussed by Gorbachev and President Reagan at Reykjavik four years earlier. [4] In fact, completing the START treaty – which Gorbachev originally sought to sign at the Washington summit – would take an entire additional year.

The documents show that Gorbachev came to Washington determined to push for his idea of a European security structure, or the “common European home.” He envisioned a gradual transformation of NATO and the Warsaw Pact into political organizations and their subsequent dissolution as the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) would become institutionalized and subsume NATO security functions. For Gorbachev, this was the answer to the Soviet Union’s pressing issues—modernization and integration into Europe. [5] At the same time, the Soviet leader was not going to alienate Germany as a potential friend and donor by opposing German unification—even in NATO if other alternatives could not be found. [6]

This situation created a strange dichotomy, where Gorbachev showed surprising flexibility on the issue of German unification—agreeing with the Helsinki principle of self-determination on alliances – but at the same time wanted to slow down the pace of unification to let European integration come first. At the Washington summit, Gorbachev said that he would prefer to see “united Germany as the mediator of the European process” and that his preferred model of unification would be “a model that would include some length of time and be synchronized with the European processes.”

The documents show Gorbachev as painfully aware of the reverse connection between German unification and the European process—fast unification would negate his vision of the common European home. Although Baker in his Moscow meetings before the summit stated that the United States now accepted the idea of building European security structures, and the Americans would go on to lead a NATO summit in July focused on altering alliance policy in ways that would help Gorbachev, at the Washington/Camp David summit President Bush emphasized that “unification is unfolding faster than any of us could have imagined,” and that “united Germany is right around the corner.”

In his conversations with Bush, perhaps for the first time in the history of U.S.-Soviet summits, the Soviet leader talked about his parliament (the Supreme Soviet) almost as much as his American counterpart discussed the Congress—and in a similar fashion as well. Gorbachev sincerely admitted that political pressures from the Supreme Soviet imposed severe limits on his freedom of maneuver on most of the issues of the negotiations, but he also partly used this issue as leverage with the U.S. president.

However, especially on the issue of the Lithuanian drive for independence, Gorbachev was truly under fire from the left and from the right in the Supreme Soviet. He also badly needed to show the summit as his success, which domestically would hinge on signing the trade agreement, securing Western credits, and a fast signing of START. The documents show that Gorbachev repeatedly discussed the looming economic crisis in the Soviet Union and the need for support of the Soviet reform by the West. The two leaders’ very first one-on-one discussion on May 31 (see Document 15) spent significant time on economic reform in the Soviet Union, and Gorbachev’s requests for assistance. During that discussion, the Soviet leader asked his American counterpart what kind of Soviet Union the U.S. would want to see in the future. He in turn emphasized that the new Soviet Union would be a democratic, open and stable state with market economy, but that change would have to come gradually.

Gorbachev found Bush sympathetic regarding Soviet domestic problems but unable and unwilling to deliver what the Soviet leader wanted most—credits to support investment and purchase consumer goods. The most that Bush could do, after a personal plea from Gorbachev in the hallway after a state dinner, was to go ahead with the trade agreement, despite political criticism over the Lithuania issue, to make sure Gorbachev had at least one success to point to. After the trade agreement was signed, the Camp David discussions on June 2, 1990, featured a true tour d’horizon of regional issues and showed genuine cooperation between the Soviet and American leaders. [7]

forthcoming from CEU press

The INF Treaty, 1987-2019 August 2, 2019

"Choice" Magazine Names "Digital National Security Archive" an Outstanding Academic Title for 2018 January 7, 2019

Reagan, Gorbachev, and Bush at Governors Island December 7, 2018

Summits Book Wins Choice Award “Outstanding Academic Title 2017” January 4, 2018

The Last Superpower Summits January 23, 2017

Gorbachev’s Nuclear Initiative of January 1986 and the Road to Reykjavik October 12, 2016

The Moscow Summit 20 Years Later May 31, 2008

The Reykjavik File October 13, 2006

To the Geneva Summit November 22, 2005

[1] Svetlana Savranskaya and Thomas Blanton, The Last Superpower Summits: Gorbachev, Reagan, and Bush: Conversations that Ended the Cold War (Budapest/New York: Central European University Press, 2016, 1,013 pages). Choice Magazine from the Association of College and Research Libraries named the book an “Outstanding Academic Title 2017.” The forthcoming paperback edition divides the summits into two volumes, Gorbachev and Reagan and Gorbachev and Bush .

[2] See Svetlana Savranskaya and Thomas Blanton, eds., “The Washington/Camp David Summit 1990: From the Secret Soviet, American, and German Files,” National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 320, published 13 June 2010.

[3] Appointed by President Reagan as U.S. ambassador to Moscow, Matlock was one of the few Reagan holdovers to survive the hostile takeover by the new Bush administration in January 1989. Matlock gives a vivid and detailed account of the multiple crises facing Gorbachev in the spring of 1990 in Jack E. Matlock Jr., Autopsy on an Empire: The American Ambassador’s Account of the Collapse of the Soviet Union (New York: Random House, 1995), especially pp. 295-380.

[4] For a detailed evisceration of the U.S. negotiating positions – “little heed was given to the broader consequences of imposing one-sided compromises on Gorbachev and Shevardnadze” – see Raymond L. Garthoff, The Great Transition: American-Soviet Relations and the End of the Cold War (Washington D.C.: Brookings, 1994), pp. 423-424. The Tacit Rainbow cruise missile program, priority item number one in the Bush National Security Directive (Document 3), would be canceled in 1991 for cost overruns and lack of efficacy.

[5] For Gorbachev’s vision, see Svetlana Savranskaya, “The Logic of 1989,” in Savranskaya, Blanton, and Zubok, “Masterpieces of History”: The Peaceful End of the Cold War in Europe, 1989 (CEU Press, 2010), pp. 1-47.

[6] Gorbachev’s aide Andrei Grachev astutely observed that all the bargaining over Germany and NATO was “more a question of form than serious content; Gorbachev was trying to gain needed time in order to let public opinion at home adjust to the new reality” while “hoping to get at least partial political compensation from his Western partners….” See Andrei Grachev, Gorbachev’s Gamble (London: Polity, 2008), pp. 157-158.

[7] For the extended discussion beyond the excerpts posted here, see pp. 683-694 in Savranskaya and Blanton, The Last Superpower Summits .

Documents

“Gorbachev Confronts Crisis of Power,” Moscow 15714, Cable from U.S. Embassy Moscow to U.S. Department of State
May 11, 1990 | Source Department of State FOIA release

“Draft U.S.-Soviet Summit Joint Statement,” U.S. Department of State, R.G.H. Seitz to the Secretary
May 14, 1990 | Source Department of State FOIA release
The State Department prepared this CONFIDENTIAL nine-page script two weeks before the Washington summit, summarizing what the U.S. government expected from the meeting, in prose that reads preemptively in the past tense. The cover memo from the Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, Raymond Seitz, proposes giving the draft to the Soviets at the very beginning of Secretary Baker’s ministerial meeting in Moscow, or alternatively waiting to “gauge the tone of the ministerial” and “adjust[ing] our draft accordingly before handing it over.” Notable are the passages that propose, related to START and to CFE, that “all major substantive issues have been resolved” yet kick the can for completing these agreements until “the end of 1990” (for START, this moment would not come until July 1991). Also interesting is the absence of any mention of NATO, at a time when a unified Germany’s prospective membership in that alliance was at the center of the political debate (and of the Americans’ concerns); and instead, the draft emphasizes the CSCE processes that most appealed to Gorbachev’s vision of a common European home.

National Security Directive 40, “Decisions on START Issues”
May 14, 1990 | Source George H.W. Bush Presidential Library
The language in this SECRET five-page Directive signed by President Bush takes the reader back to the intricacies of Cold War arms control negotiations between the superpowers, with a profusion of acronyms, subceilings, devilish details, and not-so-hidden agendas. The story behind the very first item on the list, the non-nuclear air-launched cruise missile Tacit Rainbow, reveals the real reason why it took so long to complete the START treaty (it wouldn’t be signed until July 1991). Tacit Rainbow, at the time of this Directive still in development and not yet in production, was intended to be a jet-powered mini-drone that could hover over enemy targets (assuming massive air attacks were on their way), wait for enemy radar to light up, then destroy those air-defense radars. This system would be cancelled in 1991 before even entering production in part because of cost overruns and also because of audit findings that decoys would be more effective against ground radars. Yet the hard line taken by U.S. START negotiators attempting to leave open this kind of U.S. option for developing non-nuclear cruise missiles added years of delay on overall cuts in strategic weapons. Likewise, the language on submarine-launched cruise missiles – allowing 875-1000 of them to be deployed without any on-board verification procedures – was more the product of U.S. military service rivalries for new weapons systems than any real assessment of U.S. national security. After all, many more U.S. cities were on the coasts and thus vulnerable to Soviet SLCMs than were Soviet cities vulnerable to U.S. SLCMs – a zero option would have made the U.S. more secure.

Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, “On the directives for negotiations with the U.S. Secretary of State James Baker in Moscow on May 16-19th, 1990”
May 16, 1990 | Source Gorbachev Foundation, Fond 2
This package of Soviet documents from Gorbachev Foundation files includes the Politburo’s approval of what are in effect marching orders for Gorbachev’s and Shevardnadze’s dealings with the Americans up to and including the Washington-Camp David summit, starting with Secretary Baker’s ministerial visit to Moscow. The tone-setting document is the May 15th memo from six senior officials including Shevardnadze of the Foreign Ministry, Zaikov from the military-industrial complex, Kryuchkov from the KGB, Yakovlev (in charge of ideology), and Yazov from the Defense Ministry. This memo declares that “[t]he main task is to prepare the principle provisions of a Soviet-American treaty on a 50-percent reduction in strategic offensive weapons, to be coordinated during the summit” and the following specific directives even expect the agreement “to be initialed by the USSR and US leaders during the meeting…” But on Germany, the memo includes the position that the Soviets had already presented at the Two Plus Four negotiations in Paris, that “it would be politically and psychologically unacceptable for us to see a united Germany in NATO. We cannot agree to the destruction of the balance of power and stability in Europe that would inevitably result from this step.” Top Gorbachev adviser Anatoly Chernyaev had earlier in May debated this position with Gorbachev, who well understood that it could not be sustained, yet this was Gorbachev’s official brief as he went into the summit. As the further documents show, he would seriously exceed his brief in Washington; yet the memo gives the sense of limits and domestic political pressure under which Gorbachev was operating. Combined with the directives that follow, the memo clearly attempts to limit the possibility of any further Gorbachev concessions during the negotiations, and details very specific positions on each of the contentious issues to be covered. Interestingly, the specific instructions include a paragraph on biological weapons—this subject becomes an important part of discussion at the summit, taken up directly by Gorbachev with Bush at Camp David, according to David Hoffman’s account in The Dead Hand .

Secretary of State James A. Baker III, NODIS EYES ONLY cable from Moscow, Memorandum for the President: “My Meetings with Shevardnadze,” 18 May 1990
May 18, 1990 | Source Department of State FOIA release
Just two weeks prior to the summit, Secretary of State James Baker sends this “eyes only” memo to President Bush about the preparatory meetings with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, in language that reads as if directly dictated by Baker. The two foreign ministers spend almost the entire day together, covering the entire spectrum of U.S.-Soviet relations in their conversation, even traveling to Zagorsk (about 40 miles from Moscow) to visit one of the oldest functioning monasteries and the seat of the Russian Orthodox Church hierarchy. On arms control issues, as Baker informs the President, they were only “slugging it out,” and uncharacteristically, Shevardnadze felt compelled to read his entire “arms control brief in front of his whole delegation,” which signaled to Baker that the military’s positions were strengthening. There was no real progress in the discussion of Lithuania, but Shevardnadze reacted enthusiastically to Baker’s suggestion that the USSR be involved in a G-24 effort to support peace in Central America. Most important is Baker’s description of Shevardnadze’s general mood. The American finds his Soviet colleague “distracted and little overwhelmed by everything. The economic problems, the public mistrust, the sense of losing control, the fear of nationality issue, and concerns about Germany all are weighing very heavily.”

Record of conversation, M.S. Gorbachev and U.S. Secretary of State J. Baker (with delegations)
May 18, 1990 | Source Gorbachev Foundation, Fond 1, opis 1
The fascinating excerpt presented here covers the arms control portion of the Gorbachev-Baker conversation, in preparation for the Washington summit, while the full text of this memcon includes extensive but inconclusive discussion of the issues of German unification and of tensions in the Baltics, particularly the standoff between Moscow and secessionist Lithuania. Following the official directives, Soviet negotiators are trying to avoid making further concessions while agreeing with the U.S. insistence on making an exception for Tacit Rainbow missile, which exceeds the Soviet-sought range limit on cruise missiles, and by accepting – after some debate – the U.S. demand that the issue of inspection of SLCMs on naval ships be resolved by a separate non-binding political statement and not be part of the treaty. Here we find the Soviet leader channeling President Ronald Reagan’s famous proverb, “trust but verify,” while the Americans duck any verification measures. Baker even rejects Gorbachev’s proposal for what would be purely symbolic inspections of “two ships a year,” something that would help Gorbachev with his domestic critics. When Gorbachev retorts, “does your position consist of the condition that an alien foot should never be able to step on an American ship?”, Baker finally admits, “We, of course, would prefer precisely this solution. We do not want to start movement on this slippery road.” Gorbachev’s frustration is evident when he points to the START “concession that the American side did not even anticipate. I am talking about the agreement to cut the number of our heavy missiles by half. We agreed to that in Reykjavik. Compared to that, American concessions are just sunflower seeds.” For his part, Shevardnadze laments that “two days will not be enough to list all our concessions” during the recent negotiations. For perhaps the first time in such negotiations, the Soviets match the U.S. concern for how the Congress will view the treaty in ratification debates with their own references to the Supreme Soviet’s consideration – perhaps reflecting the new opposition groups from right and left in that body.

U.S. Department of State, Memorandum of Conversation, Secretary Baker and Mikhail Gorbachev, Kremlin, 18 May 1990 [with cover note and underlining in President Bush’s handwriting]
May 18, 1990 | Source George H.W. Bush Presidential Library
h Presidential Library

Secretary of State James A. Baker III, NODIS EYES ONLY cable from Moscow, Memorandum for the President: “My Meeting with Gorbachev”
May 19, 1990 | Source Department of State FOIA release
This memo for President Bush’s “eyes only” details Baker’s immediate impressions from his five-hour meeting with Gorbachev. This is the first time, notes Baker, when Gorbachev questioned the United States’ “real attitude to the Soviet Union,” whether the United States wanted to “take advantage of Soviet troubles,” like trying to “wean the East Europeans away.” Mainly, Gorbachev saw Germany’s potential inclusion in NATO as “a fundamental shift in the balance of forces,” and that “it would look like Gorbachev had made the Soviet Union a big loser in the process,” that “it would be the end of perestroika.” Baker concludes “Gorbachev is clearly squeezed and is going to react strongly to any step that causes him potential problems,” and that “Germany definitely overloads his circuits right now.”

U.S. State Department, Theme Paper: The Baltics, SECRET/EXDIS [prepared for summit briefing book]
May 21, 1990 | Source Department of State FOIA release
of State FOIA release

U.S. State Department, Theme Paper: Perestroyka and U.S.-Soviet Economic Relations, SECRET/EXDIS [prepared for summit briefing book]

U.S. Department of State, Talking Points, Secretary Baker’s Briefing to Members of the White House Press Corps
May 22, 1990 | Source State Department FOIA release
Back from Moscow, the Secretary of State appears in the White House press briefing room to set the stage for the summit, outline the issues, and shape the press coverage going forward. The cover memo from Baker’s senior aide, Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Margaret Tutwiler, gives Baker the scenario and the 30-minute time limit for the briefing. The Talking Points in outline format express cautious hopes for completing the START treaty (“In Malta the Presidents set a goal of resolving all major substantive START issues by the summit. Progress at the Moscow ministerial has certainly put them in a position where that is possible.”). At the very end is the summary of the potential trade agreement that would become the primary (although primarily symbolic) outcome of the summit.

“Press Fact Sheets for the Summit,” U.S. Department of State to Brent Scowcroft, The White House
May 28, 1990 | Source State Department FOIA release
This 28-page set of CONFIDENTIAL drafts provided by the State Department to the White House gives one-page summaries of each of the agreements expected at the summit, together with those “that could be signed or announced if political decision made” and those “not yet fully negotiated” – the latter including START as well as “Bering Sea Fisheries.” The package gives a detailed sense of what kept both countries’ bureaucracies busy before and during the superpower summits. Even though ultimately intended to turn into public press statements, these drafts contain some insider insights, including in the cover memo reporting that “[i]n cases where texts are still being negotiated with the Soviets, we have tried to predict the result and drafted the fact sheets on that basis.”

“Status Update on Agreements and Joint Statements for the Summit,” U.S. Department of State to Brent Scowcroft, The White House
May 29, 1990 | Source State Department FOIA release
This memo from the State Department to the White House updates where each of the proposed agreements stand, with candid language about each, including the fact that emigration legislation is unlikely to pass in Moscow before the summit – which was one of the original U.S. conditions for a new trade agreement. For the uninitiated, the memo helpfully explains that “agreement texts must be conformed (U.S. and Soviet sides agree the English and Russian texts are the same) and then certified (State interpreter confirms the final texts are identical) before signature.”

“Telephone Call from Chancellor Helmut Kohl of the Federal Republic of Germany,” Memorandum of Telephone Conversation [with President Bush], The White House
May 30, 1990 | Source George H.W. Bush Presidential Library
The West German chancellor rings President Bush to make three points before Gorbachev arrives in Washington for the summit. First was the joint Kohl-Bush position on the “future membership of a united Germany in NATO without any limitations.” Second was Kohl’s intention to “find an sensible economic arrangement” with Gorbachev because he “needs help very much” – meaning major West German financial aid and credits. Third, “it is of immense importance that we make further progress in disarmament.” Interestingly, in the Bush-Scowcroft version of this conversation that would be published in their joint memoir, A World Transformed , Kohl’s third point about disarmament is left out altogether (p. 278). And the memcon is circumspect on Bush’s side about Gorbachev’s need for financial aid, with Bush saying only that he “remember[s] your private conversation with me. Subsequently, that has been raised, with Jim Baker. We have problems with that, related to Lithuania.” The U.S. was also running its own budget deficit, and Bush had no intention of providing major financial support to Gorbachev – that would be up to Kohl.

Record of Conversation, M.S. Gorbachev and G. Bush, Washington D.C., The White House [First One-on-One, excerpts]
May 31, 1990 | Source Gorbachev Foundation
This is an excerpt published by the Gorbachev Foundation and translated by the Archive in 2010, covering the first one-on-one (actually with translators) meeting in the Oval Office between the U.S. and Soviet leaders. The full U.S. memcon appears in The Last Superpower Summits (pp. 658-663). Bush’s memoir (p. 279) describes this discussion as “largely philosophical, the kind each of us had hoped to have at Malta.” This first conversation of the summit went significantly longer than planned, forcing the cancellation of the first plenary session, but the tone between the leaders is striking, direct and candid. They assure each other of their commitment to cooperation and further arms control negotiations. Bush draws Gorbachev’s attention to the situation in Lithuania and how difficult it is for him politically to sustain the position of supporting perestroika while Moscow is putting pressure on Lithuania to stay in the Soviet Union. Bush says he will try to continue to show patience, but he mentions that the Lithuanian opposition leaders were comparing him to Chamberlain, the appeaser of Hitler, “for supporting you [Gorbachev] and not the great American principles of democracy and freedom.”

Record of Conversation, M.S. Gorbachev and G. Bush, Washington D.C., The White House [Plenary, with delegations, excerpts]
May 31, 1990 | Source Gorbachev Foundation, Fond 1, Opis 1
In this famous “two anchor” discussion, the U.S. and Soviet delegations discuss the process of German unification and especially the issue of united Germany joining NATO. Bush is trying to persuade his Russian counterpart to reconsider his fears of Germany based on the past, and encourage him to trust the new democratic Germany. Baker repeats the nine assurances, a package of various American pledges put together for maximum impact, including the one that the United States now agrees to support the pan-European process and transformation of NATO to remove the Soviet perception of threat. Gorbachev’s preferred position is Germany with one foot in both NATO and the Warsaw Pact—the “two anchors”—in some kind of associated membership, which Bush calls “schizophrenic.” After the U.S. President frames the issue in the context of the Helsinki agreement, Gorbachev proposes the formulation that German people would have the right to choose their alliance—which he in essence already affirmed to Kohl during their meeting in February 1990. In stating and then reaffirming this position, Gorbachev significantly exceeds his brief and incurs the ire of other members of delegation, especially the Soviet official with the German portfolio, Valentin Falin, and Marshal Sergey Akhromeev. On the future of NATO itself, the Soviet leader suggests that if NATO becomes “a genuinely open organization,” then the Soviet Union “could also think about becoming a member of NATO”—surprisingly, he already suggested it to Vaclav Havel on May 21, during the Czechoslovak president’s visit to Moscow. The key warning about the future comes in Gorbachev’s caution that “if the Soviet people get an impression that we are disregarded in the German question, then all the positive processes in Europe, including the negotiations in Vienna [over conventional forces] would be in serious danger. This is not just bluffing. It is simply that the people will force us to stop and to look around.” This is a remarkable admission about domestic political pressures, from the last Soviet leader.

Record of Conversation, M.S. Gorbachev and G. Bush, Washington D.C., The White House [Excerpts from One-on-One and the Plenary with delegations]
Jun 1, 1990 | Source Gorbachev Foundation, Fond 1, Opis 1
These brief excerpts published by the Gorbachev Foundation were translated and published by the Archive in 2010. An almost equally brief U.S. memcon of the private meeting appears in The Last Superpower Summits on pp. 677-678. After showing flexibility on German unification during the previous day’s discussions, the Soviet leader is trying here to achieve his major political goal—to get Bush to agree to sign a trade agreement with the Soviet Union in the absence of the expected law on emigration. Gorbachev explains how important for him this agreement would be and asks the U.S. President for a “political gesture” in the one-on-one conversation. In the plenary portion of the talks on strategic arms control, Gorbachev states his ultimate goal—“we have a firm intention to reach a signing of this treaty already in this year. This is the most important [thing].” But no breakthroughs on either issue are reached until later in the day when Bush decides to sign a trade agreement by finessing the emigration law requirement and adding a secret codicil requiring the USSR to suspend its blockage of Lithuania and begin serious dialogue.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, Telephone Call [by President Bush] to Chancellor Helmut Kohl of the Federal Republic of Germany
Jun 1, 1990 | Source George H.W. Bush Presidential Library, Memcons and Telcons File, MDR release to the National Security Archive
ional Security Archive

Record of Conversation, M.S. Gorbachev and G. Bush, Camp David, Maryland [Excerpts from Camp David discussion]
Jun 2, 1990 | Source Gorbachev Foundation
This excerpt published by the Gorbachev Foundation provides a small part of the extended Camp David discussions, which included a tour d’horizon of regional hot spots and mutual security cooperation. A lengthy U.S. memcon drafted by Bush aide Ed Hewett appears in The Last Superpower Summits , pp. 683-694. Here, Gorbachev thanks Bush for agreeing to sign the trade agreement. The Soviet leader is satisfied with this outcome that gives him a victory to take home, to allay the criticism of the conservatives, and at least symbolically to address the economic crisis at home. He is also very sensitive to the public assessment of the summit and wants to pronounce it a victory. Bush and Gorbachev together discuss what they would say at the press conference the next day, especially on reaching the trade agreement. Both the Gorbachev Foundation excerpt and the Hewett memcon leave out the discussion on biological weapons that took place during Gorbachev’s visit to Camp David, during which Bush confronted Gorbachev with information that the U.S. received from their British partners after the defection of Soviet biological weapons expert Pasechnik in the fall of 1989. Only two weeks earlier, on May 14, the British and American ambassadors to Moscow, Rodric Braithwaite and Jack Matlock, had presented a demarche on biological weapons to the Soviets, according to David Hoffman’s pioneering research.

“Washington Summit Briefing Points,” U.S. Department of State to Deputy Secretary [Lawrence] Eagleburger
Jun 4, 1990 | Source State Department FOIA release
Immediately following the summit, the State Department sends these SECRET talking points to the Deputy Secretary, Lawrence Eagleburger, away from Washington in Paraguay. The cable notes that separate (and presumably more expansive) Presidential letters are being sent to U.S. embassies in NATO countries as well as in Warsaw, Prague, Berlin and Budapest. Here we see the basis for subsequent accounts claiming that the meeting “was essentially different from any previous U.S.-Soviet summit” – “beyond containment to an era of enduring cooperation.”

CIA/SOVA Intelligence Assessment, “Moscow’s Push for a New European Order.”
Jun 5, 1990 | Source CIA Historical Review Program
torical Review Program

“Soviet Reactions to the Summit,” U.S. Embassy Moscow to U.S. Department of State, Moscow 19444
Jun 12, 1990 | Source State Department FOIA release
This remarkable summary of Soviet assessments of the summit points out “for the average Soviet, the summit story could not compete with concerns over food supplies and the election of Yeltsin to the RFSFR [Russian republic] presidency.” The cable goes on to remark, “From here, especially judging from the television coverage, the summit seemed part of a Gorbachev political campaign to gain support at home.” Bizarrely, the entire section headlined “Dissenting Voices” – giving a “more jaundiced view of the summit” – is blacked out by State Department declassification officers, claiming “B1” which means damage to U.S. national security.

U.S. Mission Vienna Cable to SecState, “CFE: Visiting FRG official on Germans, Soviets and CFE”
Jun 9, 1990 | Source Department of State FOIA release

“Briefing Allies on Washington Summit,” U.S. Department of State to U.S. Embassies in NATO Capitals, Tokyo, Seoul, Canberra [and info to Moscow]
Jun 15, 1990 | Source State Department FOIA release
This 13-page cable two weeks after the summit provides the Bush administration’s fullest version of the summit results in the form of briefing points for U.S. diplomats to deliver to the allies. Classified SECRET (or one level up from the CONFIDENTIAL version sent to all diplomatic posts), this briefer includes several additional paragraphs of description just for the allies, as well as quotes from the “candid” exchanges with Gorbachev. For example, the cable quotes Gorbachev as saying were it not for the development of close working relations with Washington, the “rapid pace of change in Europe could have provoked a real clash of interests between the two countries, like “putting a match to a bonfire.”
