3
THE MYSTERY OF
OERA LINDA
By Hyranio Garbho

--- PAGE BREAK ---

7
On the Authenticity of Oera Linda
Is the Oera Linda manuscript authentic? Was it actually
written (copied) in the 13th century? Did its true authors
genuinely live between the 6th century BC and the 1st
century AD? Are the stories it tells authentic records of
events that took place from the second millennium BC
onwards and were inscribed on the walls of the Burgos of
ancient Friesland? Or is it rather a forgery, a more or less
ingenious hoax carried out with relative success in the mid-
19th century? What evidence is there in favour of its
authenticity? What evidence is invoked to prove its
falsification? Much has been written on the subject, and
various theories and explanations have been put forward. But
the truth is that, although some are more suggestive than
others, it has not yet been possible to prove that it is a forgery,
nor can its authenticity be stated with definitive certainty.
This is the current state of the debate on the Oera Linda.
More than 140 years after its first public appearance, this
document remains a mystery.
The fact that its falsification has not yet been proven does
not mean that it is an authentic document. We know that.
But we cannot fail to point out, at the same time, how
surprising – and suggestive – it is to us that this has not yet
been determined. In cases like this, it is usually easier to
prove that a document is false than to prove that it is
authentic, and the process never takes more than a few
weeks. Therefore, at this point, the fact that the tests carried
out on the paper and ink have not

--- PAGE BREAK ---han to prove that it is
authentic, and the process never takes more than a few
weeks. Therefore, at this point, the fact that the tests carried
out on the paper and ink have not

--- PAGE BREAK ---

8
conclusive in any of the cases should give us all pause for
serious reflection.
But is modern historiography capable of taking on this
reflection? In our opinion, it is not. Because the Oera Linda
was, from its inception, an impossible text; a text that, from
its very genesis, clashed with the most deeply rooted creeds
and dogmas of the uninformed minds of the 19th century.
That text could never have been written: that was the
general conviction that was reached very early on. The book
tested researchers' ability to go beyond their own limits,
forcing them to break certain habitual patterns of thought.
That is why the book could not be possible; and the
intellectuals of the time immediately dismissed it as
worthless. This attitude has not changed much over time.
Today's intellectuals, like those of yesterday, remain stuck
within their own limitations, clinging tooth and nail to their
own structure of prejudices. They fear anything that does not
fit neatly into their categories of understanding. A n d they
will never be willing to open their minds to anything that
challenges their most deeply held convictions. It is, as we
well know, a simple matter of attitude: it is here that all
subsequent bias originates, both yesterday and today.
One of the most curious aspects of this debate lies in the
ease with which people talk about literary fraud and forgery.
As if it were very easy to carry out such an act, especially
with an old book. No attention is paid to the enormous
complexity involved in doing so. Producing a book today
and then pretending that it is an old one would mean not
only using paper and ink from that period—not to mention
that in most   of   the   cases   agenciársela   es
practically

--- PAGE BREAK ---d then pretending that it is an old one would mean not
only using paper and ink from that period—not to mention
that in most   of   the   cases   agenciársela   es
practically

--- PAGE BREAK ---

9
impossible—but also subjecting the manuscript to effects
that would simulate the passage of time—effects that, in any
case, should not only be able to deceive the human eye, but
also scientific expertise. And the latter is, in practice, almost
impossible. I say 'almost' as a way of expressing myself,
because one never knows to what extent human ingenuity
can achieve such things 'today'. However, in the case of a
fraud of this type, in the second half of the 19th century, the
possibility of achieving deception diminishes considerably.
Most of the evidence invoked to accuse the manuscript of
falsification has a common denominator: it does not respond
to scientific expertise or hard evidence, but rather remains
firmly in the realm of argumentation. Even when this
evidence originates from scientific expertise, as is the case
with some recent investigations, they fail to take advantage
of this opportunity and ultimately base their conclusions not
on the evidence, but on complex speculations, more or less
intricate and ingenious—not to say fanciful—that have been
constructed on the "assumed" inauthenticity of this book.
The most emblematic case of the latter is the study carried
out by Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk
Porck, whose conclusions were presented at the Book
Congress of the International Association of Paper
Historians in 2006, under the title The Oera Linda Boek, a
literary forgery and its role (1) .Due to its relevance to the matter
at hand, we will give this study a high degree of importance
in our analysis below.
1 Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, The Oera Linda Boek, a
literary forgery and its role, IPH, Congress Book 16, 2006.

--- PAGE BREAK ---e of importance
in our analysis below.
1 Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, The Oera Linda Boek, a
literary forgery and its role, IPH, Congress Book 16, 2006.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

10
In recent years, the main focus regarding the authenticity of
the Oera Linda has been on Goffe Jensma's thesis. In our
opinion, this is the breeding ground for all other current
speculation about the book. According to Jensma, the Oera
Linda is a forgery that was not intended to be a forgery(2)
.His extremely bizarre thesis proposes that three individuals,
presumably involved in a religious dispute, decided to
conspire to forge a document and thereby demonstrate that
the views of the opposing side in these religious
disagreements were false or spurious. They sought, perhaps,
to parody the Bible, although only plausibly, since they
expected to be discovered in their deception and thus
demonstrate, by way of analogy, that if they had managed to
deceive a good number of people in this fraud, the authors of
the Bible could also have done the same. Thus, behind all
this parody lay the clear intention to prove the spurious, not
to say false, nature of the Holy Scriptures, while imposing
the modernist views held by the forgers on the conservative
vision that dominated Frisian Protestantism at the time. But
for various reasons, the deception was taken very seriously,
and in a short time there were so many
2This opinion on Jensma's thesis is also confirmed in the study carried out by
Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck. It states the following:
"According to Jensma, the Oera Linda Boek was not intended to permanently deceive
its readers. It was not a fraud, but a mystification. Several clues were incorporated in
this regard, both in form and content, to make the reader believe that not everything
was as it seemed. One of the main signs would be the paper, which supposedly
creates an illusion of authenticity, but could not have deceived 19th-century readers
for long." Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, The Oera Linda
Boek, a literary forgery and its paper, IPH, Congress Book 16, 2006, p. 178.d not have deceived 19th-century readers
for long." Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, The Oera Linda
Boek, a literary forgery and its paper, IPH, Congress Book 16, 2006, p. 178.

--- PAGE BREAK ---19th-century readers
for long." Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, The Oera Linda
Boek, a literary forgery and its paper, IPH, Congress Book 16, 2006, p. 178.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

11
defenders of the book's authenticity that it was too late to
retract or recant.
There were, at most, three forgers: François HaverSchmidt,
Cornelius
Over
de
Linden
and
Eelco
Verwijs.
HaverSchmidt, whom Jensma identifies as the main
perpetrator of the fraud, was the intellectual producer of the
book, the inventor of the stories, and the creator of the
pseudo-runic characters in which the text is written. Verwijs
acted as editor and proofreader, and Cornelius Over de
Linden, the least educated of the three, as transcriber or
copyist of the manuscript.
Downplaying the fact that this thesis by Jensma is not
actually Jensma's but Johan Winkler's3, there are, in the
general lines of this approach, countless issues that are
highly debatable. Indeed, in our overall assessment of this
author's arguments, none of his hypotheses, in our opinion,
has any probative value. Jensma merely speculates and
never stops doing so. He assumes motivations and presents
them as evidence. He makes psychological observations
about the alleged counterfeiters and uses them to explain the
reasons for a fraud that he takes for granted and does not
bother to prove. He constructs a historical context and
makes it fit his
3Jensma himself acknowledges this in his monograph. There, we can read the
following: "Shortly after 1900, Johan Winkler (Leeuwarden 1840 - Haarlem 1916), a
doctor from Leeuwarden, the capital of Friesland, presented a new point of view on
the case. He was convinced that Cornelius Over de Linden had not written the book
alone, as was generally assumed at the time, but that it was the product of the
collaboration between François HaverSchmidt, a vicar and modernist poet, Eelco
Verwijs, a bookseller and archivist, and Cornelius Over de Linden, a shipwright."
Goffe Jensma, The Masked God. François HaverSchmidt and the Oera Linda Book, 2004,
p. 368.nd modernist poet, Eelco
Verwijs, a bookseller and archivist, and Cornelius Over de Linden, a shipwright."
Goffe Jensma, The Masked God. François HaverSchmidt and the Oera Linda Book, 2004,
p. 368.

--- PAGE BREAK ---elco
Verwijs, a bookseller and archivist, and Cornelius Over de Linden, a shipwright."
Goffe Jensma, The Masked God. François HaverSchmidt and the Oera Linda Book, 2004,
p. 368.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
speculation. And as if all this were not enough, on the only
thing that really matters – that is, the paper and ink – he
makes only a few very marginal observations, which lack any
probative value, because even there he speculates4.
Certainly, in this sense, Jensma does not work like a typical
historian; at least, not as far as this document is concerned.
There is not a single letter, not a single confession, nor,
ultimately, a single testimony extracted from any statement
that allows us to affirm or support any of his ideas. All of
them spring from his imagination and from the connections
that, based on certain very circumstantial facts, he proposes
as hypotheses; and even, in some cases, in the form of a
"suggestion". But nothing substantial; and everything,
absolutely everything, speculative. As has already been
established, in constructing his hypothesis, Jensma did not
rely on any 'empirical' evidence, but only on speculations and
suggestions that were guided by the ideas of another author,
Johan Winkler, which he ended up reproducing almost
verbatim(5) .
4 In Jensma, for example, references to the type of paper used in the manuscript are
extremely marginal and do not exceed four or five lines. Not to mention how
imprecise they are, it is striking that the author who invokes them attaches so little
importance to them. Since the Oera Linda paper would have been made using
machinery that only existed from 1850 onwards, it is pointless and futile to try to
prove the inauthenticity of this manuscript by other means (such as stylographic
analysis or historical criticism), as the deception has already been established by the
expert analysis of the type of paper.
5 In a passage from his famous monograph on the Oera Linda, we can read the following:
"Winkler's views are consistent with the results of my own textual analysis. Like him, I believe that
more than one person worked on the text (referring to the Oera Linda), probably three, and that the
book is essentially about modernist theology. Additionally, I suggest that Winkler's opinion on the
matter originated from an anonymous informant from the Over family of Linden and that for this reason it
can be considered more reliable than has usually been assumed. I take these two circumstances as an
argument supporting theymous informant from the Over family of Linden and that for this reason it
can be considered more reliable than has usually been assumed. I take these two circumstances as an
argument supporting the

--- PAGE BREAK ---the Over family of Linden and that for this reason it
can be considered more reliable than has usually been assumed. I take these two circumstances as an
argument supporting the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

13
Much more valuable to us in this regard is the study by
Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck,
whose research was mentioned above. Although contrary to
the hypothesis that defends the authenticity of the book, the
work of these researchers has, at least, the merit of basing
their premises – not their conclusions – on scientific
expertise carried out primarily on the paper and, to a lesser
extent, on the ink.
This research is relevant for two main reasons: first, because
it was the first serious scientific investigation carried out on
the Oera Linda paper using high-precision equipment and
technology; and second, because none of the results of the scientific
expertise proved to be conclusive. In other words, because it
could not be proven, using scientific means, that the Oera
Linda was a forgery.
Prior to this research, the Oera Linda had already been
subjected to other scientific tests on the paper and ink. In
fact, the first studies were carried out between 1873 and
1876, just a few years after its first public appearance in
1867. At that time,
use of Winkler's ideas as a hypothesis for the remainder of this study." Goffe Jensma, op. cit.,
2004, p. 368. The parentheses in the quotation are ours.
6 Among the research on paper and ink carried out during these years are those of
Hugo Suringar, Verklaring over het papier van het O.L.B. (Report on the paper of the Oera
Linda Boek), May 1874, original manuscript in Tresoar, Leeuwarden; Frederik Muller,
Oudheid van papier schrift van het Oera Linda Boek, (Antiquity of the paper and ink of the Oera
Linda Boek), published in Nederlansche Spectator, 5 August 1876; P. Smidt van Gelder,
letters to Frederik Muller, published as appendices in Oudheid van papier schrift van het Oera
Linda Boek.Oera
Linda Boek), published in Nederlansche Spectator, 5 August 1876; P. Smidt van Gelder,
letters to Frederik Muller, published as appendices in Oudheid van papier schrift van het Oera
Linda Boek.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

14
Specialists agreed that the document was fake7 and that it
must have been made after 1800. They assumed that the
paper had been manufactured on a modern machine of the
time and that it must have been treated with a special
chemical compound to give the manuscript the appearance
of an ancient text. However, none of these hypotheses was
ultimately proven in these studies, and the experts assumed
the manuscript was inauthentic regardless of the results of the
tests carried out on the book. After this, with the exception of
new research carried out in Germany in the 1930s, which
confirmed that the paper used in the Oera Linda had been
machine-made (we will return to this important issue later),
no new tests on the paper or ink were carried out in this
regard. Hence the importance for us of the research by
Kardinaal, van der Grijn and Porck.
In their study, these paper researchers share the prejudices
of their predecessors. But their work has an added bonus
that sets it apart from the rest: it provides revealing
information about the direction of the paper fibre and the
wire mesh used in its production, which gives us clues as to
the most likely date of manufacture – a date that, in any
case, is far from the 19th century.
7 With the exception of J.G. Ottema, who is known for being the first translator of
the Oera Linda into a modern language, specifically Dutch. Ottema conducted his
own study of the manuscript's paper, concluding that it was authentic. J.G. Ottema,
Thet Oera Linda Bok. Naar een handschrift uit de dertiende eeuw, Tweede uitgave, 1876.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ted his
own study of the manuscript's paper, concluding that it was authentic. J.G. Ottema,
Thet Oera Linda Bok. Naar een handschrift uit de dertiende eeuw, Tweede uitgave, 1876.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

15
The premises of the investigation by Kardinaal, van der Grijn
and Porck are based on a comparison between the paper
used in the Oera Linda and some "convenient" blank sheets
found on the Over de Linden estate. They sought to prove
that both sets of sheets were part of the same stock. If this
had been possible, the origin of the manuscript's paper
would have been established and its falsification proven.
However, it goes without saying that this could not be
proven in this investigation.
In their work, Kardinaal, van der Grijn and Porck had the
complete manuscript at their disposal for visual inspection of
the text. The expert analysis, however, was carried out on
small pieces of paper detached from the edges of some of
the pages of the Oera Linda and from the blank sheets found
on the Over de Linden estate. The pieces of paper from the
Oera Linda came from two different sources: in one case, it
was a piece whose origin could not be established (in our
study we will refer to this as the 'anonymous piece'); and in
the other, the piece of paper had been detached from one of
the letters in the manuscript, presumably from page 143,
according to the researchers (in our study we will refer to
this as the "epistolary piece").
There is something very interesting to note about this
"epistolary fragment". Apart from the letters attached to the
beginning of the manuscript, there are two other letters in
the Oera Linda: one attributed to Ljudgêrth and the other to
Rika. Herman Wirth, the translator of the Oera Linda into
German, refused to translate Ljudgêrth's letter, considering
its authenticity to be very

--- PAGE BREAK ---to Ljudgêrth and the other to
Rika. Herman Wirth, the translator of the Oera Linda into
German, refused to translate Ljudgêrth's letter, considering
its authenticity to be very

--- PAGE BREAK ---

16
questionable8 . If the "epistolary fragment" from the
research carried out by Kardinaal, van der Grijn and Porck
corresponds to this letter, it would explain many things. But
we will return to this matter later. As far as we are
concerned now, it should be noted that apart from these
samples, the researchers investigating the Oera Linda paper
had no other material at their disposal, so their conclusions
are based solely on this evidence.
Regarding the process, analysis and conclusions of this
investigation, we can summarise as follows: 1) All available
samples were tested: the pieces of paper from Oera Linda
(the anonymous and epistolary); and the samples of the
"blank sheets" found on the Over de Linden estate. 2) The
tests carried out were: a) a visual inspection of the entire
Oera Linda and the "blank sheets"; b) X-ray fluorescence
tests to analyse the fibre and measure the thickness of the
paper; and c) Herzberg stains to determine the age treatment
by "supposed" artificial colouring of the paper. In addition
to these tests, some other chemical analyses were carried out
to determine the presence of rosin, alum and kaolin. 3) Visual
inspection revealed that all pages of the Oera Linda were
identical in terms of font, composition, and properties;
however, X-ray fluorescence tests demonstrated that there
were, in fact, considerable differences between the two
samples tested (the "anonymous fragment" on the one hand,
and the "epistolary fragment" and "blank sheets" on the
other). 4) While it is true that an attempt was made to
support, in the observation of patterns
8 See note 496 in the chapter entitled "Thus far the Council of Gosa. What follows is Konerêd's
account."

--- PAGE BREAK ---true that an attempt was made to
support, in the observation of patterns
8 See note 496 in the chapter entitled "Thus far the Council of Gosa. What follows is Konerêd's
account."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

17
the direction of the fibre and the use of a wire mesh,
evidence that the paper had been made by a "Foudrinier"
machine equipped with an "égoutteur", none of this was
conclusive, as chemical analyses revealed the complete
absence of resin, alum and kaolin filler, which are essential
in the manufacture of paper by this type of machine. 5)
Although the researchers insisted on an alleged artificial
discolouration of the paper in order to give the manuscript
an antique appearance, the "alleged" colouring substance
used was never identified. 6) Nor could it be proven that the
Oera Linda paper was from the same stock as the blank
papers found on the Over de Linden estate; and although the
latter bore a considerable resemblance to the Oera Linda
"letter fragment," they also had many essential differences
from the "anonymous fragment."
With all these setbacks in the investigation – and I say
setbacks because these researchers were not seeking to
discover whether the Oera Linda was authentic, but rather to
prove that it was fake – they had no choice but to resort to
speculation and base their conclusions on anything other
than the results of their own investigation. Ultimately, the
research by Kardinaal, van der Grijn and Porck betrayed
itself by basing its conclusions on Jensma's bizarre and
ambiguous ideas, which, in our opinion, ended up spoiling
the entire study—and everything that this research could
have had, at some point, of value.
There is only one point at which this study becomes
dangerously suggestive, although it never abandons the

--- PAGE BREAK ---everything that this research could
have had, at some point, of value.
There is only one point at which this study becomes
dangerously suggestive, although it never abandons the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

18
grounds for speculation. Regarding the "blank sheets" found
on the Over de Linden estate, research tells us that they
were numbered and that "probably" – at least, that is what a
simple visual inspection suggests – they had been numbered
by the same hand that numbered the Oera Linda sheets. But
not only that: they were also cut to a similar size to those in
the manuscript(9) .Based on this, Kardinaal, van der Grijn
and Porck suggest that "perhaps the blank papers were still
remnants of an Oera Linda production" and that - although
this remains to be proven - these sheets may have been
prepared as "Oera Linda pages that were never actually
used"; as if someone had wanted to add more pages to the
manuscript but then decided to abandon the idea (10). " Until
now," these researchers conclude, "the role of the blank
sheets remains (still) quite mysterious" (11) .
Based on the research of Kardinaal, van der Grijn and Porck
– and contrary to what would have been their wish – a line
of argument can be opened in favour of the authenticity of
the Oera Linda, which had never before been suspected by
any other research. It starts from a single line contained in
one of the letters attached at the beginning of the
manuscript, which the text attributes to Hidde Oera Linda.
In it, we can read the copyist saying: 'so that they are not lost, I
have copied them onto foreign paper'. This seemingly
innocent phrase is absolutely decisive when discussing the
type of paper from which the Oera Linda manuscript is
made. If it were not for this phrase, we would have to
assume that this book
9 Cf. Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, op. cit., p. 179.
10 Cf. Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, op. cit., p. 184.
11 Ibid.d have to
assume that this book
9 Cf. Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, op. cit., p. 179.
10 Cf. Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, op. cit., p. 184.
11 Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---at this book
9 Cf. Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, op. cit., p. 179.
10 Cf. Adriaan Kardinaal, Ellen van der Grijn and Henk Porck, op. cit., p. 184.
11 Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

19
It must have been written on parchment; and the question of
its authenticity would perhaps long ago have been settled in
favour of it being a forgery. But if it was copied onto
foreign paper, it is possible that this was cotton or linen
paper (the study by Kardinaal, van der Grijn and Porck
proved that the 'anonymous fragment' was linen, unlike the
"epistolary fragment" and the "blank sheets" which were
found to contain chemical agents used in the processing of
wood, cotton and straw), or a mixture of both, as Ottema
suggests in his study.
In the lecture on the Oera Linda given in 1871 for the
Frisian Society, we can read a quote from Wattenbach in
which he appears to say:
The manufacture of cotton paper must have been in use among the
Chinese since ancient times; and it must have become known to
the Arabs due to the conquest of Samarkand around the year 704.
In Damascus, paper manufacturing was an important branch of
industry, which is why it was called 'Damascene paper'. This art
was brought to the Greeks by the Arabs. It has been claimed that
Greek manuscripts from the 10th century written on cotton paper
exist, and that in the 13th century it was much more widely used
than parchment. To distinguish it from Egyptian paper, it was
called Carta bombicina, gossypina, cuttunea, xylina. A distinction
from linen paper was not yet necessary. Raw cotton was originally
used in the manufacture of cotton paper. We first find paper made
from rags mentioned by Petrus Clusiacensis (1122-1250). The
Spanish and Italians learned how to manufacture this paper from
the Arabs. The most famous industries were in Jativa, Valencia,
Toledo, and Fabriano in the Marca di Ancona (12).
12 Lecture read at the annual meeting of the Frisian Society in February 1871. The full
text of this lecture appears as the Introduction to the English Version of the Oera
Linda by W. R. Sandbach. We have also included it as an Introduction in our
Spanish Edition.ruary 1871. The full
text of this lecture appears as the Introduction to the English Version of the Oera
Linda by W. R. Sandbach. We have also included it as an Introduction in our
Spanish Edition.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

20
And further on, the lecturer himself adds:
"In Germany, the use of this material did not become very
widespread, regardless of whether it came from Italy or Spain.
Therefore, the further it spread from the East and neighbouring
countries, the greater the need for linen to take the place of cotton.
(...) Bodman considers that the oldest pure linen paper dates from
1324, but until 1350 mixed paper was widely used"(13) .
Research by Kardinaal, van der Grijn and Porck proved that
the Oera Linda paper contained no resin, alum or kaolin.
However, they did demonstrate that it had been
manufactured by some kind of machine, based on the
direction of the fibres and the use of a wire mesh. The total
absence of resin, alum, or kaolin, combined with the
evidence that this paper was manufactured, may indicate
that it was made by infinitely more modest machines, long
before the existence of "Foudrinier" machines. Above all,
considering that the length of the fibres (3 to 6 mm) would
also show that the beating in the preparation of the paper
had not been very strong (as would be expected from a
modern machine from the early 19th century). Furthermore,
tests carried out by these researchers also demonstrated the
presence of starch, which, although it can be considered a
common addition to rosin or resin, also points to a type of
mixed paper, such as that used until 1350.
13 Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ed the
presence of starch, which, although it can be considered a
common addition to rosin or resin, also points to a type of
mixed paper, such as that used until 1350.
13 Ibid.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

21
The intelligent reader will note that these are also
speculations; but at the same time, they will recognise that
they are based on facts that have been verified. After all, as
long as there are no conclusive results from properly
conducted tests, no one can do anything but speculate. And
the value of such speculations will only be determined by
the degree of probability or closeness to the "facts" that have
been verified up to that point. In this sense, we believe that
there is a high probability that the Oera Linda is authentic.
First, because the evidence indicates that the Oera Linda
paper was made from a composition of linen and cotton, as
was used until 1350. Second, because the copyist of the
manuscript acknowledges, towards the end of his letter, that
he copied it on foreign paper, not parchment, which was
available in vast regions of Europe in the 13th century. This
paper was brought to the Old Continent by the Arabs, but
they had learned it from the Chinese. Its composition
typically included the use of linen and cotton, as well as a
wire mesh. The type of beating indicates that the
manufacturing machine may not have been modern, which
is reinforced by the absence of chemical components such
as resin, alum and kaolin processing. Thirdly, because no
chemical substance has been found to prove artificial
discolouration of the leaves, there are good reasons to
believe that they may have faded over time (we do not claim
this to be true, but only probable). Fourth, because most of
the evidence used to challenge the authenticity of the text is
taken from the results of tests carried out on the "epistolary
fragment" (probably the letter that Wirth did not want to
translate), rather than on the "anonymous fragment", the
latter being moretaken from the results of tests carried out on the "epistolary
fragment" (probably the letter that Wirth did not want to
translate), rather than on the "anonymous fragment", the
latter being more

--- PAGE BREAK ---

22
representative of the entire manuscript, as it could have been
extracted from any part of the Oera Linda, and not from a
specific one. And so, we can continue to add evidence and
speculation. With that, the only thing we can prove is that
the debate over the authenticity of the Oera Linda—a debate
that is now more than a hundred years old—is still open.
Beyond the paper, however, and the highly qualified
research carried out on it, there are other reasons that lead us
to legitimately suspect that the Oera Linda could be
authentic. Here are some of them.
The Letters
There is a striking coincidence between the letters attached
at the beginning of the Oera Linda and the period in which
they were "supposedly" written. The oldest of these is dated
803 AD and reflects, towards the end of its text, a deep
concern for the survival of its people. The other, dated 1256
AD, speaks of a flood and no longer expresses the same
concern as the previous one about persecution and sieges.
This is very curious and warrants reflection. Towards the
end of the 8th century, the infamous Charlemagne had
succeeded in unifying all the Germanic kingdoms under
what is known as the Holy Roman Empire. It is known that
he was not a very peaceful king and that he subjected all the
Germanic peoples and tribes to Christianity by fire and
sword. These events earned him the very significant
nickname "butcher of the Saxons", by which he was known
in ancient times throughout vast areas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---s to Christianity by fire and
sword. These events earned him the very significant
nickname "butcher of the Saxons", by which he was known
in ancient times throughout vast areas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

23
regions of Europe. It is highly probable that the persecution
and siege of his people, referred to by Liko Ovira Linda in
803, had something to do, to some extent, with the despotic
power of Charlemagne, who only three years earlier had
been crowned Emperor by Pope Leo III. If the letter
attributed to Liko Ovira Linda were false, it would be
difficult to explain how another author, born in a different
time and with different concerns, could have been sensitive
enough to tune in so accurately to the era of the letter and
highlight, first and foremost, concerns for the survival of his
people. The thousand years that separate the 19th century
from the time when this letter is dated make it very difficult
to believe that the "supposed" forger would have been able to
"feel" like someone from the 8th century.
-even more so, as someone who, being Frisian, suffered
greatly from persecution and harassment by Christianity, to
the point of beginning to fear for the disappearance of his
own people. The fact that only these concerns are
highlighted in this letter - since the letter seems to speak
only of this - may be a reliable indicator that it was indeed
written at the time it is said to have been written.
The second letter, on the other hand, is very different. Dated
1256, Hidde Oera Linda's epistle recounts very different
contexts and concerns. What worries this second copyist is
preserving the manuscripts, saved from a recent flood, for
which he has procured foreign paper. Here again, there is an
astonishing coincidence with the context and period in
which this letter is dated. The 13th century was particularly
notorious in north-western Europe for the constant
onslaughts of the North Sea on the continental territory of

--- PAGE BREAK ---d in
which this letter is dated. The 13th century was particularly
notorious in north-western Europe for the constant
onslaughts of the North Sea on the continental territory of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

24
the Low Countries. Catastrophic floods occurred in 1212,
1214, 1219, 1248, 1282 and 1287. There had been floods
before, but only sporadically in 803 and 1164, with a long
interval of almost three hundred years of complete stability.
Letter from Hidde Oera Linda
According to what geologists have been able to establish,
these onslaughts from the North Sea were so extreme that
they not only managed to overcome all natural resistance in
the area—the Callantsoog dunes, for example, were
completely destroyed in the floods of 1248—but also
completely transformed the geography of the region,
forming an inland sea that extended some 100 km inland,
with a width of no less than 50 km and a depth of 4 to 5
metres. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---completely transformed the geography of the region,
forming an inland sea that extended some 100 km inland,
with a width of no less than 50 km and a depth of 4 to 5
metres. This

--- PAGE BREAK ---

25
The inland sea, also known as the Zuiderzee, had a coastline
stretching 300 km around, covering a total area of
approximately 5,000 km². The name Zuiderzee is quite
telling. It literally means "southern sea". This reveals that it
was named by the Frisians, who were located to the north of
this new maritime formation. Hidde Oera Linda's letter was
written, according to the author's own testimony, in 1256.
This means that the copyist lived in a time characterised by
these floods. His letter literally says that he saved the
manuscript - presumably the one copied by Liko Ovira
Linda - from a flood. This information is fully consistent
with the period in which the letter is dated. Hidde Oera
Linda speaks of a flood that occurred the year before the
date on which he wrote. It can therefore be deduced that this
must have been 1255. There are records of the
aforementioned floods because they were all catastrophic.
However, this does not mean that there were no minor water
movements in years other than those recorded by
historiography. The key to determining the veracity of the
letter is that it was written in a century when these floods
were commonplace among the inhabitants of the north-
western coast of the Low Countries. This means that they
occurred frequently, although historiography has only
managed to record a few, mainly because of their
catastrophic nature. Thus, it is highly probable that in 1255
there was also a flood caused by an advance of the North
Sea, of which there are no major historical records, precisely
because it was a minor phenomenon. Of course, there is
always the possibility that a "supposed" forger was aware of
these floods and intentionally wanted to match the date of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ly
because it was a minor phenomenon. Of course, there is
always the possibility that a "supposed" forger was aware of
these floods and intentionally wanted to match the date of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

26
drafting of the letter with one of these. But even so, this
issue is problematic, because we assume that if the forger
was aware of these facts, he must also have known
something about the dates. So, the question arises: why did
he not conveniently date the letter one year after some of
these floods occurred? Why not in 1220, or 1249, or 1283?
If his intention had been to deceive, would this not have been
a convenient opportunity? Instead, the letter refers to a flood
for which there are no historical records; but this, contrary
to what one might think, makes it even more credible, as it
considerably reduces the possibility that it was intentionally
dated 1256 in order to make it coincide with a date for which
there is clear historical evidence.
The migrations of the Magyars and Finns
In the Oera Linda chronicles, there are countless accounts
that, if we were to compare them with official history, would
surprise us more than once. Most of these narratives are
written in the margins, and in many cases, they are no more
than a single line. All of them can be irrefutably invoked in
favour of the book's authenticity. Their tenor is very similar
to that discussed earlier in the analysis of the letters. These
are tiny notes that could not have been recorded by anyone
who was not a direct witness to the events they describe.
The common pattern in all of them is that they are consistent
with history and, to the extent of that consistency, highly
probable. One of these notes in the Oera Linda concerns the
migrations of the so-called "sons

--- PAGE BREAK ---hat they are consistent
with history and, to the extent of that consistency, highly
probable. One of these notes in the Oera Linda concerns the
migrations of the so-called "sons

--- PAGE BREAK ---

27
of Finda." The text refers to the yellow-skinned peoples
indiscriminately. It states that they did not dare to cross the
vast Twisklând—that is, Central Europe—because it was
plagued by dense forests and wild beasts 14. These accounts
correspond to a description of the Golden Age in ancient
times. But then came the era following the catastrophe of
the sinking of Âldland. The text describes it as the "Bad
Times" and speaks of a series of transformations in the
climate and geographical situation of the region. Among
these, the catastrophe brought about the complete
disappearance of the dense forests that populated Central
Europe, which resulted in the consequent disappearance of
the animals that depended on those forests for their survival.
Without them, and without the density of the forests of
yesteryear, the path to the northernmost regions of Europe
became fully accessible. In Oera Linda, the migrations of
the children of Finda (Magyars and Finns) took place after
the sinking of Âldland, which is consistent with the above
account. These must have taken place around 2090 BCE, i.e.
just over a hundred years after the great catastrophe.
Historical evidence supporting these migrations is the
presence of Finno-Ugric languages in these regions. These
languages are now considered a sub-branch of the Uralic
languages, whose origin is precisely Magyar.
14 The text reads: "On one side, the boundary was the Sea of Wr-alda, which no one
except us can or could navigate; on the other side we were limited by the vast
Twisklând, which the Sons of Finda did not dare to cross because of the dense forests
and wild beasts." Oera Linda, English version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "Written in All the
Burgos".

--- PAGE BREAK ---, which the Sons of Finda did not dare to cross because of the dense forests
and wild beasts." Oera Linda, English version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "Written in All the
Burgos".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

28
The Phaistos Disc
Robert Scrutton, in his famous book on the Oera Linda
entitled "The Other Atlantis", argued that the Phaistos Disc
could be invoked as evidence in favour of the authenticity of
the Oera Linda. This disc, discovered in Crete on 15 July
1908 during an excavation of the Minoan Palace of Phaistos
by Italian archaeologist Luigi Pernier, is a fired clay disc
dating from the late Bronze Age, containing mysterious
hieroglyphic inscriptions on both sides of the plate, which
have been deciphered—at least the inscriptions on side A—
by Hungarian philologist Vladimir Georgiev(15) .According
to Scrutton, Georgiev's work allows us to establish that the
statements made in the Oera Linda about Minnos, the King
of the Sea, are accurate, thus proving, incidentally, the
authenticity of the book. Given that the Phaistos Disc was
only discovered in 1908 and deciphered by Georgiev in
1977, the authors of the Oera Linda could not have based
their accounts of Minnos and the island of Krêtar (Crete) on
what is engraved on the Disc. Nevertheless, according to
Scrutton, the accounts from both sources coincide.
15 According to other sources, the Phaistos Disc has never been truly deciphered,
despite many attempts. Among the most prominent, in our opinion, are those of Axel
Hausmann, who in 2002 wrote a book on the subject entitled The Phaistos Disc. A
Document from Atlantis (Der Diskus von Phaistos. Ein Dokument aus Atlantis); and also
those of Leon Pomerance, who interpreted the inscriptions and hieroglyphics on the
Disc in terms of astronomical symbols. Various interpretations of the Disc's writing
have also been proposed by figures such as Kjell Aarten, Winfried Achterberg,
Thomas Balistier, Jean Faucounau, Steven R. Fischer, F. G. Gordon, George Hempl,
Adam Martin, Derk Ohlenroth, Ο. Polygiannakis, Benjamin Schwartz, and F. Melian
Stawell.arten, Winfried Achterberg,
Thomas Balistier, Jean Faucounau, Steven R. Fischer, F. G. Gordon, George Hempl,
Adam Martin, Derk Ohlenroth, Ο. Polygiannakis, Benjamin Schwartz, and F. Melian
Stawell.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

29
According to Georgiev's interpretation, the Phaistos Disc is
written in the Luwian language, a lost branch of the Indo-
European languages related to the Hittites. According to this
author, the Luwians originally lived on the banks of the
Danube and only moved to the region of Anatolia in Asia
Minor at a very late stage.
Phaistos Disci
Georgiev speculates that around 1700 the Luwians took
control of the island of Crete. In his interpretation of the
Phaistos Disc, he tells us of deep social unrest and internal
strife between two tribal chiefs: Yara and Santadimuwa.
According to Georgiev, these conflicts were resolved in
favour of Santadimuwa, forcing Yara into self-imposed
exile in a fortress on the island. The Disc also indicates that
once defeated, Yara promised Santadimuwa that he would
devote himself to growing cereals and would not cause him
any problems. This is what is narrated by the Disc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---dicates that
once defeated, Yara promised Santadimuwa that he would
devote himself to growing cereals and would not cause him
any problems. This is what is narrated by the Disc.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

30
Robert Scrutton asserts that Yara is Minnos; and that instead
of exiling himself to a castle, he retained his land and
welcomed all the Luvites who identified with his cause and
sought refuge and protection in his land. Then, threatened
by the possibility of losing their kingdoms, the Luwian
princes agreed with Minnos on a code of laws, showing
themselves to be friendly towards the Frisian king. But
when the laws enacted by Minnos established the duties of
the princes, they turned against him, even attempting to
poison him, which led to Minnos' decision to leave Crete
and return to his homeland in Lindahêm. A few members of
his crew, probably Hittites, recorded these events on the
Phaistos Disc, changing Minnos' name to Yara and siding
with the Luwian princes and Santadimuwa. Thus, the events
relating to this king of the sea, who gave laws to the
inhabitants of Crete, would have been completely distorted,
with a view entirely favourable to the position of
Santadimuwa and that of the Luwian princes themselves
prevailing.
Robert Scrutton believes that the Disc was deliberately
inscribed with cryptic writing because the aim was to
conceal everything related to this emblematic king of the
sea. This explains the difference in writing on either side of
the Phaistos Disc. Side A and side B are, in fact, inscribed
with different hieroglyphics, even though they were written
at the same time. This only accounts for the deliberate
coexistence of two types of writing at the same time: one
open, profane and demotic; and the other sacred,
hieroglyphic and hermetic. The hermetic writing (side B of
the Disc) contains, in Scrutton's opinion, the true

--- PAGE BREAK ---he same time: one
open, profane and demotic; and the other sacred,
hieroglyphic and hermetic. The hermetic writing (side B of
the Disc) contains, in Scrutton's opinion, the true

--- PAGE BREAK ---

31
The story of Minnos, whose name was falsely changed to
Yara on side A of the disc, would not have prevented future
generations of princes from vindicating him by using his
name and creating the famous legend of King Minnos,
which is still remembered today.
Pantelaria
According to the Oera Linda account, when the Frisians
arrived on the Phoenician coast in 2000 BC – that is, 193
years after the sinking of Âldland – they came across a
mysterious island whose pronounced bays gave the
impression that it was actually three islands. They settled in
the middle part (which appeared to be the central island) and
named it Thyrhisburgt, in honour of Thyr, the Frisian hero of
the Oera Linda, whom experts identify with Tyr, the
mythical Norse god and son of Wotan. There they
established a fortress and named their naval commander,
Tünis, as the eternal ruler of the place.
It is likely that the Phoenician coasts reached by the Frisians
in 2000 BC were the coasts of Tunisia. After all, Tunisia has
always been a strategic location in the Mediterranean (the
Phoenicians founded Carthage there in the 9th century BC).
Although, officially speaking, there is no evidence of
Phoenician settlements on the African coast before the 10th
century BC. The Oera Linda states that the Frisians reached
the Phoenician coasts of the Mediterranean 193 years after
the sinking of Âldland. But this may be an inaccurate
reference, unless we are willing to assume that the
Phoenicians had already reached the coasts of North Africa
earlier than established by official historiography. Another
option is that the Phoenician coasts to which

--- PAGE BREAK ---me that the
Phoenicians had already reached the coasts of North Africa
earlier than established by official historiography. Another
option is that the Phoenician coasts to which

--- PAGE BREAK ---

32
reference the Frisian text refers to the coasts of Palestine.
But even there it is said that the Phoenicians appeared only
around the 15th century BC, that is, some five hundred
years after what is referred to in the Oera Linda. It should be
noted, in this regard, that the traditional method for dating
the presence or origin of a people in a given region of the
world depends largely on the archaeological evidence
found. If this evidence is of a certain age of "x" years, this
can be established as the age of the people under study.
However, this does not mean that these people cannot be
older; everything will depend on the discovery of new
evidence. This leads us to think, taking the Oera Linda as
evidence, that the Phoenicians may be older than has been
proven so far. This would save the Frisian text from falling
into a flagrant anachronism. If this were the case, Tunisia or
Palestine would be the most suitable places to locate the
early incursions of the Frisians into the Mediterranean.
However, we believe that Tunisia has a huge advantage over
Palestine in this regard, and the reasons for this are
particularly interesting.
In the heart of the Mediterranean Sea, off the coast of
Tunisia and about 100 km from Sicily, lies an island called
Pantelleria. In 1975, a British archaeological expedition
found the remains of an ancient naval base on this island
that predated the Phoenician occupation. According to
official historiography, the Phoenicians probably took
possession of this island around the 7th century BC. The
first inhabitants of Pantelleria were probably of Iberian-
Ligurian origin. However, archaeological evidence of
settlements and artefacts on the island dates back no less
than 35,000 years.

--- PAGE BREAK ---itants of Pantelleria were probably of Iberian-
Ligurian origin. However, archaeological evidence of
settlements and artefacts on the island dates back no less
than 35,000 years.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

33
Although Pantelleria today does not clearly display the
features described by the author of the Oera Linda – an
island with such pronounced bays that it actually gave the
impression of being three islands – it is highly probable that
four thousand years ago it may have looked similar. Most of
the islands in the Mediterranean have undergone significant
geographical changes over the last five thousand years. The
Oera Linda manuscript refers to an island near the
Phoenician coast. If those coasts were, in fact, Tunisia, the
island with steep bays must have been Pantelleria.
Furthermore, the ruins of the ancient naval base discovered
by the British in 1975 have the typical appearance of a
fortress such as those described in the Frisian manuscript.
But this island is also interesting for other reasons.
Administratively dependent on the Italian province of
Trapani in Sicily, the island of Pantelleria adopted the typical
emblem of the island of Sicily as its coat of arms and flag.
This emblem, like the coat of arms of the Isle of Man,
consists of a triskelion on a red and yellow background. We
do not know whether Pantelleria bears this coat of arms for
Sicily or whether Sicily bears it for Pantelleria. The adoption
of this emblem in Sicily dates back to the 13th century. At
that time, Pantelleria was under Sicilian occupation (16). It is
highly likely that the symbol migrated from Pantelleria to
Sicily and not the other way around. If this is the case,
Pantelleria offers itself as a privileged place to support the
authenticity of the Frisian manuscript.
16 The island of Pantelleria came under Sicilian rule during the reign of Roger II of
Hauteville in 1130. The first versions of the triskelion as a Sicilian emblem date
back to 1280. This makes it very likely that the Sicilians adopted this coat of arms
from the inhabitants of the island of Pantelleria.The first versions of the triskelion as a Sicilian emblem date
back to 1280. This makes it very likely that the Sicilians adopted this coat of arms
from the inhabitants of the island of Pantelleria.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

34
The Three-Legged Symbol—trisquel or vilfos, in Listian
language—is a Celtic symbol. At least, that is what official
historiography tells us. We have other information on this
subject. Guido von List, the famous unraveller of the Secret
of the Runes, believes that the "Three-Legs" are covert
fyrfos characteristic of the Armanist tradition. The Armanen
were not a people, but a caste of magician priests, standing
at the top of the social structure of the ancient Aryan-
Germanic tribes. One of these tribes was the Frisians (17).
Related racially and geographically to the Germanic
peoples, the Frisians may have cultivated the same religious
symbols. This would explain the presence of a triskelion on
the island of Pantelleria, where they are believed to have
arrived around 2000 BC. But this still entails a deeper
mystery.
Flag and Coat of Arms of Pantelleria
17 In the classic division of the Germanic peoples made by Roman historians Pliny
and Tacitus, the Frisians, together with the Saxons, Jutes and Angles, would be part
of the Ingaevones. It is well known that, according to this interpretation, the Proto-
Germans were divided into three large tribes (Pliny speaks of five): the Ingaevones or
Germans of the North Sea region, the Istaevones or Germans of the western side of the
Rhine, and the Hermiones or Germans of the eastern side of the Rhine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ve): the Ingaevones or
Germans of the North Sea region, the Istaevones or Germans of the western side of the
Rhine, and the Hermiones or Germans of the eastern side of the Rhine.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

35
According to Guido von List, the triskelion 18is an encrypted
late fyrfos, whose origin lies in the mysterious Head of
Geryon. The name Geryon is an evolved form of the
monosyllable "Ge", the primitive name of the Gibor rune.
This rune is, in fact, a fyrfos. In his unparalleled research on
the hidden meaning of the runes, List identifies the fyrfos
with the swastika. A fyrfos is a hidden, encrypted swastika.
The need to encrypt or hide the swastika was imposed on the
Germanic tribes after the relentless persecution they suffered
at the hands of the Christians. But the practice of encrypting
swastikas was already widely known among the Germanic
peoples long before the arrival of Christianity. In fact,
Kroder de Juul himself is an encrypted Gibor rune, as can be
seen by following Gorsleben's work.
In List's opinion, the oldest hieroglyphic form of fyrfos or
encrypted swastika is the head of Geryon. This symbol is
represented by an equilateral triangle made up of three
human profiles. The fact that his name is "Geryon" reveals
that it is an encrypted Gibor rune. According to List, in all
these cases, the symbol preceded the hieroglyph. Thus, the
idea of hiding the fyrfos—originally four-armed—in a trial
hieroglyph—three-armed or three-headed, as in the case of
the Head of Geryon—may have been determined by the use
of the vilfos. The vilfos would thus be an ancestral form of
the Head of Geryon. The fact that it is a crypt of the fyrfos is
even attested to by its own name. "Vilfos" literally means
" four feet" ( from Vier Fuβ, which in
18 The Spanish word trisquel derives from the Greek word triskelion - in Greek
τρισκελιον - which literally means "three legs". Its name in Greek already reveals its
very ancient origin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---panish word trisquel derives from the Greek word triskelion - in Greek
τρισκελιον - which literally means "three legs". Its name in Greek already reveals its
very ancient origin.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

36
German means precisely "four feet"). This does not
coincide, of course, with its three limbs, but it allows us to
think that it could indeed have been an ancient crypt of the
fyrfos. According to List, all triskeles, triskelions and
related hieroglyphs, such as the Head of Geryon and the
Three Feet, derive from the "Vilfos". Therefore, it can be
concluded that none of these symbols are originally Celtic
(Druidic) (19)  ; rather, they all originate from ancient
Germania, among whose peoples we find the Frisians.
Symbol of the Head of Geryon
In this vein, the "Three Feet" could well have been a Frisian
symbol. If this were the case, it would confirm our
assumption that ancient
19 We use the term "Celtic" here as a synonym for "Druid". The "Celtic Druids"
would have been, in the opinion of the chroniclers of Oera Linda, "Celts corrupted"
by the Golen (priests of Sidon) of Phoenician origin. A more complete reference to
the Celts (kåltas), the Golen (Gauls) and the Druids (trowydas) can be found in this same
Preliminary Study in the section entitled: The Golen, the Kåltas and the Trowydas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---ce to
the Celts (kåltas), the Golen (Gauls) and the Druids (trowydas) can be found in this same
Preliminary Study in the section entitled: The Golen, the Kåltas and the Trowydas.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

37
Frisian sailors reached the island of Pantelleria, and that this
would be the island mentioned in the Oera Linda, the one
reached by Tünis and called Thyrhisburgt.
But that is not all. There is one more aspect to review. The
Frisian account says:
Nêf Tünis sailed through the Strait of Gibraltar to the
Mediterranean Sea. When Âtland sank, there was also much
suffering on the Mediterranean coast, and many people from Finda,
the Krekalander, and people from the country of Lyda, came to us.
On the other hand, many of our own people fled to the land of
Lyda. The result of all this was that the Krekalander everywhere
ceased to be led by the Volkmoder. Tünis had placed himself in
this situation, and so he hoped to find a good refuge there, from
where he could go and serve under the auspices of the wealthy
princes. But as his fleet and his people looked disastrous, the
inhabitants of the coasts thought they were pirates and drove them
away. They finally arrived on the Phoenician coast, 193 years after
the sinking of Âtland. Near the coast, they found an island with
two deep bays, which made it look like three islands. They settled
on the middle one and later built a fortress there. Then they wanted
to give it a name, but there was no agreement on this. Some
wanted to call it Fryasburg, and others Neftunia, but
The Magyars and Finns suggested that it be called Thyrhisburgt"20.
If the Phoenician coasts they reached were indeed the coasts
of Tunisia, as we suggested above, then it makes perfect
sense that Tunisia is called Tunisia. This mysterious name
does not originate from the Arabs who occupied this region
later on, nor from the Greeks, who called it Tynes before
Christ, nor from the Phoenicians, who founded Carthage
there. The name Tunisia derives from Tunis, the word used
by the ancients to refer to the city that
20 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "Inscribed in the Borough of
Stavia".e
there. The name Tunisia derives from Tunis, the word used
by the ancients to refer to the city that
20 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "Inscribed in the Borough of
Stavia".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

38
is currently the capital of this country. But the origin of this
name remains a mystery. Some have attributed it to the
Phoenician deity Tanith, others have assumed it has a
Berber origin. The truth is that the region has been known
by this name since time immemorial. And it is highly
probable that its antiquity dates back more than fifteen
hundred years before the Common Era.
The Oera Linda chronicles tell of a sea king named Tünis.
They say that he arrived on the Phoenician coast around
2000 BC. He founded Thyrhisburgt on an island (probably
Pantelleria) that he came across off these shores. His
exploits are legendary. He was known throughout the
Mediterranean world as "Cousin Tünis" – in Frisian, Nêf
Tünis – by virtue of his kinship with Wodin and Inka, all
nephews of another mythical sea king named Sterik. Some
have wanted to see in this character the equally mythical
god of the oceans, Neptune. We will talk about that later.
But, as far as we are concerned now, Tünis is relevant as the
possible origin of the name of the city of Tunis - called
Tunis in ancient times. Was Tunis named in honour of this
legendary Frisian king of the sea? We do not know. But it is
nonetheless intriguing and suggestive that this name, whose
origin is still shrouded in mystery, is practically identical to
the name of this mythical character from the Oera Linda
chronicles.
Based on all these coincidences, I would like to suggest the
following hypothesis. It is likely that a Frisian sailor sailed
across the Mediterranean to the coast of North Africa. It is
also likely that he settled there, founding cities, and became
famous.   Nothing

--- PAGE BREAK ---likely that a Frisian sailor sailed
across the Mediterranean to the coast of North Africa. It is
also likely that he settled there, founding cities, and became
famous.   Nothing

--- PAGE BREAK ---

39
This is impossible. Let us assume that it was called Tünis, as
taught by the Oera Linda. This would explain the origin of
the mysterious name of the city of Tunis. If we add to this
what we said above regarding the coat of arms of the island
of Pantelleria and the pre-Phoenician fortress discovered
there in 1975, we have more than one reason to believe that
the Oera Linda accounts have some basis in fact. Thus, the
chronicles about Tünis and his arrival on the Phoenician
coast may constitute a basis for the authenticity of the
manuscript. Based on the probabilities we have outlined
here, we believe that it is not unreasonable to assume the
verisimilitude of the Oera Linda account. And if this is the
case, this text reveals itself to us as a source of privileged
information about the ancient world. This is the value we
attribute to this text in principle.
Anachronisms
One of the most common criticisms of the Oera Linda is that
it's full of anachronisms. People say the text is riddled with
them, and this has become the main argument against its
authenticity. We don't think these criticisms are totally
unfounded. Many of them have merit. However, we also
believe that many of the so-called anachronisms are not
really anachronisms at all and can be explained, if not
refuted, on the basis of a very simple argument – one that is
highly probable and has gone unnoticed until now. We
maintain that if there are anachronisms in the text, they can
be perfectly attributed to the copyist or chronicler of the
Oera Linda, and there are good reasons to think so. To do
this, we must first determine which could possibly be
"anachronisms" and which are not. This leads us to

--- PAGE BREAK ---onicler of the
Oera Linda, and there are good reasons to think so. To do
this, we must first determine which could possibly be
"anachronisms" and which are not. This leads us to

--- PAGE BREAK ---

40
imposes the task of distinguishing between two different
types or classes: those determined by events that could not
have happened as narrated in the Oera Linda, because they
are out of place in time or place (according to what we are
taught by official historiography); and those that correspond
to social forms or structures of thought that cannot be
attributed to specific peoples or regions, as they reflect
concerns typical of later periods (such as the 19th century,
for example).
The previously analysed account of Tünis' travels to the
Mediterranean would correspond to the first type of
anachronism proposed here. It states that Tünis arrived on
the Phoenician coast in 2000 BC, at a time when there is no
evidence that Phoenicians were present there. Therefore, it
is claimed that this must be an anachronism. However, the
possibility that the word "Phoenician" was added by the
copyist, and even, to some extent, by the chronicler, has not
been considered. It should not be forgotten that the Oera
Linda was first recorded as a text in the 5th century BC, at a
time when the Phoenicians were widely known throughout
the Mediterranean world. The chronicler may have meant
that Tünis arrived in a region that in his time (the 5th century
BC) was occupied by Phoenicians - even though they had
not been there in the days when Tünis (i.e. fifteen centuries
earlier) actually arrived there. If the original text had been
written in 2000 BC, this would indeed be an anachronism;
but the copyist says that it was written in the 5th century BC
– at least the passage we are analysing – at a time when the
word 'Phoenician' and the people to whom it refers were
widely known. Thus, it does not seem that this is truly an
anachronism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---the passage we are analysing – at a time when the
word 'Phoenician' and the people to whom it refers were
widely known. Thus, it does not seem that this is truly an
anachronism.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

41
The Oera Linda was written – at least the oldest part of it –
in the 5th century BC. But it tells stories that took place
some seventeen centuries earlier. This could be an easy
explanation for all the anachronisms. Since its authors were
so far removed in time from the events they describe, it is
easy to understand how they could have made so many
common inaccuracies. This is not unusual; on the contrary,
it is very common – and even to be expected. Admitting this
would be an exercise in intellectual honesty, even for the
most ardent detractors of the Oera Linda. After all, it is not
difficult to imagine that a chronicler of the 5th century BC
BCE would have lacked the most basic training that a
modern historian has. That being the case, it turns out that
the anachronisms, previously used to challenge the
authenticity of the text, could today very easily become, for
these reasons, quite the opposite.
But one thorny issue remains. Among the anachronisms in
Oera Linda—as we have already mentioned—there are two
types: those that refer to spatial-temporal discrepancies in
the facts, and those that appear to be subjective
constructions from a very recent time. It is this second type
of anachronism that we will discuss in the following lines.
In a significant passage from the chapter entitled 'The Laws
of the Government of Los Burgos', we read the following:
"If she (the Volkmoder) is called upon to decide on any legal matter
between a Grêvetman and the community, she must always lean
towards the side of the community, in order to preserve

--- PAGE BREAK ---e (the Volkmoder) is called upon to decide on any legal matter
between a Grêvetman and the community, she must always lean
towards the side of the community, in order to preserve

--- PAGE BREAK ---

42
peace; for it is better for one man to suffer than for many to do
so."21
Here is what we consider to be a pure anachronism.
Passages such as this could very easily be invoked in favour
of the manuscript's inauthenticity. What we read in it seems
dubious, questionable and most likely anachronistic. The
phrase in the passage that makes this article suspicious is
"...and because it is better for one man to suffer than for
many to do so". A simple reading of these lines evokes the
New Testament text of John 11:49-50, in which Caiaphas,
the Jewish high priest, appears saying: "... You know
nothing, nor do you consider that it is better for one man to
die for the people than for the whole nation to perish."
In another passage of the Oera Linda, we find an entire
chapter that seems noteworthy in the context of the debate on
anachronisms. It is entitled "The Writings of Minnos II"22.
Towards the middle of the chapter, we read the following:
"In another time, when the plague ravaged the country, they (the
priests) came with a whole troop of people and said: 'We are all
making offerings to the gods so that they may take the plague away. Will you
not help us to ward off their wrath? Or have you yourselves brought the plague
upon the land with all your arts?' 'No,' said Minerva, 'I know of no god who
does evil, so I cannot ask them to do good. I only know that there is one good
spirit, that of Wr-alda, and since he is good, he never does evil." "Where
then does evil come from?" asked the priests. " All evil comes from
you, and from the stupidity of the people who allow themselves to be
deceived by you," she replied.
21 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The Laws of the Government of
Burgos". The parentheses are ours.
22 The original chapter in Frisian is "Ut-a skrifta Minnos", which can be translated as
"About the Writings of Minnos".ho, chapter: "The Laws of the Government of
Burgos". The parentheses are ours.
22 The original chapter in Frisian is "Ut-a skrifta Minnos", which can be translated as
"About the Writings of Minnos".

--- PAGE BREAK ---ws of the Government of
Burgos". The parentheses are ours.
22 The original chapter in Frisian is "Ut-a skrifta Minnos", which can be translated as
"About the Writings of Minnos".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

43
Hellênja. "If your God is so extremely good, why does he not prevent evil?"
asked the priests. Hellênja replied: "Frya has put us here, and Kroder, that is,
the Wheel of Time, must do the rest. For all calamities, advice and remedies can be
found, but Wr-alda wants us to seek them out for ourselves, so that we may
become strong and wise. If we did not do this, he would abandon us to our
own devices, so that we might experience the results of wise or foolish
behaviour"(23) .
This passage evokes the classic theological discussions of
medieval Europe on the origin of evil and God's role in it. It
also recalls the theological debates of the Protestants of the
19th century on the same subject. It is, in fact, apparently an
impossible dialogue, from the perspective of the ethics we
know of the Germanic peoples before the advent of
Christianity. There are some precedents for this way of
thinking in Plato's early dialogues. But it would not be
unreasonable to think that they are actually a later addition to
the text.
In another passage from the same chapter, we read:
People began to mock and ridicule her, so she did not dare to
continue with the subject. And one would have thought that the
priests would call a meeting of the people to expel us from the
country; but instead, instead of mistreating her, they marched from
pagan Krekaland to Alpa, proclaiming that Almighty God had
been pleased to send his intelligent daughter Minerva, also called
Nyhellênja, on a cloud over the sea to give the people good
advice; and so that all who listened to her would be enriched by
her words and be happy and ultimately rule over all the kingdoms
of the earth. For this reason, they erected statues of her on all their
altars. They announced and enthused the common people with
advice she had never given. And they recounted miracles she had
never performed. Cunningly, they made themselves masters of our
laws and customs; and with skill
23 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The Writings of Minnos II".racles she had
never performed. Cunningly, they made themselves masters of our
laws and customs; and with skill
23 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The Writings of Minnos II".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

44
and ingenuity were able to explain them and spread them around them"24.
In these lines, perhaps more clearly than in the previous
example, we can see a type of anachronism of the second
kind described by us. It is almost a fictionalised account of
what the history of Christianity has been to date, according
to a particular point of view. Let us analyse this piece by
piece. First, the text says of Nyhellênja that, instead of being
mistreated by the priests, they "marched from pagan
Krekaland to Alpa, proclaiming that Almighty God had
been pleased to send his intelligent daughter Minerva, also
called Nyhellênja, in a cloud over the sea to give the people
good advice". This, seen from a particular appreciation of
the early history of Christianity, bears many similarities to
the events that occurred immediately after Jesus' death. His
disciples—like
the
priests
in
this
narrative
about
Nyhellênja—went beyond the borders of Palestine (to
Greece, Egypt, Rome, etc.) proclaiming that Jesus was an
envoy of God and that he had come into this world, among
other things, to give his wisdom to men. The text then adds,
referring to Nyhellênja, the following: "For this reason, they
erected statues of her on all their altars. They announced and
enthused the common people with advice she had never
given. And they recounted miracles she never performed." In
our opinion, this is a clear allusion to Christianity; and
therefore, a passage that qualifies very well for what we
have called anachronism. We can say that what the text
recounts about Nyhellênja also happened t o Jesus.   In his
name, the priests
24 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The Writings of Minnos II".

--- PAGE BREAK ---what the text
recounts about Nyhellênja also happened t o Jesus.   In his
name, the priests
24 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The Writings of Minnos II".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

45
Christians erected statues of him on all their altars; they
proclaimed his second coming at every opportunity; they put
words in his mouth that are highly unlikely to have been
spoken by a first-century Jew; and they recounted miracles
that we cannot be certain ever happened. In this sense,
Jensma's thesis, analysed at the beginning, becomes highly
appealing. If we wanted to show, in a didactic way, how
Christianity since Paul has been a manipulation of the
teaching, work, and life of Jesus for its own ends, a story of
Nyhellênja, narrated in these terms, would seem to us to be
a very appropriate account—if not a true parody of the life
of Jesus. It is highly probable that the author of these lines
wanted to demystify Jesus (or de-divinize him); it is also
possible that he sought to undermine the power of the
churches (Catholic or Protestant). After all, if it is possible
to recognise, in a precedent prior to Jesus, all the vices that
would later develop in the Church, a parody such as this
serves as an anchor to make the situation being judged even
more visible. Thus, it is not unreasonable to think that this is
also an anachronism; although, as with all such things, we
cannot sustain this beyond speculation.
Among those we might describe as anachronisms, there is
one that is particularly interesting. It is a narrative whose
similarities with the New Testament figure of Jesus are even
more evident than in the previous example. The name of the
hero of these sagas, in Frisian, is Jes-us. From the outset, it
is clear that the similarity is not a matter of interpretation.
The Oera Linda states that Jes-us lived in the 6th century
BC and was the son of a high priest and a Frisian princess
from the region of Kasamyr. It adds that heis not a matter of interpretation.
The Oera Linda states that Jes-us lived in the 6th century
BC and was the son of a high priest and a Frisian princess
from the region of Kasamyr. It adds that he

--- PAGE BREAK ---interpretation.
The Oera Linda states that Jes-us lived in the 6th century
BC and was the son of a high priest and a Frisian princess
from the region of Kasamyr. It adds that he

--- PAGE BREAK ---

46
It was a forbidden love, so Jesus was hidden and denied as a
son. Taken to live with the poor of the city, he grew up fully
aware of his high lineage, so he sought to acquire as much
wisdom as he could. In this way, his intelligence became
very vast, earning him the admiration of the people and the
fear of the priests. When he became an adult, he returned to
his parents, but they rejected him again. Overwhelmed with
grief, he wandered throughout the country. Then he met a
Frisian sailor who taught him the customs of the children of
Frya. From then on, he devoted himself to preaching love,
charity, justice, and intolerance towards the rich and the
priests. People knew him by the name of Kris-en, but his
Frisian friend called him Bûda. The priests hated him, so
Jes-us was forced to flee the country. None of this, however,
prevented his doctrine and teaching from spreading
everywhere. Finally, after twelve years of travelling to
various places, Jes-us died. The Oera Linda does not clarify
how. But it does say that his friends preserved his teachings
and took it wherever there were people willing to hear them.
What happened after Jes-us' death? Let the Oera Linda
chronicler himself clarify this for us.
"While the doctrine of Jesus spread across the planet, the false
priests went to the land of his birth to announce his death. They
claimed to be his friends and pretended to feel great sorrow by
tearing their clothes and shaving their heads. They went to live in
caves in the mountains, but there they had hidden all their
treasures and made images of Jesus. They gave these statuettes to
the simple people. They finally told them that Jesus was a god, that
he himself had told them so, and that all those who believed in his
doctrine would then enter his kingdom, where everything would
be joy and happiness. Realising that they knew that Jesus was
opposed to the rich, they announced everywhere that theo believed in his
doctrine would then enter his kingdom, where everything would
be joy and happiness. Realising that they knew that Jesus was
opposed to the rich, they announced everywhere that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---octrine would then enter his kingdom, where everything would
be joy and happiness. Realising that they knew that Jesus was
opposed to the rich, they announced everywhere that the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

47
poverty, suffering, and humility were the gateway to his kingdom,
and that those who had suffered most on earth should enjoy the
greatest happiness there. Although they knew that Jesus had taught
men to regulate and control their passions, they taught that men
should repress their passions, and that the perfection of humanity
consisted in being as insensitive as cold stones. In order to make
the people believe that they practised what they preached, they
feigned poverty outwardly and pretended to have overcome all
their sensual passions by not having wives. But if any girl had
made a misstep, she would have been quickly forgiven. 'The
weak,' they said, 'will be assisted, and to save their souls, men must give
generously to the Church'. Acting in this way, they had wives and
children without having homes, and they were rich without
working. But the people became impoverished and more miserable
than they had ever been. This doctrine, which required priests to
possess no more knowledge than to speak deceitfully and pretend
to be pious while acting unjustly, spread from East to West and
also came to our lands"25.
The length of the quotation is justified in order to properly
illustrate what is, without a doubt, a genuine anachronism.
For those of us who are familiar with the history of
Christianity, this is a condensed way of presenting it, from a
particular point of view, contrary to the tradition of the
Churches. But let us look at it in detail. There are two types
of similarities in these accounts of Jesus: first, there are
those that are circumstantial; and then there are those that
almost mirror the history of Christianity. There are also a
number of interesting differences that are worth noting,
especially because beneath the surface of each of these lie
bizarre forms of coincidences and synchronicities. Let's start
with the first. The circumstantial coincidences are: a) His
parents. The Oera Linda says that Jesus was the son of a
high priest of the
25 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians".The circumstantial coincidences are: a) His
parents. The Oera Linda says that Jesus was the son of a
high priest of the
25 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians".

--- PAGE BREAK ---oincidences are: a) His
parents. The Oera Linda says that Jesus was the son of a
high priest of the
25 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

48
town of Finda and a princess of Frisian origin. Something
very similar can be said about the historical Jesus in this
regard. The evangelists point out, in their own way, that
both Mary and Joseph were direct descendants of King
David26. It has been established that Joseph was a rabbi, that
is, a kind of priest. If Mary is a descendant of David, there
are reasons to attribute a royal lineage to her, and therefore
the status of a princess. There is something very curious
about King David that has been overlooked until now. The
Bible says that this king was blond and had beautiful eyes
(probably blue)(27) ,a characteristic more typical of the
Frisian people than of the inhabitants of the Palestinian
region. If this were the case and Mary were descended from
him, there are reasons to think that she was probably of
Frisian origin. b) He lived among the poor. The Oera Linda
Bible says that Jes-us grew up among the poor of the
village. Something similar can be said about Jesus.
Although both were of royal nature, for various reasons they
lived among the humblest people of their respective villages.
c) The wisdom and fear of the priests. The Oera Linda says that
Jes-us cultivated wisdom from a very young age and that this
earned him the fear(28)  and antipathy of the priests.
Something similar is also preached about Jesus. The topic of
the wise child who speaks with the highest dignitaries and
priests of his people is a common theme in the Oera Linda
story and in the neo-document.
26 Matthew 1:1-16; Luke 3:23-38. Although Luke does not mention Mary in this
genealogy, it is clear that this is her lineage, as it differs from Matthew's, which is
effectively Joseph's lineage and part of that of Heli, who is presumably Mary's
father. If Luke says that Heli is Joseph's father, it is because Joseph acquires that
status by being Mary's husband. In the ancient world, descent through the maternal
line did not count, which is why Luke does not name Mary, but names Joseph, her
political substitute in the line of descent from David.
27 1 Samuel 16:12 and 1 Samuel 17:42
28 In a significant passage from Oera Linda, we read: "The people looked upon him
with respect, and the priests feared his questions." Oera Linda, Spanish version by
Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians."ificant passage from Oera Linda, we read: "The people looked upon him
with respect, and the priests feared his questions." Oera Linda, Spanish version by
Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians."

--- PAGE BREAK ---Oera Linda, we read: "The people looked upon him
with respect, and the priests feared his questions." Oera Linda, Spanish version by
Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians."

--- PAGE BREAK ---

49
testamentary. In Luke, for example, we read that when Jesus
was twelve years old, he discussed complex theological
issues with the wise men and teachers of the law: people
were amazed when they heard him and marvelled at his
astonishing intelligence29. d) The content of the preaching. The
Oera Linda says that Jesus preached love, justice, and charity
everywhere. The same can also be said of Jesus. And
although these are generally features of the preaching of
most of humanity's sublimators, there are some aspects that
bring the doctrinal profiles of these two figures into much
more emphatic harmony. For example: Jesus "taught the
people not to tolerate the rich or the priests, and to protect
themselves against false shame" (30). Jesus also predisposed his
people against the Pharisees and priests of his time (31) .But
the Oera Linda also suggests that these priests played a
parasitic role in their society. In a significant passage
directed against the priests, we read: "The earth (said Jes-us)
gave its treasures to those who work, so everyone is obliged to dig,
plough and sow if they want to reap; although no one is obliged to do
anything for another, unless it is of their own free will."
Similarly, Jesus says similar things to the scribes and
Pharisees. Finally, the antipathy between the priests and Jes-
us on the one hand, and Jesus and the Pharisees on the other,
is also reflected in the way they described both figures: while
the priests called the Jes-us of the Oera Linda "Fo" (false),
the Pharisees said that the historical Jesus was a blasphemer.
e) The names of Jes-us. The Oera Linda says that Jes-us was
also known as Kris-en and Bûda.   Jesus is called in the
29 Luke 2:40-52
30 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians".
31 Matthew 23:1-34; Luke 11:37-47at Jes-us was
also known as Kris-en and Bûda.   Jesus is called in the
29 Luke 2:40-52
30 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians".
31 Matthew 23:1-34; Luke 11:37-47

--- PAGE BREAK ---known as Kris-en and Bûda.   Jesus is called in the
29 Luke 2:40-52
30 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians".
31 Matthew 23:1-34; Luke 11:37-47

--- PAGE BREAK ---

50
Gospels Christ, which means the anointed one. The word
Christ derives from the Greek verb "crisein", "jrisein" or
"krisein" (χρισειν), which is very similar to the word "Kris-
en". On the other hand, these names also suggest a parallel
with the figures of Krishna and Buddha. Although "Kris-en"
is also a way of saying "Christ", the link with Krishna is
suggested by the region where he is said to have preached -
Kasemyr, Kashmir, in ancient India - and the presence of
the name Bûda. Krishna and Buddha are two avatars,
incarnations of Vishnu, the Hindu deity. As incarnations,
they are God made man. This is fully consistent with what
Christianity says about Jesus. f) The spread of his doctrine.
The Oera Linda says that Jes-us was forced to flee from the
wrath of the priests. Jesus is said to have been crucified at
the instigation of the Pharisees. But in both cases, these
events did not tarnish the work of these figures. Both the
doctrine of Jes-us and that of Jesus managed to spread
beyond the borders of their own country. And in both
cases, it is their friends or disciples who are responsible for
spreading their work. This is, therefore, also a typical case
of what we have called circumstantial coincidences. Forms of
similarities that evoke and refer to each other, their
differences being very minor events, relating either to
circumstances, time, or place. The almost carbon-copy
similarities, on the other hand, are most prevalent in the
Oera Linda account. These not only reinforce the
anachronism hypothesis, but also culminate in constituting
the best evidence in favour of those who lean towards its
inauthenticity. But let us look at this in detail. The Oera
Linda says that while the doctrine of Jesus was spreading,
the false priests went to the land of his birth to report his
death. There they pretended to be his friends, tore their
clothesThe Oera
Linda says that while the doctrine of Jesus was spreading,
the false priests went to the land of his birth to report his
death. There they pretended to be his friends, tore their
clothes

--- PAGE BREAK ---s that while the doctrine of Jesus was spreading,
the false priests went to the land of his birth to report his
death. There they pretended to be his friends, tore their
clothes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

51
and shaved their heads. The idiom "to rend one's garments"
is not strictly Frisian, Nordic or Germanic. It is Jewish and
belongs to the tradition of the Bible. It is what the New
Testament text says that characters such as Caiaphas, the
scribes and the Pharisees of the Temple did. The Oera Linda
then adds that the priests made images and statuettes of Jes-
us and gave them to the common people. Concern for
images and representations of God is not an interest of the
Germanic peoples, but it is of the biblical Jews and
Protestants in Christianity. After this, the Oera Linda states
that Jes-us was proclaimed God by the priests - and that this
truth had been communicated to them by Jes-us himself.
The divinity of Jesus was also decreed by a council of
bishops(32) ;and they also said that, in his own way, sometimes
openly, sometimes through signs, it was Jesus himself who
communicated this to his disciples. The Oera Linda
maintains that the priests made the people believe that those
who adopted this doctrine would inherit the kingdom and be
happy and fulfilled. The idea of the kingdom is also a
Christian idea. There is no notion among the Germanic
peoples that evokes a similar idea. The closest thing might
be Valhalla. But one does not enter there by profession of
faith, nor by attachment to more or less dogmatic doctrines.
The right to Valhalla is won by the sword. Only death in
combat guarantees its possession. What follows in the Oera
Linda is practically a chronicle of the history of medieval
Christianity: priests who preached poverty and chastity in
the name of Jesus, but lived very comfortably in their
convents   fornicating,   without   working   a   day   to
anyone;   and
32 The divinity of Jesus was discussed and decreed at the Council of Nicaea, held in
Nicaea in 325 AD; and it was ratified at the Council of Constantinople in 381 AD.a   day   to
anyone;   and
32 The divinity of Jesus was discussed and decreed at the Council of Nicaea, held in
Nicaea in 325 AD; and it was ratified at the Council of Constantinople in 381 AD.

--- PAGE BREAK ---nyone;   and
32 The divinity of Jesus was discussed and decreed at the Council of Nicaea, held in
Nicaea in 325 AD; and it was ratified at the Council of Constantinople in 381 AD.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

52
displaying greater wealth than the decent citizens of the
place. This is a portrait that mirrors the history of the
Christian Church in the Middle Ages. Finally, the Oera
Linda says that this was a doctrine that spread from East to
West and also reached the lands of northern Europe, the
Frisian lands, the country of the authors of these chronicles.
This is exactly the direction in which Christianity spread.
Thus, the identity between one account and another, in all its
lines and aspects, reveals a form of perfect coincidence—
sufficient reason to justifiably suspect their authenticity.
But that is not all. Towards the end, the Oera Linda adds a
text of extraordinary prophetic value. Here it is in its
entirety.
"But when the priests believe they have completely extinguished
the light of Frya and Jes-us, all men who have silently preserved
the truth among themselves, hiding it from the priests, will stand
up. These will be of royal blood (princely blood), priestly blood,
Slavonic blood, and Frya's blood. They will make their light
visible, so that all men will see the truth and exclaim: "Woe to the
deeds of the princes and priests!" The princes who love truth and justice
will separate themselves from the priests; then blood will flow, but
from this the people will gain new strength. The people of Finda
will contribute their industry to the common good, the people of
Lydas their strength, and we our wisdom. Then the false priests
will be swept from the earth. The spirit of Wr-alda may be invoked
everywhere and always. The laws that Wr-alda instilled in our
consciences at the beginning will be the only ones heard. There will
be no princes, no masters, no rulers, except those chosen by the
general voice. Then Frya will rejoice, and the earth will bear fruit
only for those who work it. All this will begin 4,000 years after the
sinking of Âtland, and 1,000s, except those chosen by the
general voice. Then Frya will rejoice, and the earth will bear fruit
only for those who work it. All this will begin 4,000 years after the
sinking of Âtland, and 1,000

--- PAGE BREAK ---en by the
general voice. Then Frya will rejoice, and the earth will bear fruit
only for those who work it. All this will begin 4,000 years after the
sinking of Âtland, and 1,000

--- PAGE BREAK ---

53
years later, all priests and oppression will have disappeared"33
There are many interesting points to discuss regarding these
passages. First, the text refers to a time of oppression. In this
era, the oppressors will believe that they have completely
extinguished the light of Jes-us and Frya. If we omit Jes-us
from this account, considering him to be an interpolation in
what may have been an original narrative, and focus solely on
Frya, this question becomes highly suggestive. Frya is the
goddess of light in the proto-pagan religion of the Germanic
peoples. The Oera Linda says that a time will come when
men who have silently preserved their truth will stand up
and rise against oppression. This time will come when the
priests believe they have completely extinguished the light
of Frya. Is this not our time? They will make the light of
Frya visible again and denounce the acts and vileness of the
princes (the rulers), who will have been colluding with the
priests until then. Now, who are these priests? In our
opinion, those of the Christian churches (including the
Catholic Church) are not. Good rulers will separate
themselves from these ungodly priests. And blood will be
shed - will there be wars? - but from this, the people will
gain new strength and everything will return to its natural
balance. The people of Finda - the Asians - will contribute
to the common good with their technology and industry; the
children of Lyda - the Africans - with their labour; and the
children of Frya with their wisdom. The priests will be
swept from the earth. And all this will begin 4,000 years
after the sinking of Âldland, that is, in the year 1807 of our
era; and it will take another 1,000 years to complete.   Is
this a
33 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians".sinking of Âldland, that is, in the year 1807 of our
era; and it will take another 1,000 years to complete.   Is
this a
33 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter "The True Frisians".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

54
An interesting prophecy. It is not at all identical or similar to
any other in the Christian tradition. This allows us to
imagine it as a text that is completely different from those
we have analysed here previously. And it allows us to
develop our hypothesis in the following paragraphs.
We maintain that the Oera Linda is a hybrid in which some
parts are apocryphal and others highly authentic. It is
possible—and probable—that the traditions of the Germanic
Nordics of ancient Friesland have been preserved by a
family lineage in certain manuscripts, transmitted and
copied from generation to generation over the course of
centuries. It is possible—and also probable—that in these
manuscripts, each new generation has inserted information
different from the original, making this text a hybrid riddled
with anachronisms and thus justifying the accusation of
inauthenticity. After all, unlike other ancient manuscripts,
the Oera Linda, by express admission, is a manuscript that
has been copied and re-copied for two thousand six hundred
years. A n d the probability that in each copy, each new
copyist has not only copied but also interpreted the
information and inserted new things according to their new
background is highly likely. Thus, it is quite possible that
the original text read, in the passage commenting on Tünis'
travels, that he simply reached the northern shores of the
lands of Lyda (Africa), and the copyist, with the new
information available in the 6th century BC, added the word
"Phoenicians". Similarly, references to a sage from
Kasamyr, whose wisdom may have been extremely similar
to that of Jesus, may have led the copyist to identify him
with Jesus, to the point of calling him

--- PAGE BREAK ---eferences to a sage from
Kasamyr, whose wisdom may have been extremely similar
to that of Jesus, may have led the copyist to identify him
with Jesus, to the point of calling him

--- PAGE BREAK ---

55
Jes-us; and to recreate, based on these similarities, the early
history of Christianity. This copyist could have been Liko
Ovira Linda, whose opinion of priests, categorical in every
respect, is not at all far from that held by other
contemporaries of his, such as Aldeberto, Tankelmo, or the
mythical Eun della Stella. I do not rule out the possibility
that there may also have been other more recent additions to
the text. Ljudgêrth's letter, for example, may well be one
such case. This would explain the two different types of
pages that, according to the results of the analyses, the Oera
Linda contains. It would also shed light on the mysteries
surrounding the anachronisms and, incidentally, explain the
coexistence of the various dialects of Old and Modern
Frisian in the same text. If all this were possible, the Oera
Linda would essentially be an authentic text. That is to say,
regardless of the details, the bulk of the stories told remain
highly probable and plausible. The bulk of the Oera Linda
chronicles tells us that there was a Germanic people who
civilised the Mediterranean; and not only the Mediterranean,
but also the lands of our Romanic America; and also distant
India. It adds that this Germanic people originated from a
vanished continent, sunk in the northern seas, which its
inhabitants later called Âldland, Atlantis. And that their
civilisation advanced from West to East, not the other way
around (except in the case of Nêf Inka, who is said to have
marched towards the coasts of the American continent),
bringing with them a completely original culture, traces of
which can still be found today in all corners of the planet.
In line with this argument, the stories about Nêf Tünis and

--- PAGE BREAK ---ringing with them a completely original culture, traces of
which can still be found today in all corners of the planet.
In line with this argument, the stories about Nêf Tünis and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

56
Nêf Inka, Ulysus and Kalip, Minos and Krêtar, the Golen,
the Kåltas (Celts) and the Trowydas (Druids) seem highly
probable; and even what has already been analysed, in
another sense, about Jes-us and Nyhellênja (Min-erva). In
what follows, we will review in detail the conditions of
possibility of all these stories. In some of them, the degree of
coincidence with what has been established by official
historiography is truly surprising. We will begin our
analysis with the well-known stories of Jes-us and Nyhellênja.
Having them fresh in our memory will facilitate the
presentation of what we are trying to communicate. In a
new light, these stories will seem surprisingly different to
us.
Jes-us, the sage of Kasamyr
There is something in the stories about Jesus that we have
not yet noticed. This is of grave importance. The Oera Linda
says that Jesus was a native of the region of Kasamyr and
places this province in the valleys of India. Since ancient
times, there has been a plain between the high mountains in
this region known as Kashmir. Kasamyr and Kashmir are
probably the same place. If this is the case, the Oera Linda
account of Jesus becomes extraordinarily compelling. There
is a tradition, little known in the West, that says Jesus lived
in Kashmir. After surviving the crucifixion and healing his
wounds, Jesus is said to have migrated to northern India in
search of the lost tribes of Israel. There, among the high
mountains, he lived to a very old age. And his tomb, even
today, remains accessible to any visitor. The most
interesting thing about this story, for the purposes of

--- PAGE BREAK ---ong the high
mountains, he lived to a very old age. And his tomb, even
today, remains accessible to any visitor. The most
interesting thing about this story, for the purposes of

--- PAGE BREAK ---

57
prove the authenticity of the Oera Linda, is that it was first
raised in 1902. Before that date, it was completely unknown
in the West, and even in the East. It is true that there was
knowledge of a great sage named Yuzasaf who had lived
around the first century in Kashmir. But it was not until the
early 20th century that he was identified with the person of
Jesus. The first to speak of this was Ghulam Ahmad, the
self-proclaimed messiah and founder of the Ahmadiyya
Muslim community(34) .However, since then, there have
been numerous studies that have emphasised these
similarities.
Tomb of Jesus in Kashmir
34 Before Ghulam Ahmad, a Russian aristocrat and adventurer named Nicholas
Notovitch had written about a probable journey of Jesus to India during the years
when nothing is known about his life. He presented these ideas in a book written in
French entitled La Vie inconnue de Jesus Christ (The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ). In it,
he claimed that during the years Jesus was lost, he travelled to India and was
initiated into Buddhist mysteries. This story was revealed to him in the monastery of
Hamis, in Ladakh, Nepal, where he claims to have found a manuscript narrating the
stories of Issa, a man from the West who studied the teachings of Buddha there.
According to some sources, Ghulam Ahmad was inspired by Notovitch's
information. But their approaches differ on one essential point. While Notovitch
places Jesus in India before beginning his ministry, Ahmad points out that the trip to
India would have taken place after he was saved alive from his crucifixion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---While Notovitch
places Jesus in India before beginning his ministry, Ahmad points out that the trip to
India would have taken place after he was saved alive from his crucifixion.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

58
The Oera Linda was first published in 1872. If it is a
forgery, how could the forgers have known about these
things thirty years before they were first raised? The Frisian
manuscript also says that Jesus was called Kris-en, Bûda
and Fo35. Yuzasaf is the Arabic name for Prince Siddhartha
in the legend of Barlaam and Josaphat. Siddhartha is
Gautama Buddha. In China, this prince was known by the
name Fo. Yuzasaf, Siddhartha, Buddha and Fo are four
names for the same person. Now, the name of Jesus in
Hebrew is Yoshua; in Arabic it is Issa. Yuz Asaf could be a
later evolution of the name Yoshua Issa. All these
coincidences are significant. But there is more. In the tomb
of this emblematic character in India, there is a bas-relief
engraved in the stone in which two feet can be distinguished.
This indicates that it is the tomb of a saint. The tradition of
engraving the "feet" of the deceased on their tomb was, in
ancient times, very popular in Asia. But these engravings
were always accompanied by some distinctive symbol of the
person lying there. For example, on Buddha's tomb, the feet
engraved in the stone have a swastika. On Yuz Asaf's tomb,
the engraved feet show wounds typical of crucifixion. This
cannot be ignored. It is well known that only in Rome were
people crucified - in Rome, or in places occupied by the
Romans. This was not the case in India. There are also
various inscriptions in ancient Arabic on the stone of Yuz
Asaf's tomb. But it is oriented in an east-west direction,
following the
35 The Oera Linda says: "His first name was 'Jes-us', but the priests, who hated him,
called him 'Fo', that is, 'False'. The people called him 'Kris-en', meaning shepherd;
and his Frisian friend called him 'Bûda', because he had a treasure of wisdom in his
head and a treasure of love in his heart." Oera Linda, English version by Hyranio
Garbho, chapter: "The True Frisians".s Frisian friend called him 'Bûda', because he had a treasure of wisdom in his
head and a treasure of love in his heart." Oera Linda, English version by Hyranio
Garbho, chapter: "The True Frisians".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

59
classical Jewish tradition—and not the Arab tradition, which
buries its dead facing Mecca. Whoever lies there could not
have been Hindu either, since in that case his remains would
have been cremated. Next to Yuz Asaf's tomb is another
smaller one, possibly that of his wife. All these are
indications that the hypothesis that Jesus lived and died in
Kashmir may have a very strong basis. If this is the case, the
story told by the Oera Linda about Jesus in Kasamyr makes
sense; and having been proposed prior to the writings of
Notovicth and Ahmad, it cannot be claimed that it is a
forgery or that it was based on these reports. Rather, it
proves that the Oera Linda may be authentic; and that the
Frisian account, like the manuscript from the Hamis
monastery, narrates, in its own way, real events, which they
learned about from different sources.
There is still something else to add. In the previous pages,
we have endeavoured to show that the Frisian account, as
far as the story of Jesus is concerned, may be riddled with
interpolations. We said that these interpolations could be the
work of copyists and not necessarily evidence of
falsification. But there is another side to this. We accuse the
Frisian text of being apocryphal in these passages, based on
the evidence that its account is a carbon copy of the
Christian story – seen, obviously, from a particular point of
view. But this may not be entirely accurate. For if one
compares the story of Jesus' life with that of other divine
messengers, the story of Christianity could well be revealed
to us as plagiarism. This is because the similarities between
them are constant and repetitive. For example, it is said of
the Buddha that: a) he was of royal descent

--- PAGE BREAK ---e revealed
to us as plagiarism. This is because the similarities between
them are constant and repetitive. For example, it is said of
the Buddha that: a) he was of royal descent

--- PAGE BREAK ---

60
(the same is said of Jesus, who is descended from David);
b) who fed multitudes with only five loaves of bread that he
had in a basket (Jesus also multiplied five loaves of bread
from a basket to feed the multitudes); c) who walked on
water (Jesus also walked on water); d) who abolished
idolatry and taught compassion, love, and equality among
men (teachings that also coincide with those given by
Jesus); e) who was called "shepherd" and "carpenter" (Jesus
was also a carpenter and was called a shepherd); and so on.
All these things prove that the Oera Linda account of Jes-us
may be authentic. But they may also support the view that it
is Buddha, and not Jesus, who is being referred to. After all,
at one point, the Oera Linda says about this figure that he
lived five centuries before Christ, which is closer to
corresponding to Buddha than to Jesus. The Jes-us of the
Oera Linda was a native of Kasamyr, a region in India.
Buddha was born in Lumbini, Nepal, north of India, very
close to Kashmir. It is likely that the Frisian account refers
to Buddha and not to the Jewish prophet, whom the Oera
Linda itself calls Bûda and Fo (names historically assigned to
Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha). Moreover, Yuz Asaf is,
as already mentioned, the name of Buddha in medieval Arab
legends. All this is possible and probable. Even the
historical similarity. For if the story about Jes-us seems
similar to that of the historical Jesus, this may be due,
rather, to the latter's resemblance to the Buddha, and not
necessarily to an attempt to parody Christianity (which
would negate Jensma's argument). In short, all these
speculations show how complex these issues are; nothing has
yet been resolved, and anything is possible or probable. As
far as our interest is concerned, this topic is interesting
because itthese
speculations show how complex these issues are; nothing has
yet been resolved, and anything is possible or probable. As
far as our interest is concerned, this topic is interesting
because it

--- PAGE BREAK ---

61
allows us to propose a principle of plausibility for Oera Linda.
After all, the Buddha lying in Kashmir has an engraving on
his tomb of two feet with crucifixion wounds. And although
we admit that the Frisian account may be referring to
Buddha—and not to the historical Jesus—it is striking that
he is named "Jes-us," because that identification only came
about thirty years after the Oera Linda was published. And
even admitting that these events may have been the work of
a copyist—who, after seeing the resemblance between this
Indian figure and Jesus, decided to add the name "Jes-us" to
the story—even admitting this, I say, this copyist must have
gotten this story from somewhere. And wherever that place
was, he must have obtained the information before 1902.
Therefore, the authenticity and originality of his account is
safeguarded in any case.
Nyhellênja and Min-erva
The Oera Linda tells of a priestess from the city of
Walcheren whose name was Minerva—also known as
Nyhellênja by seafarers. It says that she ruled in the Burgh of
Walhallagâra around 1600 BC. Overwhelmed by the
instigations of Kålta, another priestess, she left Walcheren
and set off with Jon, a prince of the sea, to conquer the
Mediterranean. After stopping at many ports—among which
the Oera Linda mentions Thyrhisburgt itself, the city
founded by Tünis (possibly Pantelleria)—they reached the
shores of Greece, which the Frisians call Krêkalânda, and in
a place called Attika Minerva founded a city she named
Athenas. The Oera Linda says:

--- PAGE BREAK ---y Pantelleria)—they reached the
shores of Greece, which the Frisians call Krêkalânda, and in
a place called Attika Minerva founded a city she named
Athenas. The Oera Linda says:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

62
When Jon reached the Mediterranean Sea (...) he sailed his fleet
straight to Lydia (Africa)... but Minerva said: "Do not approach, for here
the air has long been poisoned by the priests" (...) When night fell, Jon
changed course towards distant Krêkalênda (Greece). Finally, they
arrived at a country that looked very arid, but they found a port
there. Here Minerva said: 'Perhaps, in this place, we should not be afraid
of the princes or priests, since they always seek out rich lands' (...) When
Minerva had explored the country called Attika by its inhabitants,
she saw that its people were all goat herders and lived on meat,
wild roots, herbs and honey. They were dressed in skins and lived
on the slopes of the hills, which is why they were called hellingers
(inhabitants of the slopes). At first they fled, but when they knew
we would not attack them, they returned and were very friendly.
Minerva asked them if we could settle there peacefully. This was
accepted on condition that we help them fight their neighbours,
who constantly came to take their children and rob their homes. So
we built a citadel there, a few hours away from the port. On
Minerva's advice, it was named Athenia, as she said that those
who came after us should know that we were not here out of
malice or violence, but that we had been welcomed as friends"(36) .
Beyond the probability or otherwise of this account, there is
something in it that has been verified. The word "Athens"
has no Greek root; however, it does have one in the Frisian
language. In Greek, this word is only used in the plural
form, which also coincides with the Frisian "âtha" – from
which the word "athens" is derived – which is also used in
the plural form and means "friends". But that is not all. The
Frisian story tells us that Minerva was known to sailors as
Nyhellênja. In the Oera Linda, Nyhellênja is sometimes also
called Hêllênja. The name "Hêllênja" evokes the name
"Helena", by which the entire country of the Greeks was
known in the ancient world. This could not have been
invented.
36 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The History of Jon (Part II).
Inscribed in Texland".try of the Greeks was
known in the ancient world. This could not have been
invented.
36 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The History of Jon (Part II).
Inscribed in Texland".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

63
by alleged forgers. The names Nyhellênja and Hêllênja are
practically identical. And it would not be unreasonable to
think that the Greeks owe their name to this Frisian
priestess, later deified in the figure of Athena (which in
Frisian means "friend"), and known in the Roman world as
Minerva.
Votive Altar to Nyhêllênja
Nyhellênja was indeed a Germanic goddess worshipped in
Walcheren, Zeeland (south-west Holland), where more than
160 votive altars dedicated to her are still preserved. She
was also worshipped in Germany, particularly in

--- PAGE BREAK ---orshipped in
Walcheren, Zeeland (south-west Holland), where more than
160 votive altars dedicated to her are still preserved. She
was also worshipped in Germany, particularly in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

64
Colonia, where two altars dedicated to her divinity have
recently been discovered. In most of these altars, the
goddess is depicted as a girl in an apse, either seated on a
throne with a basket of apples beside her, or standing on a
boat, usually accompanied by a dog or a wolf that appears to
be howling beside her. In all these places, Nyhellênja was
venerated as the patron saint of seafarers. The inscriptions
on her altars always refer to these facts. There, sailors
implore her for safety in navigating the North Sea, or thank
her when they have successfully sailed these seas. Other
inscriptions ask or thank Nyhellênja for guarding and
keeping safe the goods of a fleet during navigation. This is a
very interesting fact. Herman Wirth, translator of the Oera
Linda into German, says that the name Min-erva may not be
a name, but a title. Based on the evidence that this goddess
was the guardian of sailors' goods and possessions while
they sailed the seas, Wirth notes that "Minerva" means
precisely this: "My Goods," "My Possessions," "My
Heritage." There is a passage in the Oera Linda itself that
confirms this. There we can read:
When Nyhellênja, whose real name was Minerva, was well established,
and the Krekalander loved her as much as their own people did, some
princes and priests came to her citadel and asked her for a place to
leave their possessions. Hellênja replied: 'I carry my possessions in my own
chest. What I have inherited is the love of wisdom, justice and freedom. If I lose
these, I will become like the vilest of your slaves; now I give you this advice for
nothing, but later I will sell it to you'. The nobles walked away laughing and
saying, 'We are your humble servants, wise Hellênja'. But they went too
far in this, so that the people came to take thisthing, but later I will sell it to you'. The nobles walked away laughing and
saying, 'We are your humble servants, wise Hellênja'. But they went too
far in this, so that the people came to take this

--- PAGE BREAK ---

65
name as a name of honour (as a title?) 37 "
It is likely that the priests went to her to ask where to leave
their possessions because she was the one among sailors
who was responsible for such matters. But she refuses to
look after the priests' possessions because they are
hypocrites and flatterers. Nyhellênja's possessions, however,
are not tangible things. Rather, she safeguards intangible
assets such as wisdom, justice and freedom. These are her
possessions. Herman Wirth notes that in Frisian, 'my
possessions', 'my assets', in the plural, is said to be 'Mina
Erva'. From this it follows, without much difficulty, that this
may have been a title rather than a name. For this reason,
perhaps, Nyhellênja was called Min-erva (note that in
Frisian this name is written with a hyphen separating the
word "Min" from "Erva").
Having established that it is highly probable that Nyhellênja
was indeed called Min-erva, for the reasons given above,
one final question remains to be analysed on this topic. This
concerns the similarity between the name "Min-erva" and
the name "Minerva" given to the well-known Roman
goddess. But it also concerns the unequivocal parallel that
can be drawn between the two goddesses. After all, Minerva
is considered the Roman equivalent of the Greek goddess
Athena, with whom Nyhellênja has already been identified.
The etymology of the name Minerva is lost in the mists of
time and there is no certainty about its origin. Some claim
that this name is Etruscan, but offer no evidence to support
this. The etymology offered
37 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The Writings of Minnos II".

--- PAGE BREAK ---m
that this name is Etruscan, but offer no evidence to support
this. The etymology offered
37 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The Writings of Minnos II".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

66
by Wirth is not only highly satisfactory, but also fully
consistent with many of the characteristics observed in
Nyhellênja—and evidenced by the various inscriptions that
have been preserved on her altars. If this is the case, the
identification between Nyhellênja, Minerva and Athena is
just a step away from being definitively established. That
Minerva and Athena are, archetypically speaking, the same
goddess is beyond question. That Minerva-Athena is the
Germanic goddess Nyhellênja is very likely, according to
the Oera Linda account. For if Minerva does indeed mean, in
the Old Germanic language, "My possessions" or "My
inheritance", and this is a characteristic of Nyhellênja, the
parallel between the two is fully justified. Minerva is not a
Latin word; on the contrary, it is Germanic. Even in modern
German, the expression "My heirs", corresponding to "My
inheritance", is "Meine Erben", which can perfectly well be
understood as a late evolution of "Mine Erva". Nor is the
name Athena Greek; it is Germanic, Frisian - and we have
already seen this. From this we deduce that the Oera Linda
may have some basis in these stories. But, of course, there is
even more.
The Golen, the Kåltas and the Trowydas
The chapters devoted to the Golen, the Kåltas and the
Trowydas are perhaps the most interesting in the Oera
Linda. Above all, because their particular point of view
offers us a completely new perspective on these matters.
Briefly speaking, it has been assumed that the Golen are the
classic Gauls; and that the Kåltas and the Trowydas are,
respectively,   the   Celts   and   the   Druids.   We

--- PAGE BREAK ---ers.
Briefly speaking, it has been assumed that the Golen are the
classic Gauls; and that the Kåltas and the Trowydas are,
respectively,   the   Celts   and   the   Druids.   We

--- PAGE BREAK ---

67
fully share this opinion. But the Oera Linda adds some even
more interesting points that have not yet been given due
consideration. First of all, the name of the golen, its true
origin, and its particular character. It is to this core of issues
that we will devote the following lines.
The first thing that strikes us as relevant is the name of this
group, the word used to designate them, namely "golen".
This word has no Germanic root, and we hardly recognise it
among the sounds that evoke the Frisian language. We
therefore do not know where it might come from. However,
we cannot fail to notice its similarity to words that have
emerged in other linguistic contexts. The name "Golen"
sounds very similar to the word Golem, which in the Jewish
world refers to a creature without a true soul or spirit, made
of inanimate matter, and which is a kind of robot under the
mental control of other beings. This is, for us, extremely
suggestive. In Germanic peoples, what defines a true man is
the spirit. With the expression "golen", the Oera Linda may
be referring to the "people" or "peoples" who, from the point
of view of the Frisian chronicler, were perceived as
"soulless" people. We will return to these curious notes
later. It is worth mentioning other things first in order to
understand the story.
The Oera Linda's first reference to the golen immediately
links them to the trowydas; and it does not speak of them in
terms of a people - as when it refers to the krekalander
(Greeks) or finneses (Finns) - but identifies them as a
priestly caste, who are called

--- PAGE BREAK ---and it does not speak of them in
terms of a people - as when it refers to the krekalander
(Greeks) or finneses (Finns) - but identifies them as a
priestly caste, who are called

--- PAGE BREAK ---

68
"trowydas" for being false and hypocritical. The text clearly
and emphatically states that they came from Sidon—
probably the Phoenician Sidon in distant Lebanon, north of
Palestine. This information is of decisive importance, as it
places the hitherto unknown origin of the Celts—Celts or
Gauls, as they were interchangeably called—in the
Phoenician world. The Oera Linda account says that these
Golen (or Gauls) first arrived in Missellja (presumably
Marseille, or one of the islands in the Mediterranean off its
coast) and wanted to buy it. At the time, no one realised the
enormous mistake that was being made; and it was only
when the Frisians became aware of this that they gave the
island the name Missellja, which means precisely "badly
sold" (38). This is also, incidentally, extremely interesting.
But let us take it one step at a time. According to the Oera
Linda,the golen were missionary priests from Sidon. This is
a very important piece of information. This city, founded in
the third millennium BC, was originally one of the most
important enclaves in the Phoenician world. Comparable
only to Tyre, which was in fact older, Sidon was, in the
early days of primitive Phoenicia, the most important city in
the entire northern region of Palestine. If the
38 The etymology of the word "Missellja", as Wirth has rightly suggested, lies in the
combination of the words "mis" and "sellja". "Mis" is a prefix which, in Frisian as in
English, is used to negate or signify the opposite of the root word it accompanies.
Examples: "Misspell" (to spell incorrectly), "Misbehave" (to behave badly), "Miscount"
(to make a mistake in a calculation); "sellja" in Old Frisian means "sale" or "to sell" (as
in English "sell"). Hence, the etymology of the word "Missellja" is "badly sold" or
"sold by mistake". It is interesting to note that the German word for "to sell" is
"verkaufen", which in a figurative sense can also mean "deception".
39 It is striking that the text uses the term "missionaries" to refer to these priests from
Sidon. The missionary profile fits perfectly with what we know about Christians, but
not with what we know about European peoples before the arrival of Christianity." to refer to these priests from
Sidon. The missionary profile fits perfectly with what we know about Christians, but
not with what we know about European peoples before the arrival of Christianity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---priests from
Sidon. The missionary profile fits perfectly with what we know about Christians, but
not with what we know about European peoples before the arrival of Christianity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

69
Oera Linda is correct, and the golen were indeed priests of
Phoenician origin, thus establishing the Phoenician origin of
the druids as well. This is a very important issue and,
incidentally, a hypothesis of considerable proportions.
The Oera Linda leaves no doubt that the Golen were
Phoenicians. It states this clearly and repeatedly in multiple
passages. In one particularly significant passage, we read
the following:
"The Romans, moreover, lived in enmity with the Phonisjar
(Phoenicians); and their priests, the Roman priests, who wished to
assume sole rule of the world, could not tolerate the unpleasant
Golen. First they took Mis-sellja (Marseille) from the Phonisjar -
and then all the countries to the south, west and north, as well as
the southern part of Britanja (Britain) - always driving away the
Phonisjar priests, that is, the Golen, thousands of whom sought refuge in
northern Britanja."(40)
And in another equally interesting passage, we read:
The golen, as the missionary priests of Sidon were called, had realised that
the land was sparsely populated and that they were far from the
Volkmoder. In order to make a favourable impression, they called
themselves, in our language, the 'seekers of truth'; but they would have
been better off calling themselves 'inhibitors of truth', or in a shorter form
'Trjuwendne', as our seafaring people later called them"(41) .
This establishes the true origin of the Golens (Gauls). And
with that, also, the origin of the Trowydas (Druids).
Regarding the Kåltas (Celts), the Oera Linda says that they
were of Germanic origin, but ultimately corrupted by
40 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "Fragment".
The
parentheses, italics and underlining are ours.
41 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The Golen". The italics and
underlining are ours.Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "Fragment".
The
parentheses, italics and underlining are ours.
41 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The Golen". The italics and
underlining are ours.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

70
the Gauls. These statements are corroborated by official
historiography if properly consulted. We know, for
example, according to these sources, that the "Gauls" were
originally known as "Celts" and that it was only from the
Romans onwards that they were called "Gauls". The Greeks
called all peoples who, in their opinion, were "beyond" any
land known to them "Celts" (keltoi - κελτοι). Thus, the
keltoi or "Celts" were the peoples who inhabited the regions
"beyond" the Alps, "beyond" the Ligures, "beyond" the
Pillars of Hercules, "beyond" the Northern Lights (which we
do not know why the Greeks knew about). This led the
Greeks to identify the "Celts" with the Hyperboreans. And
they were probably right, if the "Celts" were, as we indeed
believe, the Germanic peoples who survived from the lost
Âldland or Atlantis.
But the Golen were something else. The Oera Linda tells us
that the Golen arrived in Europe, settling first in Missellja
(Marseille), an island they had purchased. They were not
strictly speaking a people, but rather a caste of Phoenician
missionary priests. We have already said enough about this
in the preceding lines. But what we have not said is how
they came to identify themselves with the Kåltas (Celts).
The Oera Linda tells us of a priestess named Syrhed who
ruled in Flyburgt around 1600 BC. She was a priestess of
dark dealings, whose rivalry with Nyhellênja (Minerva) led
her to wage war. The Oera Linda describes her as jealous
and scheming, but also says that she was very beautiful and
highly
intelligent.
Her
advice
was
obscure
and
incomprehensible, which is why the sailors called her Kålta.
She hated Minerva because she

--- PAGE BREAK ---s that she was very beautiful and
highly
intelligent.
Her
advice
was
obscure
and
incomprehensible, which is why the sailors called her Kålta.
She hated Minerva because she

--- PAGE BREAK ---

71
She always won everyone's favour, and she wanted to be
more than her. Frustrated at not achieving this, she went to
the Mâgjares to learn tricks of witchcraft. And when she
knew enough, she left with the Golen, but this did not work
either. She also became enemies with Jon, the legendary
king of the sea of Âlderga, and suffered his attacks when
Flyburgt was burned down. She managed to escape, but the
lamp(42)  of her city and some priestesses remained under
Jon's power. During her escape, some villages in the region
dominated by the Scheldt River joined her. And the war
between Kålta and Minerva was then fiercer than ever.
Parallel to these events, some golen had taken their boats
and sailed along the Mediterranean coast from Missellja to
Kâdik, and from Kâdik to Brittanja. But they were unable to
influence the government of this region, because it was
strong and because its inhabitants were still "Children of
Frya". The Oera Linda says that Brittanja was then an island
to which all Frisians who had been tried for common crimes
or offences against the laws of Frya were sent into exile.
There they had to pay for their crimes by extracting iron or
tin from the mines. According to the Oera Linda, they were
a relatively large population. The Golen first approached
them. But they could do nothing to influence them, for
despite being exiles there, they remained steadfast in their
loyalty to the people of Frya. Then Kålta came and
harangued them, promising them greatness and freedom if
they followed him to the mainland and proclaimed him their
Volkmoder.   They did as he asked.
42 In the Frisian belief revealed in the Oera Linda, possession of a lamp lit with the
flames of the original lamp in Texland guarantees the survival of a people, a nation
and a city. Without its presence, nothing has value; nothing is considered true. By
losing the lamp of Flyburgt, Syrhed was condemned to be a false priestess; and
therefore, neither her advice nor her visions would have any validity.othing has value; nothing is considered true. By
losing the lamp of Flyburgt, Syrhed was condemned to be a false priestess; and
therefore, neither her advice nor her visions would have any validity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---thing is considered true. By
losing the lamp of Flyburgt, Syrhed was condemned to be a false priestess; and
therefore, neither her advice nor her visions would have any validity.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

72
she told them; and thus Kålta took control of the states south
of Friesland as far as the Sêjene (the River Seine). In the
highlands of these lands, she built a city which she called
Kåltasburg (now Carnac in France)(43)  ,from where she
ruled as Volkmoder, despite fierce opposition from its
inhabitants, who from then on were called "kåltas", meaning
inhabitants of the city of Kåltasburgt. The Golens then
dominated Brittanja, which had been left not only
depopulated (with very few Frisian inhabitants), but also
without priestesses or true lamps. The Oera Linda puts it
this way:
The Golen gradually gained control over all of Brittanja. This was
partly because there were no longer any citadels there, but also
because they no longer had any Burgtmaagden. And thirdly,
because their lamps were not real. Because of all this, the people
stopped learning. And they became stupid and clumsy. And,
having allowed the Golen to steal their weapons, they were led
around like bulls with a ring in their nose"(44) .
This is how the golen became strong in Brittanja and, a
thousand years later, taking advantage of the internal
quarrels of the Frisians over the election of a new Êrêmoder,
they took possession of the lands of the continent and easily
defeated the weakened (morally weakened) children of Frya.
The Frisian account tells us thus:
After Mâgy was murdered and Fryasburg had been restored, a new
Êrêmoder was chosen. My mother was chosen, but she refused to
be the Volkmoder (...) all the other priestesses
43 This city was known at the time of the Oera Linda chronicler as Kêren-åk, and
corresponds to the present-day city of Carnac in France, famous for its megalithic
constructions, particularly its menhirs.
44 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The History of Jon".sponds to the present-day city of Carnac in France, famous for its megalithic
constructions, particularly its menhirs.
44 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The History of Jon".

--- PAGE BREAK ---t-day city of Carnac in France, famous for its megalithic
constructions, particularly its menhirs.
44 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The History of Jon".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

73
They then wanted to be the Volkmoder. Each state took sides with
its own Burgtmaagd and would not yield on this point (...) Such
proceedings led to disputes between the states, and thus the bond
that united them was broken. The people of one State became
jealous of the people of the other States, or at least came to regard
them as foreigners. As a result, the Golen or Trowydas took
possession of our lands as far as the Skelda, and the Mâgjars as far
as the Wrsâra"(45) .
It is likely, based on these facts, that the Golens first settled
in Belgium and then in France. After all, the colony they
maintained in Marseille continued to exist. Later, some
groups of them migrated to the Alps, settling in Switzerland
and then in northern Italy. Official historiography tells us
that the Gauls were an extraordinarily nomadic, mobile
people (or group of peoples) who were constantly migrating.
This fits perfectly with what is recounted in the Oera Linda.
The Phoenician peoples were also astonishingly mobile. In
short, inhabiting the regions that had once been occupied by
the Kåltas (Celts), the Golen could very well have been
confused with them. And in fact, the Oera Linda says that
the Golen corrupted the language of the Kåltas, most likely
because they settled among them.
When the Romans arrived in the regions that the Greeks said
were inhabited by Celts (keltoi), they found only Golen, or
Kåltas corrupted by the Golen (to the point that, in essence,
they too had become Golen). That is why they called them
"Gauls" and not "Celts". This explains why they are
confused; and it also explains why there are, among the
Druids, whose religion is eminently Golian (and by
45 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The First Writing".hy they are
confused; and it also explains why there are, among the
Druids, whose religion is eminently Golian (and by
45 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The First Writing".

--- PAGE BREAK ---d; and it also explains why there are, among the
Druids, whose religion is eminently Golian (and by
45 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The First Writing".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

74
so much so, Phoenician), so many discernible elements of
the Germanic proto-religion (originally of Celtic descent).
Thus, according to the Oera Linda, the golen of Phoenician
origin, nicknamed trowydas (literally "inhibitors of truth",
i.e., "false"), managed to corrupt the kåltas (Celts), giving
rise to a monstrous culture (the Oera Linda expresses itself
in these terms about the religion of the golen-trowydas),
which only managed to impose itself due to the internal
deficiencies and rivalries (weakening of morals) of the
Frisians themselves.
The Oera Linda's opinion of the golen-trowydas is dire. It
describes them as deceitful and unreliable; prone to trickery
(dishonesty); cunning and devious; inclined to live by
deception, deceit, trickery, artifice and treachery. To get an
idea of the visceral nature of these opinions, let us read a
passage from the Oera Linda that summarises the
description of the golen. The passage is taken from the
chapter entitled "The Golen", and reads as follows:
The golen celebrated all kinds of vile and monstrous festivals,
which were promoted by the inhabitants of the coast, with their
lascivious women and their sweet, poisonous wines. If any of our
people (the Kåltas) behaved in such a way as to endanger their
lives, the Golen provided them with refuge and sent them to
Phonisja (Phoenicia)... Once they had settled there, they made them
write to their family, friends and contacts, telling them that the
country was so good and the people so happy that no one could
imagine it. In Brittanja there are many men, but few women.
When the golen learned this, they brought girls there from all over
and gave them to the Britons for nothing. But all these girls served
their purpose of stealing children from Wr-alda and giving them to
the false gods"(46) .
46 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The Golen".r nothing. But all these girls served
their purpose of stealing children from Wr-alda and giving them to
the false gods"(46) .
46 Oera Linda, Spanish version by Hyranio Garbho, chapter: "The Golen".

--- PAGE BREAK ---

75
In other passages, the Oera Linda describes these famous
religious celebrations of the golen in greater detail. Needless
to say, they do not rule out ritual sacrifice and bloodshed.
All this is abominable in the eyes of a Frisian. Hence the use
of epithets such as "execrable" and "monstrous" to describe
the Golen. But the most relevant aspect of all this is not
stated in the Oera Linda, although it can be perfectly
deduced from it. Let us see.
There is a famous tradition linked to the legends of the Grail,
according to which Joseph of Arimathea, a wealthy Jewish
dignitary from the time of Jesus, arrived in Marseille with
Mary, Martha and Magdalene, carrying a strange object said
to contain the blood of the Nazarene. Why Marseille? What
was so interesting about Marseille that these fugitives from
Christianity came there? What hidden links connected them to
the golen? Tradition says that after staying there for a while,
Joseph of Arimathea took the Grail to Britain. Why Britain?
What was there in Britain that was not found anywhere else
in the world? According to the Oera Linda, Marseille and
Britain were the only two places on the planet where the
Golen ruled most extensively, through their priests (or
trowydas - druids). The origin of the druids' presence on the
island is lost in the mists of time. We only know that they
were already there around the 8th or 7th century BC, and that
there were also druids in France and other parts of Europe -
and even in Turkish Galatia. The latter is also relevant, since
we know that Paul of Tarsus, the founder of Christianity,
also went there, as one of his favourite regions, where he
sought t o c o n v e r t the Galatians.

--- PAGE BREAK ---also relevant, since
we know that Paul of Tarsus, the founder of Christianity,
also went there, as one of his favourite regions, where he
sought t o c o n v e r t the Galatians.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

76
Is it necessary to explain that the Galatians were Gauls
(golen) who migrated from central Europe to Anatolia in
Asia Minor (Turkey)? Why did Paul address them? We do
not know. But we are intrigued by the synchronicity
between these two emissaries of Christianity and their
predilection for bringing their message (the Grail, in the case
of the former) to regions once inhabited by Gauls (golen) and
Trowydas (Druids).
If all this holds water and the Oera Linda is an authentic
text, then we should also consider the distortions of the
history of the Grail, which became the cup of Jesus in the
Celtic (Golian-Druidian) world and was rescued for the
Germanic world as the fallen stone from Lucifer's crown by
the renowned German poet Wolfram von Eschenbach. But
the story of Christ could also perfectly well be a pagan myth
(there is overwhelming evidence of this today), manipulated
by the Golens and confused, if not mixed up, with the stories
of an obscure preacher from Galilee. All this is possible and
probable.
Before closing our chapter on the Golen, we would like to
briefly revisit an idea raised at the beginning of this
exposition. There we said that the word "Golen" may find
its etymology in the word "golem", which means "soulless
creature" (that is, a "formless" being, artificially created from
inanimate matter, without spirit). We do not know the origin
of the word.   We also do not know whether this was an
endonym among the Gauls (or golen), or whether they
received this name from others, but did not call themselves
that. The Oera Linda does not clarify anything in this
regard. But if this were an exonym (even if the word may
have originally been Golian), and they had been called   by
by   the   Frisians,   it would be   interesting.ot clarify anything in this
regard. But if this were an exonym (even if the word may
have originally been Golian), and they had been called   by
by   the   Frisians,   it would be   interesting.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

77
Then, too, we can discern, in the echo of the word, the
deeper thought that these Frisians must have formed about
them. This is speculation, no doubt. But it is interesting
speculation, especially when we consider what the Frisian
chroniclers expressly dare to say about the Golens, the
Gauls, and the Druids.
9) Wodin, Nêf Tünis and Nêf Inka
The Oera Linda tells of three legendary cousins whose
exploits are memorable to the Frisian people. Their names
were Wodin, Tünis and Inka. Wodin, the eldest of them,
lived in Lumkamâkja; Tünis and Inka were natives of
Aldergâmude. The Oera Linda recounts that these cousins
would distinguish themselves as brave warriors in the
conflagration that pitted the Frisians against the Mâgjars and
Finns. Called to war by the Êrêmoder Minna in Ast-flylând,
the young warriors gathered and appointed Wodin as their
military leader. Tünis was appointed head of the naval
forces, and Inka was elected admiral. The ships then set sail
for Denmark, carrying Wodin and his powerful army on
board. The war went well for the three cousins, and they
managed to defeat the evil Mâgy, the natural leader of the
Mâgyars. But the Oera Linda says that, through deception,
flattery and magic spells, Mâgy managed to soften Wodin's
character and win him over to his side. He offered him his
own daughter in marriage; and through the use of magic
herbs, he managed to make Wodin renounce Frya and Wr-
alda. Over time, Mâgy gained absolute control over him;
because Wodin, a good warrior in

--- PAGE BREAK ---riage; and through the use of magic
herbs, he managed to make Wodin renounce Frya and Wr-
alda. Over time, Mâgy gained absolute control over him;
because Wodin, a good warrior in

--- PAGE BREAK ---

78
In essence, he could be strong and brave, but he was not
clairvoyant. At least, that is what the Frisian manuscript
says about him. His reign lasted six years, and then he
disappeared. Mâgy said that he had ascended to heaven. His
son, the son of Wodin, then reigned as his heir. But as he
was not old enough for the position, Mâgy, who was his
grandfather (remember that his daughter had married
Wodin), took over as king again.
Tünis and Inka met a different fate. For reasons that the
Oera Linda does not explain, when Tünis and Inka decided
to return home, they were unable to dock at any port in old
Friesland. The Volkmoder in Texland had forbidden them to
do so. This forced the two cousins to steer their ships
towards the coast of Cadiz, near the Strait of Gibraltar, where
they stocked up on food and various supplies. The Oera
Linda recounts that Tünis wanted to sail the Mediterranean,
but Inka wanted to head for the western seas, where he
thought he might find the remains of the lost Âldland, which,
due to its height, would not have sunk. Unable to reach an
agreement, they decided to go their separate ways. Inka set
sail westward and sailed into the depths of the Atlantic
Ocean. The Oera Linda recounts that nothing more was ever
heard of him. Tünis, on the other hand, crossed the Strait of
Gibraltar and sailed the Mediterranean.
The story of Tünis, the legendary Frisian king of the sea, has
already been recounted, in part, in this study. To summarise,
let us say that he sailed to the Phoenician coast and founded a
city there in honour of Tyr, which he called Thyrsburgt. He
made good economic deals with the Phoenicians,
particularly with the inhabitants of Sidon, which made him
enormously wealthy

--- PAGE BREAK ---ere in honour of Tyr, which he called Thyrsburgt. He
made good economic deals with the Phoenicians,
particularly with the inhabitants of Sidon, which made him
enormously wealthy

--- PAGE BREAK ---

79
and earning him great fame as ruler of the entire
Mediterranean. Towards the end of his life, he returned to
Friesland laden with riches. There he was received with
honours. He was considered such a great king that they
could not help but deify him upon his death. They called him
"Cousin Tunis" - in Frisian Nêf Tünis - and consecrated him
as the eternal god of the seas and oceans.
The similarity between Nêf Tünis and Neptune, the god of
the sea in Roman mythology, is evident. The parallel
between Wodin and Odin, the mythical warrior god of
Scandinavian
mythology—called
Wotan
among
the
Germanic peoples, a name that effectively derives from
Wodin—is also obvious. There are, of course, certain
discrepancies in these parallels. Wodin, for example, is
described as a strong and brave warrior, but one who lacked
wisdom. This contrasts sharply with what we know of Odin
or Wotan, whose wisdom brought about the unveiling of the
runes, and who drank from Mimer's well. The same can be
said of Tünis. But the most interesting case of the three
cousins, perhaps because of our geographical position, is
that of Inka or Nêf Inka, who sailed to the western seas and
was never heard from again. Given his name, it is very
difficult not to associate him with the Incas. And if the
Oera Linda says that he sailed to the western seas in search
of some refuge from Atlantis, we are even more compelled to
draw this parallel.
There is abundant information about the presence of the
White Gods in America. Much of this information has been
provided by Spanish chroniclers themselves. When they
arrived in America, they encountered stories everywhere
about enchanted cities in the Andes

--- PAGE BREAK ---ch of this information has been
provided by Spanish chroniclers themselves. When they
arrived in America, they encountered stories everywhere
about enchanted cities in the Andes

--- PAGE BREAK ---

80
inhabited by "White Gods". Paititi, Elelín, Aztlan, Thule,
Kalasasaya are just a small sample of these legends. The
Aztecs, for example, said that Quetzalcóatl had come from an
island in the eastern seas called Aztlan. The god came there
as a bearer of culture, but horrified by the bloody sacrifices,
he left, although he promised to return one day. This legend
of the white god who promises to return one day is also
repeated in the Peruvian-Bolivian Andes. There, the god is
known as Viracocha. Is Viracocha a kind of Peruvian
Quetzalcoatl? Or better still: are both Viracocha and
Quetzalcoatl evocations of a Frisian sailor who sailed the
Atlantic seas in search of the remains of his lost homeland,
Âldland, which the Oera Linda calls Nêf Inka?
In this sense, are the Incas descendants of these Frisian
sailors who arrived in America under the command of Nêf
Inka, probably around 2000 BC? An interesting analysis
carried out in England on three Inca mummies found in
royal tombs revealed that their blood composition did not
fully match the blood patterns of the native indigenous
population. The Incas flourished in Peru around the 13th
century. It is likely that a line of descent was maintained
from the distant days of Nêf Inka, whose name evokes the
title given to the emperor, until the time of the Incas'
appearance on the historical scene. If this is the case, we
could satisfactorily explain the striking cultural similarities
(in terms of social organisation and laws) that persist between
them and the ancient Frisians. Robert Scrutton has detailed
all these aspects in his book on the Other Atlantis. We can
only marvel at and take pleasure in this. After all, the
presence of the Vikings in America   -like   the   of
other   Germanic peoples      andaspects in his book on the Other Atlantis. We can
only marvel at and take pleasure in this. After all, the
presence of the Vikings in America   -like   the   of
other   Germanic peoples      and

--- PAGE BREAK ---

81
Scandinavians—has already been extensively proven by
other interesting studies and research carried out since the
1950s. In our opinion, they say what is otherwise attested to
in the Oera Linda. For them, the Frisian text serves as yet
another piece of evidence among the countless pieces of
evidence of the presence of these peoples in America.
i Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free
Documentation License, Version 1.2 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the licence is included in the section
entitled GNU Free Documentation License.