Source note (Tower of Babel staging): James Augustus Grant, A Walk Across Africa; or, Domestic Scenes from my Nile Journal (Edinburgh/London: William Blackwood & Sons, 1864). Text from Internet Archive item walkacrossafrica00gran (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

aS


“= teen % . . : : . . : eo read
7 scsi Spiess : ot es Z = - oe P Pe AotW 2 Ra EE ate netess - . a - : : : : wot tonne anh aaseg ml 7


| J.. G. FOTHERINGHAM
Bookseller et news agent
ENGLISH & AMERICAN


PERIODICALS & REVIEWS
8, Rue Neuve-des-Capucines, Paris.


’ ty Ee ee a bat ca CK


Oe > =, 7,


A WALK ACROSS AFRICA
bo aS
Wee prue LE )
Pe heck Jé F y,


A WALK ACROSS AFRICA


OR


DOMESTIC SCENES FROM MY
NILE JOURNAL


BY


JAMES AUGUSTUS GRANT


CAPTAIN H.M. BENGAL ARMY


FELLOW AND GOLD-MEDALLIST OF THE ROYAL
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY


WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS
EDINBURGH AND LONDON
MDCCCLXIV


The Right of Translation is reserved


TO


THE MEMORY OF


JOHN HANNING SPEKE,


THE DISCOVERER OF THE SOURCE OF THE NILE,


THIS VOLUME,
A RECORD OF MANY HAPPY DAYS SPENT TOGETHER
IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES, IS AFFECTIONATELY
AND MOURNFULLY INSCRIBED BY


J. A. GRANT.


We yi
yt


nbn


Dt elinat
has iig


PREFACE,


Ir is not without considerable anxiety and reluctance
that this volume is submitted to the public. Having
contributed my botanical notes, drawings, and meteor-
ological registers to Captain Speke, I never dreamt of
a separate publication. My Journal, however, was a
very copious one, daily entries having been made
during our expedition ; and some personal friends see-
ing these notes, conceived that a selection from them,
describing domestic scenes in Central Africa, might
not be unacceptable. The geographical part of the
expedition, and its brillant result, had been fully
treated by my lamented fellow-traveller ; but further
details as to the ordinary life and pursuits, the habits
and feelings of the natives, and the products of the
country, appeared likely to possess a certain degree
of interest, if not of value. This opinion was en-


tertamed by Captain Speke himself, who addressed .


Vill PREFACE.


to me the following request and advice on the
subject :—
**79 ECCLESTON SQUARE, 1st June 1864.


“My DEAR GRANT,—I really wish you would write your
experiences in Central Africa, from Kazé to Gondokoro. In
doing so, try as much as possible to give, relatively, a corre-
sponding valuation to each succeeding country, in the order
in which you passed through them—I mean, as regards the
products and the capabilities of the countries, the density of
their populations, and the different natures of the people, as
well as the causes affecting them. Personal anecdotes, espe-
cially illustrative of the superstitious inclinations of the peo-
ple, will be most interesting. But nothing can be of such
permanent value to the work as a well-defined account of the
rainy system and its operation upon vegetable life, showing
why the first three degrees of north latitude are richer than
the first three in the south, and how it happens that the
further one goes from the equator, the poorer the countries
become from want of moisture. I maintain that all true
rivers in Africa—not nullahs—which do not rise in the
flanking coast ranges, can only have their fountains on the
equator ; but the people of this country have not learned to
see it yet—Yours ever sincerely,

“J. H. SPEKE.”


I shall not attempt to comment upon the rain-sys-
tem of the elevated land we traversed at the equator,
but merely remark that in this region fruitful showers
were constantly falling like dew. The influence of
these showers was, that although the flora was not so
tropical as in countries which are at a far lower ele-


vation, and though this quarter of the globe, from all


PREFACE. 1X


accounts, receives less rain than any other portion of
the equator, still the country might be termed a gar-
den of fertility and richness.

My acquaintance with Captain Speke commenced
as far back as 1847, when he was serving in India
with his regiment. We were both Indian officers, of
the same age, and equally fond of field-sports, and our
friendship continued unbroken. After his return from
discovering the Victoria Nyanza, he was, as is well
known, commissioned by the Royal Geographical
Society to prosecute his discovery, and to ascertain,
if possible, the truth of his conjecture—that the Nile
had its source in that gigantic lake, the Nyanza. I
volunteered to accompany him; my offer was at once
accepted; and it is now a melancholy satisfaction to
think that not a shade of jealousy or distrust, or even
ill-temper, ever came between us during our wander-
ings and intercourse.

The advice of my friend, as given in the above
letter, comcided with my own views. The scenes
and descriptions here recorded are from life —tran-
scripts from my Journal made on the spot, without
any reference to books, or any attempt at embellish-
ment. Some of the details may appear triflime—all
of them are very imperfectly related ; but they are at
least true, and they will help, I trust, to render my
countrymen more familiar with the interior life of


Africa, to which Livingstone and Speke have re-


x PREFACE.


cently imparted fresh interest, and to which the
attention of Christian philanthropists is now turned.

The plants which I had the pleasure of gathering
during our expedition consisted of above seven hun-
dred species, fully eighty of which were quite new
to science. ‘The most useful are noticed in this vol-
ume; and the whole collection has been presented to
the noble Herbarium of Kew Gardens.

The title chosen for my narrative was suggested by
a circumstance which I may perhaps be pardoned for
mentioning, as it forms one of many kind favours
received from Sir Roderick I. Murchison, K.C.B.,
the able and zealous President of the Royal Geo-
oraphical Society. Last season Sir Roderick did me
the honour to introduce me to Her Majesty’s first
Minister, Viscount Palmerston, and on that occasion
his Lordship good-humouredly remarked, “ You have
had a long walk, Captain Grant!” The saying was
one well fitted to be remembered and to be told
again; and my friendly publishers and others recom-
mended that it should form the leading title of my
book.


DINGWALL, ROssS-SHIRE,
December 1, 1864.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.


Embark at Plymouth for the Cape—Madeira—Rio de Janeiro—Simon’s
Bay—Sail for Zanzibar—Capture of a slave-vessel and 500 slaves
—Land at Zanzibar on the 108th day after departure from Eng-
land, : : : ‘ ; : :


CHAPTER IL


Zanzibar—The slave-market—Chmate and produce of the island—
Trade and shipping—Decapitation of two murderers—Our party
proceed to the mainland of Africa,


CHAPTER III.


Journey to Kazeh, 500 miles in the interior — Escort and casualties
on the march—Cross the East African chain into Ugogo—Climate
and diseases of Kazeh—Agriculture and products—Wild animals,
birds, and fish— Four native races, the Wazaramo, Wasagara,
Wagogo, and Wanyamuezi,


CHAPTER IV.


Sojourn at Kazch, lat. 5° S., long. 33° E.—Province of Unyanyembe
—Crops, cattle, &e.—Moossah, an Indian trader, his wives, attend-
ants, and cowherds—-The Watusi— Disastrous effects of war—
Moossah’s account of the northern kingdom,


CHAPTER V.


Journey to Ukuni—Difficulties at starting—Picturesque country—
Attacks of fever— Trees and fruit— Mode of making bark-cloth—
—Natural history—Native club-house—Dances and games—De-
scription of a Sultan—Women of the country—Slaves in irons—
Release of a slave—Native cookery—The negro on parade,


PAGE


ll


44


Xil CONTENTS.


CHAPTER VI.
PAGE
Village life at Ukuni, May 27 to September 12, 1861—The country
well cultivated and wooded— The seasons, winds, &c. — Blind
musicians—F'ood of the natives—Women at harvest—Coinage and
manufactures—Flora of Ukuni—Domestic and wild animals—Sin-
gular ceremony with a dead lion—Attack of ants—Sultan and Sul-
tana of Ukuni—African women are good mothers—Drum music
—Superstitions—System of brotherhood, . : : ; $1


CHAPTER VIL.


Ukuni to Karague, September 12 to November 25, distance 200 miles
—Commencing the journey—Attacked on the march—The Watuta
race—The country between Ukuni and Karague—Waterfall—Vol-
canic mounds—The king of birds—The Wanyambo—The Walinga,
or workers in iron—A native beauty—Language of the country, 111


CHAPTER VIII.


Karague, November 25 to April 14, 1862—The royal family—Habits
of the Sultan Rumanika—Crusader-like custom at new moon—
Idolatry—The Sultan’s brothers—Description of Karague and its
neighbourhood— Illness of the author— English garden pease—
Markets, coffee-traders—Earliest information regarding the Nile—
The two races of Karague, the Wahuma and Wanyambo—the Prin-
cesses—Royal residence-—-Musical instruments, . : paar


CHAPTER IX.


The Uganda march, April 14 to May 27, 1862—Mariboo and his
Uganda followers—Rich foliage—Ferrying the river Kitangule—
Superstition against sounding the river—Victoria Nyanza, a bound-
less sea—Fine country between Kitangule and Kitonga—Flora of
the district—Incidents of the march—Lunch with Uganda woman
—Disagreeable march—The governor Pokinno—Summer-houses of
the Uganda, s : : . . ; . 188


CHAPTER X.


Uganda, May 27 to July 7, 1862—Meeting with Captain Speke—Aud-
ience with the King of Uganda—The Queen’s drawing-room—The
detective system—The executioners—Stick drill—Ingenious work-
men in Uganda—A storm, : ; , : PAKS)


CONTENTS. Xi


CHAPTER XI.
PAGE
Uganda to Unyoro capital, 7th July till 9th September 1862—First
stage, camps united, Uganda to Karee—The cattle and sport of
the country—One of the Seedees killed by the natives—Budja, the
chief native officer—Musical instruments—Captain Speke proceeds
to the Lake Nyanza—Antelope-shooting—Difficulties in the way of
the author’s advance—Speke returns, and the camps are united—
Elephant-hunt in Unyoro, . : ‘ 5 ; . 236


CHAPTER XII.


The capital or palace of Unyoro, September 9 to November 9, 1862,
latitude 1° 37’ north, longitude 32° 19’ east—Topography of the
country—lIts climate, soil, and animals—King Kamarasi and his
wives—Class of mendicants—Arms used by the Wanyoro—Their
food and drink—A blacksmith’s shop—Amusements of the na-


tives—The expedition embark on the Nile, Pari)
CHAPTER XIII.

Journey from Unyoro capital to an Egyptian camp, November 9 to
December 3, 1862—Floating islands on the Nile—River scenes and
canoe chase—The people civil and hospitable—Dwellings and
orchards of the natives—Waterfalls at Karuma—Fishing and hip-
popotamus trap—Ferry the Nile, and cross an uninhabited forest—
Join an encampment of Turks, : ; : 3 . 3801

CHAPTER XIV.

From December 3, 1862, to January 11, 1863—Faloro, latitude 3° 15’ N.
—The Toorkees or Turks—Regimental parade—Moonlight dance
—Products of Faloro—Wild animals—Miani’s tree at Apuddo—
Author hears of the death of Captain Speke—Preparations for

entering the Bari country, . : : : i . 3827


CHAPTER XV.


Passage through the Bari—Poisoned streams—Gondokoro—Meeting
with Mr Samuel Baker—Mr and Mrs Petherick arrive at Gondo-
koro—Trade and traders—The Nile, and mode of ferrying it—
Embark in Baker’s boats for Khartoom, . 5 : . 9361


X1V CONTENTS.


CHAPTER XVI.
PAGE
Gondokoro to Khartoom, from 26th February till 30th March 1863
—Leave Gondokoro by boat—The Shir country— Austrian mission-
station at Kitch—The rivers Bahr-el-Ghazal, Bahr-Giraffe, and
Sobat—The Shillook country—Banks of the Nile—Arab settlement
of El Eis—Entry into civilised country—Arrival at Khartoom, . 374


CHAPTER XVII


Khartoom, from 30th March till 15th April 1863—The Blue Nile—-
Natural products—Ali Bey—Khartoom a cantonment for troops
—Its bazaars and manufactures—The Coptic church—The Austrian
mission-house—Kgyptian remains—Departure by boat for Berber, 401


CHAPTER XVIII.


Khartoom to Cairo—The Gherri pass—Ruins at Scendi—The Pyramids
and ruins of Meroe—The river Atbara—The town of Berber—Scenes
across the desert—The village of Aboo Ahmed— The false sea, or
Bahr Belama—Natron wells—Extraordinary natural tunnel—Ko-
rosko—Cairo—England, : ; ‘ ‘ : . 420


MAP or tHe ROUTE or CAPTAINS SPEKE anp GRANT across
AFRICA, FRoM ZANZIBAR TO THE MEDITERRANEAN,—in a Pocket in
Cover of the Volume.


M’GANDA WARRIOR SALUTING,—on the Cover of the Volume.


EXPLANATION OF NAMES AND TERMS.


Ambadj ; native name for the pith-tree, which lines the banks of the
Nile about 7° north latitude.

Bajra ; the Indian name for a grain (Penicillaria spicata), grown in
Africa.

Byre ; the jujube-tree, Zyzyphus jujuba, called M’konazee in Wasua-
hili language, and Kalembo by Wezees. The fruit is the size of a
marble, with a hard sweet-tasting rind and large stone. In Abyssinia
it is converted into a cake, and in Egypt it is sold in the markets.

Begaree ; a system of porterage from village to village, formerly prac-
tised in India,

Bomah ; a fence of branches made round an encampment.

Boee ; a species of red-legged partridge found at 2° south latitude.

Burzah ; a summer-house or place of reception.

Budja ; the name of one of the officers of the King of Uganda.

Bogo ; native name for a wild bufialo.

Bana; Sir! or Master!

Bandwa or Wichwezee ; a class of gentle beggars.

Buggera ; the people of Madi and the ivory-hunters call their cattle by
this name.

Dagara ; the late father of the King of Karague.

Ensete ; a species of wild plantain discovered by Bruce the Abyssinian
traveller, called M’seegwah and M’tembeh by natives, who make
necklaces of its seeds.

Florikan or floriken ; a bird of the bustard family, found in cultivated
open places.

Gonjeh ; the name which the Seedees apply. to the otter.

Gnamera, or Nyamera ; a heartebeest antelope.

Inteh ; the name for a cow at Karague.

Jowarl ; a grain, wide sorghum.

Kousee ; the name given at Zanzibar to the south-east trade-winds.


XV1 EXPLANATION OF NAMES AND TERMS.


Kivro ; a place on the Luta Nzigé Lake, famous for its salt.

Kisuahili ; the dialect of the Wasuahili on the east coast of Africa.

Kinganee ; a large river, at 64° south latitude, on the east coast of
Africa.

Kittara ; a province to the west of Uganda.

Kanga ; a guinea-fowl, found along our whole route.

Kibuga ; the residence of the King of Uganda.

Kiengo ; the name of a medicine-man or rain-maker who accompanied
me to Uganda,

Kamarasi ; the King of Unyoro.

Kidi ; a nude race living on the Nile at 24° north latitude.

Kageera ; was applied to the river Kitangule, and may also mean any
river.

Kong’o ; the natives of Madi call their coarse beer by this name.

Karasha ; a small tusk of an elephant, or any tusk under 20 Ib. weight.

Lweetanzigeh ; the lake called Luta Nzigé in Speke’s Journal.

Lueroo ; the name given by some Waganda to the portion of the Vic-
toria Nyanza where the Kitangule joins it.

Looaleh ; the Uganda term for a supreme object or place of reverence.

Manioe, or Manihot utilissema ; a bush which attains a height of seven
feet ; its root, known at Zanzibar as “ Mohogo,” is the staff of life
there, being used as we do our potato.

M’wengé ; an intoxicating drink made from the fruit of the plantain in
Karague and Uganda.

Merry ; the Uganda name for boiled plantain.

Murwa; the LHlewsine coracana, or ooleyzee of the Seedees, a minute
grain converted into flour and eaten like stirabout, or made into a
fermented drink.

M’eanga, or Ouganga ; a general term for a charm, or for a man who
divines events.

Mariboo ; the name of one of the officers of the King of Uganda.

Misr ; Egypt.

M’koongoo ; signifies an Uganda officer commanding fifty or more men.

M’seoga ; the vulture, which usually eats the flesh of condemned cri-
minals in Uganda.

M’foongoo ; the name for a species of vulture.

Mukooa ; a tribe of negroes, famous as sportsmen, living in 12° south

latitude.

Mombas ; a seaport at 4° south latitude on the east coast of Africa.

Mamba ; the name given to a crocodile by Seedees.

Mina ; a black bird with yellow beak found in India, and which can be
taught to speak.

Macquareh ; a flat, broad, sweet-tasting fish.

M’kama ; the Karague and Uganda title for “ king.”


EXPLANATION OF NAMES AND TERMS. XVI


M’nanagee ; the brother of Rumanika.

M’fombeero ; the name of a mountain, estimated at 10,000 feet high,
fifty miles west of Karague, at 12° south latitude.

Maharageh ; a bean or calavance, cultivated in Usui, &c.

M’kooyoo ; a species of wild fig.

Murees ; the name given to home-brewed beer by the Egyptian ivory-
hunters.

Madar of the Punjab ; a milky bush, called Calotropis procera.

N’deezee ; the name given by Seedees to ripe plantain.

Nurrowareh ; the name given to the Victoria Nyanza by some Wa-
ganda.

Nanga ; a wooden musical instrument, having several strings.

Nyanzig, or Gnans-gnans; signifies “ Thanks, thanks,” and is used as
an expression by the Waganda.

Nzowe ; a long-haired antelope, living amongst the papyrus rush on
the borders of the Karague and other lakes.

N’kole ; a small province to the north of Karague.

Nyanza, Gna(n)za, Nyassa; are one and the same term, signifying lake.

Pokino ; the governor of a large district in Uganda.

Posho ; the term for food, rations, or pay.

Panganee ; a river at 54° south latitude, on the east coast of Africa.

Pombé ; a fermented liquor made from grains, roots, or fruits.

Quikooroo ; the palace, or title of the residence of the Sultan of Usui
and Karague.

Qualz ; a species of partridge, so called from its peculiar cry.

Reonga ; the name of the King of Unyoro’s rebel brother.

Ripon Falls ; the cataract at the escape of the Nile from Victoria Nyanza.

Ruanda ; the country from whence rises the largest feeder of the Victoria
Nyanza. Its border can be reached by water in three days from
Karague.

Rogeerah ; the rebel brother of the King of Karague.

Rumanika ; the King or Sultan of Karague.

Sorghum, Andropogon sorghum, a common African and Indian grain
made into stirabout, or used for making fermented drinks ; Kaflir
corn of the Cape, M’tama of East Africa, Doora of Egypt, and Jowari
of India.

Sesseh, the islands of ; on the west of the Victoria Nyanza.

Seedee ; the general term for a negro. At Zanzibar, those of every race
who have been freed from slavery are called Wungwana.

Saharee ; a cloth of cotton check worn round the loins or thrown over
the shoulders,

Toorkee, namely, Turks ; the name given to the Egyptian ivory-hunters
by the people of Madi and Bari.

Ukuni; a district of Unyamuezi, at 4° south latitude.


b


XV1il EXPLANATION OF NAMES AND TERMS.


Uhiao or Uhiyow ; a populous district about 8° south latitude, and not
far from the east coast.

Uhia or Mohia ; a province between Karague and Victoria Nyanza.

Ugogo ; a dry plateau land in Central Africa, at 64° south latitude.

Utumbi; an extensive province to the south-west of Unyoro.

Usui; a district south of Karague, dreaded by traders and travellers on
account of its extortionate sultan.

Verembe ; the expression used by natives of Karague when they meet.
It corresponds with our “‘ How do you do ?”

Vitokeh ; plantain-trees are called by this name in Uganda.

Watuta ; a plundering, restless race, supposed to be a branch from the
Zulu Kaffirs of the Cape. They have spread as far north at 34° south
latitude.

Wezee ; a short expression for the people who live in Unyamuezi.

Wazoongoo ; the term applied to white men. A white man is called
M’zoongoo.

Wahuma ; the reigning races of Usui, Karague, Uganda, Unyoro, &c.

Wazeewa ; a race from Uhia, living upon the banks of the Kitangule.

Watusi ; a race of cowherds, who are scattered on either side of the
equator, and who resemble the Somali in appearance,

Yanee ; a monkey, said to be so vicious that he will return a spear if
thrown at him.


MoWALK ACROSS: AFRICA:


OR


DOMESTIC SCENES FROM MY
NILE JOURNAL


CHAPTER IL.


EMBARK AT PLYMOUTH FOR THE CAPE—-MADEIRA—RIO DE JAN-
EIRO—SIMON’S BAY—SAIL FOR ZANZIBAR—CAPTURE OF A
SLAVE VESSEL AND 500 SLAVES—-LAND AT ZANZIBAR ON
THE 108TH DAY AFTER DEPARTURE FROM ENGLAND.


On the 30th of April 1860, Captain Speke and I
embarked at Plymouth on board H.M.’s steam-ship
Forte, 51 guns, bearing the flag of Admiral the Hon.
Sir Henry Keppel, K.C.B., and commanded by Captain
G. W. Turnour. Generally speaking, few persons care
to hear details of a voyage to the Cape, although, in a
frigate with 640 souls on board, a greater variety of
incident as well as interest might be expected than in an
ordinary sailing-vessel. Hight days passed smoothly ;
on the ninth day we gladly stepped on shore to enjoy


the bright island of Madeira, with its scented shrub-
29 A


2 RIO DE JANEIRO.


beries, which, though hotter than the temperature on
board ship, were exquisitely refreshing and delightful.
Here, for some days, dances, picnics, rides, walks about
the picturesque ravines, and cricket-matches, formed
the chief occupation. A farewell waltz was danced on
board ship, and the deck was like a brilliant May-day,
crowded with ladies wearing gay sashes inscribed with
the name of our good ship Forte. Our next féte
was on the Queen’s birthday, when the poop was grace-
fully hung round with large silken colours, and the
Admiral gave a bountiful entertainment. The cross-
ing of the Line was duly commemorated in the old
nautical style, with douche baths, and effective appli-
cations of steam-hose in the hands of joyous young
middies. |

The lottery as to the hour of arrival at Rio de
Janeiro was won by the only lady on board; and on
entering the magnificent bay—a most lovely sight—
we were saluted by a perfect storm of cannon and
music from the Brazilian, French, and American men-
of-war lying off the town. On landing, the mule
carriages, the dingy sallow look of the people, the
dazzling displays of jewellery, and the artificial flowers
made from the feathers of gaily-plumaged birds, par-
ticularly struck us; and a drive to the botanical gar-
dens to see the avenue of betel-palms, and a walk to
the neighbouring woods, deepened the interest of Rio.
As cholera raged in the town, several parties took
steamer to the head of the bay, passing richly-foliaged
islands in their course. Hence, forty miles of rail,
through swamp and forest, brought us to the foot of
mountains, which we ascended in omnibuses drawn
by four mules, passing on the way others, handsome


MAN OVERBOARD. o


animals, laden with bales of goods for the interior.
The drive was most interesting, every curve in the
Simplon-like road unfolding fresh beauties. T'ree-
ferns, the papau, and air-plants of every colour,
clothed the hill-sides. At dusk we reached Petro-
polis, a hill sanatorium, where we remained two or
three days, enjoying its many natural beauties and
the fine cool air.

Embarking again at Rio, the day after we left shore
our attention was arrested by the cry of “ Man over-
board!” The life-buoy was slipped and the cutter
lowered. We saw the poor fellow struggling with the
buoy, and then disappearing ; but he was picked up,
and the ship stood on her course again, the whole tak-
ing place in less time than I have taken in mentioning
the fact. Oddly enough, the hero of the scene got a
fortnight’s salt-water grog for having been in some
forbidden place when the accident occurred. During
the night of the 22d June, the tramping, rushing to
and fro, and shouting of commands on deck, told there
was a storm, and sleep was impossible. Sixteen hours
afterwards, the sea still raging in striking magnificence,
and the ship running along at eleven knots, the cry
was again heard “Man overboard!” and every one
sprang to his feet. Such was the discipline that, from
the time I first heard the alarm till I saw the boat
lowered in charge of two of the officers, Wilkinson and
Gye, only two minutes elapsed. The man is seen
clinging to the buoy; in the dusk of evening he is lost
sight of ; the boat also disappears; the suspense is
painful ; “burn a blue light ;” the boat nears the ship ;
every one holds his breath, till at length the simple
words, “All right, sir!” convey joy and gladness to


4 CAPE MOUNTED RIFLES.


all. The hardy English tar who had caused such ex-
citement, actually assisted in rowing the boat back to
the ship. We, of course, had our storm off the Cape
—a midnight scene; and though we had four boats
washed away, our mainyard sprung, and water rush-
ing wildly through our cabins, the noble ship bore the
strain most gallantly, anchoring the following day, 4th
July, in Simon’s Bay.

Sir George Grey, the Governor of the Cape, whom
the Forte was conveying to his seat of government,
was a true friend to our expedition, and evinced the
deepest interest in its progress. By his influence
we obtained .a grant of £300 from the Cape Par-
liament to supply us with a dozen baggage - mules.
Two honourable members, who formed the minority,
when the question was put, sagely remarked that
“Tt was nothing to them where the source of the Nile
was ; every one knew it was south of the equator ; ”—
not a bad guess! In the Governor's body-guard, when
he called for volunteers to cross Africa, there was not
even this minority—not a dissentient voice was heard ;
all wished to go, and we selected ten—a corporal and
nine privates of the Cape Mounted Rifles) When
paraded for our inspection, they reminded me of the
Goorkas of India. On the 16th July two teams of
beautiful bays pulled up at the Admiral’s house,
Simon’s Bay, where we then were, conveying these ten
volunteers, who sat in the open four-wheeled vans
looking very smart with their red caps, much to the
envy of some Forte marines, who would have liked to
go with us.

The embarking of the unmanageable mules was


kindly effected by Mr Wilkinson of the Forte ; and hav-


MULES. 5


ing bidden adieu to all her officers, we sailed that night
for Zanzibar in H.M.’s steam-ship Brisk, 16 guns, Cap-
tain De Horsey. Sir Henry Keppel and Staff, on a tour
of inspection, were also on board. The first night was
one of intense discomfort. We were shut up within the
walls of a screen-berth 10 feet by 10, the cots bumping
against each other, a rolling sea, and half-a-dozen mules
kicking and neighing in their misery all night long,
and directly overhead. The officers, however, were ex-
tremely kind, and their wardroom so cheerful, that we
soon forgot these midnight annoyances. Every morn-
ing a man named Long, a sailor, who said “he knew
how to manage mules, as his mother kept a team,”
would report that the mules were “all alive.” This
was very superfluous news, for we had been hearing
their music overhead all night. Often at dinner-
time Long would take the favourable opportunity of
exercising his mules about the deck, and giving the
middies a chance of a ride. At roll-call of a Sun-
day, some of the names of the crew sounded very
oddly. For instance, three Kroomen dignified them-
selves with the titles of “King John,” “Soda-water,”
and “ Prince of Wales;” while my servant answered to
the name of “April.” He was a jet-black man, and
one of the “Tots” (Hottentots), whose first essay as
valet much amused us. I had never had pillow-slips
on board, and he, thinking that I ought to possess
them, found one for me the first night in the shape of
my empty clothes-bag—a feat most creditable to his
ingenuity and sense of cleanliness. On the 27th of
July this same gentleman, while in Delagoa Bay, landed
in green velvet shooting-coat, tight jockey-trousers,
and neat regimental cap—quite a swell in compari-


6 “ TURTLE-TURNING.”


son with his master; but though he was considerably
blacker than the natives there, and very probably came
originally from the same stock, he told me that he did
not understand a word of their language—a curious
instance of negro affectation. These Delagoa men were
the first genuine Africans I had made acquaintance
with—bright-witted apparently, slim, and very ugly,
with a wild avaricious look, eating and drinking any-
thing you chose to offer them, and scrambling for the
fag-ends of your cigars—all in strong contrast to the
gentle Hindoo. What surprised me was, that near
their conical grass huts they kept pigs, which are rarely
seen near an Indian village. The breed was a very
good short-nosed black kind. Two vessels in the har-
bour, manned by East Indians, were pronounced by
the “ Prince of Wales,” and others who boarded them,
to be fitted up for slaves ; but the Portuguese governor
assured us that no slaver had visited Delagoa since the
last English man-of-war was there a year ago. This
did not remove our suspicions, for the flat-roofed houses
in the bazaar had every appearance of being receptacles
for slaves.

On the night of the Ist August the Admiral indulged
us all by landing on the uninhabited coral island of
Europa. He was the first to “turn a turtle,” and in
low water capsized and sat upon the animal all alone,
while a jolly middie, named O’Rouke, ran for help.
The beast was so strong that he was carrying the
“lieht weight” out to sea by the use of his flappers,
which acted to some purpose on the making tide, and
on the Admiral’s legs in particular. The doubtful
strugele lasted an hour and a half, when some sailors
came up and towed the vanquished turtle ashore—


SEWING-SCHOOL AT MOZAMBIQUE. 4


weight, 360 lb. The birds here were so tame and in-
sensible to danger that the men were able to knock
them over when on the ground with sticks and stones.
Four living turtle were brought on board and placed
on their backs, with a swab each as pillow. When
the ship was at anchor they were lowered with a
rope attached to them, and swam about playfully
below the stern of the vessel, coming to the surface
for air every thirty seconds. The butcher, while kull-
ing one by cutting its throat all round and opening
holes in its groins, remarked that its thick blood felt
“cooler than a sheep’s,’ and I observed it to be two
degrees less than the atmosphere (78°). He also en-
tertained the common belief that turtle will only die
at sunset.

On the 7th of August we lay off the wooden pier of
the island of Mozambique, an extinct coral formation.
Here Speke and I were able to converse, in their native
tongue, with Indian traders living away from their
wives and families, whom they had left behind in India.
We saw an interesting sight at a ship-provisioner’s :
in his back premises we found a sewing-school of ne-
oro boys and girls, presided over by a black sempstress ;
the boys were on one side and the girls on the other,
Quaker fashion, all very neat and orderly, and en-
gaged in making shirts. Farther on, in a dirtier quar-
ter, women stood at a millstone grinding wheat, while
others were alongside sifting it. One, a handsome
gypsy-looking girl, had through her upper lip a large
button of wood, which she sucked into her mouth most
adeptly, in order to create a laugh and coquet for
money. The cooks and henmen were of a lower grade;
and two lads, who also begged hard, were in chains,


8 CAPTURE OF A SLAVER.


having a rod of iron between their ankles. They pro-
bably were recent investments, and could not be
trusted at large. But what shocked us most deeply
was seeing a poor woman brutally struck across the
chest by her master, a black half-caste Portuguese, for
attempting to go out without leave. Such are some
of the vicissitudes in the life of a slave !—submis-
sion may obtain kind treatment, but even this is not
always sure.

The Portuguese troops in Fort Sebastian have Hin-
dostanees amongst them, and they observe the pleasing
(Spanish ?) custom of doffing their caps during the
“beat off” at sunset, and I understood from a sentry
that they paid this respect also to the rismg sun. The
governor dined with the Admiral. He was in plain
clothes, and wore a star. His crew of ten negroes
had to wait in their boat during the operation of
dinner. They were in man-of-war costume, and, re-
markable enough, the head-dress was a black Highland
bonnet with crest.

On the 10th of August a slave - vessel, Sunny
South or Manuella, was captured with upwards of
500 slaves on board, 75 of whom were women.
The scene they presented of nakedness, despair,
disease, and hunger, was too loathsome to describe ;
while, to judge from the ham and preserves I saw
with Long, our mule attendant, who had been sent
on board and made good use of the opportunity,
the captain and officers must have fared well. The
crew were brought on board the Brisk for the Ad-
miral’s imspection. All came willingly, with the ex-
ception of one or two, who were a little rusty, requiring
the assistance of one of our big marines to bring them


ARRIVAL AT ZANZIBAR. 9


to order. They continued smoking till stopped by
the stern discipline of the ship’s corporal, who received
and ranged them in formal line to take their names.
Eventually they dispersed over our ship, and, after
some days, might be seen working quietly with the
other sailors. The slaver, one of the fastest and most
beautifully - proportioned vessels ever put together,
went to the Mauritius, losmg 105 of the poor
starving creatures during the passage, and was after-
wards wrecked near the point at which she was
captured.

At Johannah Island (about 12° 8. lat.) we stayed
four days taking in coals. Toa rambler or lover of
picnics by clear brown mountain-streams, margined
by a most luxuriant flora, I know of no such charming
spot within the tropics. Its harbour, however, is a
dangerous coral basin or lagoon.

On the 17th August the island of Zanzibar came
in sight; also four smaller isles, looking like great
arks whose bows and sterns hung bushing over the
waters. The island has a low appearance. The town,
running along the shore for a quarter of a mile of
flat- roofed warehouse-like buildings, is not impos-
ing, its mud fort-towers and the flags of four consul-
ates being the only prominent objects. The bay is
perfect, and we anchored close to shore in seven
fathoms, this being the 108th day since we departed
from England.

The greatest heat encountered—and it was felt to be
excessive—was when in 16°S. lat. at Mozambique, the
medium temperature in the shade being, on the 7th
August, 78°. Lat. 37° S., long. 21° E., on the 22d of
June, after a storm during the night, shows the lowest


10 AMUSEMENTS ON BOARD SHIP.


recorded medium temperature, namely, 46°. Many a
pleasant hour was whiled away during the two voyages
—shooting, band-playing, rubbers at whist, amuse-
ments with the various dogs,—Tawny, a clever collie ;
Ossian, a deerhound ; and Lumpus, a retriever, &c. ;—
sketching and photographing, drying botanical speci-
mens, and picking up daily instruction in nautical
observation.


CHAPTER IL.


ZANZIBAR—-THE SLAVE-MARKET—-CLIMATE AND PRODUCE OF
THE ISLAND—-TRADE AND SHIPPING——-DECAPITATION OF
TWO MURDERERS—OUR PARTY PROCEED TO THE MAINLAND
OF AFRICA.


AFTER anchoring at Zanzibar, the Brisk had compli-
mentary salutes from the men-of-war in the harbour—
namely, the Sultan’s, the French, and H.M.S. Lyra.
Next morning at eight the Admiral had a special
salute from one of the Sultan’s frigates; and again, as
he put his foot on shore to attend a durbar, another
was given in honour of our country—our ships return-
ing each and all.

Colonel Rigby, an officer of the Bombay army,
H.M.’s Consul, entertained us with true Indian hospi-
tality during the thirty-nine days of our stay; and
his exertions greatly contributed to our getting away
so quickly. He, having passed in six languages, acted
as interpreter at the durbar, where the Sultan was
most affable, shaking hands with all.

Though the streets of Zanzibar are too narrow for a
wheeled carriage, and the supply of water deficient,
everything looked clean and neatly kept; and the shop-


1 ZANZIBAR SLAVE-MARKET.


keepers, chiefly Indians, were respect‘ul even to a pain-
ful degree, rising as we passed them. The bazaar is very
abundantly supplied with vegetables, fruit, and dried
fish; little butcher-meat, but liquor-shops abound,
and water has to be purchased—the best quality being
carried fully a mile from a hot spring, which bubbles
from under rock, and tastes unpleasantly warm. Men
in the marketplace have an edd way of hawking about
their goods for sale. Goats, carved doors, beds, knives,
swords, &c., are all paraded up and down, and their
prices shouted out. The market for human beings is
a triangular space surrounded by rickety huts, thatched
with cocoa-nut leaves; and the parties of slaves (negro
men and women brought originally from the interior
of Africa), on being exhibited, are guarded by men
with swords. Some of the unhappy groups sit calmly
in the marketplace, looking very clean, well fed and
dressed, but with a depressed anxious look, saying to
you with their eyes, “ Buy me from this yoke of
slavery!” It is avery striking though most humiliat-
ing sight to observe one of the Zanzibar rakish-looking
crafts (felucca-rigged) arrive from Ibo, on the main-
land, crammed with naked slaves for the market—all
as silent as death. The Arab owners, gaily dressed,
stand at the stern, and one holds the colours, in seem-
ing defiance of the British Consulate, as he sails past.
The price of slaves was low in 1860—only £3 each ;
and many Arabs would have taken less, as Colonel
Rigby had released upwards of four thousand, who
became independent, living in a newly-made part of
the town, and gaining a livelihood by fetching water
and selling the produce of the island.

The Sultan was most polite in sending riding-horses


THE SULTANS STUD. 13


to any gentleman who might request them from his
stud of Arab descent. Colonel Rigby’s horse-attend-
ant took me to the spot. The ménage consisted of
some forty horses and mares of Arab blood—twenty
of them packed so close in line under a long shed that
it would have defied any one of them to lie down.
They stood upon an incline of wood six inches higher
in front than behind, with heel-ropes so tight that the
poor animals could hardly raise their feet; many of
their tails shaved to the bone, others snipped round
with scissors ; not a sound one amongst them—broken
knees, greasy and gummy legs, mangy skins, bags of
bone; and the outer one of all such a skeleton that I
listened to ascertain whether he breathed. Certainly
the mares looked more comfortable when picketed in
the morning in the open yard upon sand, and tied
loosely by the head, with nose-bags full of grain ;
and the picture around them of domestic animals
had much the appearance of a home farmyard.

The climate of Zanzibar is very relaxing, owing to
the humidity of the air, a great amount of rain falling
during the year. ‘The rain comes down in plunges,
pelting showers, or like squalls at sea, and in the in-
tervals any bodily exertion is attended with profuse
perspiration and lassitude. I may mention that we
pitched camp on the 13th September, for our Cape
Mounted Rifles, on a rising ground near a pond behind
the town, where they remained upwards of ten days.
On the 28th, when on the main coast of Africa, three
of these Tots were struck down with fever, a fourth
was seized soon after, and then a fifth—all on the
same day. Speke and I did not sleep in that camp,
and our health was not affected. Colonel Rigby men-


ies ATTRACTIONS OF ZANZIBAR.


tioned a similar case of the Assaye men. Twenty-six
out of sixty who slept inland were attacked with
fever; those who had taken quinine recovered, while
those who had not died. From this it would appear
that risk attaches to certain constitutions from sleep-
ing inland, away from the sea-breeze; although, on
the heights of the island, where the soil is a rough red
rit or friable clay, | should not anticipate danger.
But on these elevated spots there is this disadvantage,
that no water is procurable ; even in a well forty feet
deep I observed there was none.

To one wishing to enjoy good health I would pre-
scribe this recipe: Reside on the shore; be in a boat
by sunrise ; row to any point on the island, or to the
exquisite living formations of coral; walk home be-
tween the hedgerows, amongst beautiful clove or mango
groves ; enjoy the refreshing milk from the cocoa-nut ;
observe the industry in the fields, the snug country-
houses of the Arabs; examine the “diggings” for
copal ; look at the men washing the elephant-tusks on
the sea-shore, or at the immense variety of crazy craft
—ain short, keep active, and you will find that there
are many worse climates than Zanzibar.

The island has two crops of grain yearly, and four
of manioc, which, with dried shark, is the staple
food of the people. They cook it in every form, mak-
ing also flour of it. One has only to walk of a morn-
ing along the roads leading into the town, to see the
productiveness of this beautiful island. Negro men
and women laden with mangoes, oranges, plantain,
sugar-cane, grass, cocoa-nut, manioc, yams, sweet po-
tato, Indian corn, ground-nut, &c., go in streams to
the market. The return of these crowds is, in con-


FRUITS AND VEGETABLES. 15


trast, utterly ludicrous. Nothing do they then carry
but a stick over their shoulder with a cut of stale
fish hanging from it; and one wonders at the extreme
poverty of the people in the midst of such abundance.
Besides the above products, cloves, cotton, bajra, sor-
chum, dall, coffee, tobacco, sessamum, grass, nutmeg,
red pepper, betel-nut, catchoo-nut, jack-fruit, papau,
almond, pomegranate, and the castor-oil plant, were
all seen growing. To remark upon a few :—The
mango-tree, met with everywhere, is splendidly um-
brageous, more lofty than the variety seen in Indian
topes, and not so brittle. It yields two crops yearly
of stringy fruit; but there are better sorts, such as
those from Pemba Island, to be procured. The clove-
tree is planted in rows 20 feet apart, and after it
has grown to the height of 30 feet, it seems to die, as
if from the effects of ants. Cloves have diminished
immensely in value ; what cost 25 dollars twelve years
ago can now be purchased for one dollar ; consequently
the agriculturists do not replace the dying trees. The
spice was being gathered by men on tripod ladders on
the 6th September. Cotton we rarely saw. The
cocoa-nut is the most common tree in the country—
the husk, we observed, being used as firewood, and
a capital salad is made from the crown of the trunk.
The Arabs allow their slaves to cultivate the manioc
or “mohogo” gratis, under the cocoa-nut trees, in
payment for gathering the harvests of mango, cloves,
&c. The growth of the ground-nut is very curious,
creeping close to the ground, with a yellow flower and
leaf resembling clover. On the flower withering the
pod goes underground, where it matures. The coffee-
tree grows luxuriantly, and the sugar-cane is very


16 TRADE.


fine; pomegranate does not seem to succeed. The
boundaries of farms are often marked by the castor-
oil bush.

Miserable-looking camels drive the oil-press. Cattle
do not thrive, though upon the neighbouring island of
Pemba a small breed succeeds. Few butchers’ shops
are seen: the natives adopt the vegetable and fish
diet, not being able to afford meat. Goats, when cas-
trated and stall-fed, become very heavy, and their
meat is considered a great delicacy by the Arabs.

Trade has considerably increased at Zanzibar. The
shipping consists chiefly of large native craft—thirty
to forty from Bombay, Muscat, &c., and but three or
four ships from Europe and America. The merchants
have their Exchange, if the place they daily meet in
may be designated by this title. Here human beings,
money, ivory, copal, cloves, cloths, beads, rice, cowries,
opercula, and goods from all quarters of the world,
change hands. The largest single tusk we saw at
Zanzibar weighed 1654 Ib.; length, 8 feet 74 inches ;
greatest circumference, 1 foot 11 inches—all of the
purest blue-tinted soft ivory. It belonged to Mr
Webb, the American consul. He had also an enor-
mous hippopotamus tusk, nine inches greatest circum-
ference, and turning, like the horn of a Highland ram,
once and a half round. As the tusk increases in size,
a corresponding rise takes place in its value per Ib.
Tortoise-shell fetched 15s. per lb.; for hippopotamus
ivory there was then no demand in Europe.

Several stirrmg events occurred while we were at
Zanzibar. Once the Brisk got information of a slaver,
but on sailing in search could find nothing of her.


BRAVE CREW OF BLACKS. nye


Again, after she had left, the Sultan requested Speke
to take one of his ships of war and capture a slaver at
Panganee; but this also proved a fruitless chase; and
as we were anxious to return to the preparations for
the march, we left the Sultan’s corvette at sea, and
proceeded homewards, at 10 a.M., in an open boat of
ten oars—distance to Zanzibar, 40 miles. We pulled
till 5 p.m., found the current carrying us to the Indian
Ocean, and put in for the night on a coral isle.

Our brave crew of blacks, the same class of men
who subsequently accompanied us upon our expedi-
tion, started again at four in the morning, rowing, off
and on, till we reached home at eight that evening.
The rowers accomplished this great feat without a
orumble, singing the greater part of the way, though
with nothing to cheer them for the two days but a
few biscuits, sweetmeats, and oranges. Who can fail
to admire such spirit! But we have the same class of
African, when roaming amid his native wilds free from
all control, committing murder without scruple ; and
an illustration of this came under our notice here.
Dr Roscher, a German gentleman, while exploring
near Lake Nyassa, was murdered in 1859 by natives
who coveted his scientific instruments. The sultan of
the country, justly indignant, sent four men to Zanzi-
bar to stand their trial for the murder. Two were con-
demned, and suffered decapitation on the 23d August.
I was present, going to the execution with the “sur-
rung” or boatswain of the British Consulate, who
cleared the way for me to get near the two men. They
squatted outside the fort wall with perfect composure,
naked from head to foot, except a waistcloth ; neither

B


18 DECAPITATION OF TWO MURDERERS.


tied nor handcuffed, and guarded carelessly by a few
jesting soldiers. The Sultan’s order to proceed with
the execution not having arrived, a considerable delay
occurred, during which the most intelligent-looking of
the two prisoners stated to me that he had committed
the act when in a state of unconsciousness! A jail
official here announced that the Sultan wished the
sahib to give the order, and I informed Colonel Rigby
of the circumstance. He at once saw through the
timidity of the Sultan, and said, as the sentence had
been passed weeks ago, he could give no orders about
it. Returning to the place of execution, where both
men still sat, we found the mob had increased. An
Arab boldly asked me, “ Why should two men suffer
for one white?” On my remarking that “Sooner or
later the men must suffer—the sun was broiling over
the poor creatures’ heads—would it not be charity
to go on with the execution?” the reply was, “They
are mere animals, and have no feeling.” Still no
one would give the order. Again the Sultan was
applied to. A rush was now rudely made on the
crowd by half-a-dozen handsomely-dressed Arabs,
brandishing their shields and swords. I thought it
was a rescue, but kept my place; and it appeared
they only wanted to get up to the prisoners, around
whom every one laughed heartily at the momentary
panic. Here one of the guard with whom I had been
conversing laid hold of my arm, and, followed by a
noisy drummer, the prisoners, and mob, we pushed on
for a dozen yards, and stopped in an open space where
some cows were lying. A twig of grass pinioned
each man, and they were made to sit on the ground,


EXECUTION SCENE. 19


speaking calmly, while the crowd, all crushing around,
joked as if at a holiday rout. Another delay occurred ;
no one had given the order. On being asked, “ Might
it commence?” I replied, “ Yes, certainly ; proceed.”
The executioner at once took his place, drew his
sword, weighed it in his hand, threw up his sleeves, |
and slipped his feet out of his shoes, while the dense
mass all seemed breathless. The executioner was a
small man, respectably dressed, looking lke an Indian
“Nubbeebux.” The prisoners sat three yards apart,
one slightly in advance of the other. The foremost
was then ordered to bend his head, when, with one
stroke, the back of his neck was cut to the vertebree ;
he fell forward, and lay breathing steadily, with his
right cheek in his own blood, without a sound or
strugele. The executioner, after wiping his sword on
the loin-cloth of the dymg man, coolly felt its edge.
The other victim had seen all, and never moved nor
spoke. The same horrible scene was again enacted,
but with a different result; the man jerked upwards
from his squatting position, and fell back on his left
side, with no sound nor after-struggle. Both appeared
as if in a sweet sleep; two chickens hopped on the
still quivering bodies, and the cows in the open space
lay undisturbed. I left the spot, hoping never to
witness such another scene; but I had the satisfac-
tion of feeling that justice was carried out, and
that had I not been present those murderers would
have escaped punishment, owing to the effeminacy
and timidity of the Sultan of Zanzibar. Their
accomplices, each with a cleft log on his neck,
were taken to witness the bodies: they were to


20 CROSS TO THE MAINLAND.


have a free pardon, and to be sent back to their
homes.

We had now a great deal to do in preparing for a
three years’ journey, in taking observations and work-
ing them out. For the benefit of photographers, I
may mention that the “developer” succeeded. It was
given me by Mr Apothecary Frost, E.LC.S.

The Sultan very kindly ordered that we should pro-
ceed across to the mainland of Africa (only forty miles)
in his corvette, the Secundra Shah, commanded by
Captain Mahomed Camese. We sailed on the anni-
versary of Havelock’s entry into Lucknow, the 25th
September. ‘The wind was ahead ; our crew, a rough
set of African lads; sandbanks were about; and after
splitting our maintop-sail, and many oaths (strange to
say, in English) from the native commander, trying to
put things to rights, we put back for the night, an-
choring close to where we started. The commodore,
an Arab gentleman, came on board to see what acci-
dent had happened. He remained in charge, and early
next morning, taking us as far as Choomba Island,
returned in an open boat. ‘The passage to the seaport
of Bagomoyo was made in ten hours, but before we
could land there was a row of three miles’ shallow
water, near the end of which two fine stout fellows
came splashing through the water, shouldered me from
the boat, and bore me like a child, nolens volens, in
triumph over to the dry shore. These were our own
“Seedee boys,” or Africans, and they gave us a warm
oreeting. Everything was reported by Sheikh, the
Arab in native charge, as ready for a start. We
tried to march on the lst October, but the trashy


THE MARCH DELAYED. 21


bazaar—all its flints, fish, rice, grog, and sixpenny
accordions, not worth more than ten pounds—had
too many attractions for our men; and we did not
get away till the following day, after having drunk
success to the expedition in a bottle of Colonel
Rigby’s champagne, and seen our kind host into his
boat on his return to Zanzibar.


CHA Ee ER


JOURNEY TO KAZEH, 500 MILES IN THE INTERIOR—ESCORT AND
CASUALTIES ON THE MARCH—CROSS THE EAST AFRICAN CHAIN
INTO UGOGO—CLIMATE AND DISEASES OF KAZEH—-AGRICUL-
TURE AND PRODUCTS—WILD ANIMALS, BIRDS, AND FISH—
FOUR NATIVE RACES, THE WAZARAMO, WASAGARA, WAGOGO,
AND WANYAMUEZI.


On the 2d of October 1860, we started from Bago-
moyo on the Hast African coast for Kazeh, 500 miles
in the interior of Africa, latitude 5° south. The party
consisted of the followmg :—


Captain Speke, commanding.


99


Grant, second in command.


Corporal, Cape Mounted Rifles, butcher.
Private “ William,” bugler and cook.


99


Middleton, Speke’s valet.
April, Grant’s valet, cook, &c.
Lemon, useful generally.
Reyters, fiddler.

Peters.

Arries.

Jansen.

“ Jacob” Adams.


9)
Said bin Salem, native commandant.
Bombay, factotum, interpreter.
Baraka, commanding Zanzibar men, interpreter.


CASUALTIES OF THE EXPEDITION. 23


Private servants and


Frij do. ‘ ;
J, ? rifle-carriers.


Ulédi, valet,
Mabrook, valet, donkey-man.

Three or four women.

Sixty-four Seedee boys, Carrying our kit and
115 porters of the interior, barter.

Eleven mules carrying ammunition.

Five donkeys to carry the sick.


Rahan, interpreter,


Twenty-five Belooch soldiers escorted us for the
first thirteen stages, and we had the under-mentioned
casualties during the journey :—

Private Peters dead ;

Five other privates sent back sick ;
About thirty Seedees deserted ;

One discharged ;

113 porters deserted ;

Eleven mules and two donkeys dead ;


Fifteen out of twenty goats stolen ; and
Our native commandant, the Sheikh, hors de combat.


The daily stages have been so well and so fully
described by Captain Speke that I shall not dwell
upon them, but merely mention a few incidents de-
scriptive of our life in the interior, and the fauna we
observed. To accomplish this distance of 500 miles
in 71 travelling days, of from 1 to 25 miles per day
on foot, took us all the months of October, November,
December, and twenty-five days of January, struggling
against the caprices of our followers, the difficulties of
the countries passed through, and the final desertion
of our porters.

There being no roads, merely a rough track, no
beasts of burden nor conveyances of any kind in the
country, our whole kit was put into loads of 50 and
60 Ib. each, without lock or key, and the porters
paraded up and down with them a whole day trying


94 CRIES OF “BOMAH” AND “ POSHO.”


their weight—a ludicrous scene of confusion and
squabbling. Their captain, distinguished by a high
head-dress of ostrich plumes stuck through a strip of
scarlet flannel, seeing all ready, led the caravan in single
file with great dignity during the march. The pace
was never more than three and a half miles per hour.
When the captain put down his load for as many
minutes as he thought necessary, the rest, a gang of
naked, woolly-haired negroes, with only an airy cover-
ing of goat-skin in front, would also stop and refresh
themselves with pipes, snuff, grain, dancing, and sing-
ing choruses. Generally there was an argument to
settle how long the march should continue; and many
were the excuses found for a halt, no water ahead
being a common one. Once camped, and the loads
stacked amidst cries of “Bomah!” or ring-fence, and
“Posho !” or food, the first concern with every one was
to receive his day’s wages, consisting of either a portion
of cloth or one necklace of beads, while we retired to
tents seven feet square, which were generally sheltered
under a tree, with the kit and natives all round us, a
motley crew. If we had that day arrived at the
headquarters of a sultan, an officer would call saying
his master must have so many cloths, with various
other articles, and he must himself have so many
more. Strong arguments and menaces would follow,
and it sometimes took several days to the confer-
ence, as the sultan would be reported absent, or, more
often, tipsy. However, once settled, if no porters
absconded, we were free to proceed on our journey.
I may here remark that nothing can exceed the noise
and jollity of an African camp at night. We, the
masters, were often unable to hear ourselves talk for


THE RIVER KINGANI. 25


the merry song and laughter, the rattle of drums,
jingling of bells, beating of old iron, and discordant
talk going on round our tents. No Hindoo dare be
so rude in your hearing, but an African only wonders
that you don’t enjoy the fun.

We passed through three distinct countries—
Uzaramo, Usagara, and Ugogo. Now at Kazeh we
were in Unyamuezi—translated “Country of the
Moon.” Our interpreters had been Africans speaking
Hindostanee, and seemed to learn the dialects as they
went along, their native Kisuahili tongue being to
them a useful basis. The four countries were not gov-
erned by one king, but divided mto provinces, each
from 20 to 30 miles across; and each had its despot
ruler, the terror of travellers, who were forced to pay
whatever tax was demanded without reference to any
scale. ‘The aristocrats or chiefs lived in no greater
luxury than the poor, although they had a revenue
from fines, taxes, a tusk of every elephant killed or
found dead in their province, and the produce of
large herds of cattle and of farming.

On leaving the coast our path ran up a broad, flat,
dry valley of grass and trees for twenty marches. At
the ninth stage, from a ridge of rising ground com-
posed of small pebbles in rotten sandstone, we saw
distant hills to the north-west, and had a good view
of the sluggish, winding Kingani, which we did not
altogether lose sight of till the thirteenth march. We
crossed the East African chain at an elevation of 4750
feet, and got into Ugogo, a plateau without a river,
and its “neeka” or deserted land requiring abundant
rain to make it look at all green. These hills were
tame in general outline; the flora also was poor. We


26 ACCLIMATISATION FEVERS.


next hailed with delight the country of Unyamuezi,
where water was abundant, oozing from under rocks
on the surface or from outcropping rock; and there
was a pleasant confiding air of homeliness and
repose in the people, so different from those worth-
less races we had found such trouble in passing
through.

The climate, with wind behind us on the march,
was cooler and less creative of thirst than that of India.
Our dress was an English summer one; no turbans
were necessary ; the evenings were delightfully cool ;
the sun seldom set in a haze, and one morning of mist,
the 24th January, was the only one we had. At night,
feeling quite secure from attack, we never slept in our
clothes, but covered ourselves with from one-to five
thin blankets, according to the elevation. During the
last week of November, previous to the regular rains,
our camp at Ugogo suffered from heavy north and west
ousts of wind, which set in at 9 AM, or from dust-
storms lasting two or more hours. In December the
rain for the time would almost crush our little single
canvass tents, but it afterwards imparted to the air
that delightful freshness of the “cold season” in the
Punjab. Fine, however, as this country appeared to
us, nearly all suffered from an acclimatisation fever,
which rapidly undermined our strength. The five
Tots were sent back from its effects; all were mar-
tyrs to it, suffering from pains in the head, eyes, and
limbs—ague, perspirations, drowsiness, startled sleep,
and delirium. The only remedies in our power or
skill were calomel and jalap, quinine, the first thing in
the morning, and strong soup or hot grog when in
store. The following is the report, 27th October


GUN ACCIDENT. oN


1860, and about the same number of men were in
hospital every morning :—


William, 10 laud., 2 quinine.

Middleton, 10 jalap, 2 calomel.

Lemon,

rea a 2 quinine each.

Jacob,

Rahan, 2 pills col. ; Speke dressed wound.


This does not include the doses given to natives in
camp, who had the greatest faith in the medicine-
chest, often sitting round us as it was administered,
and asking for the dregs of the glass! We had an
amputation case. The men were practising with their
rifles at a suspended bottle, and Rahan blew off one of
his middle fingers, and came bellowing with rage into
camp, saying, “Look here what I have suffered by
being induced to come upon this horrible journey!
My life-blood is running,” &. He had evidently been
drinking. No time was to be lost. I thought from
the first that I should have the operation to perform,
and Speke requested me to do it. I overcame the feel-
ing of reluctance, and asked for a knife. The Sheikh’s
razor performed a beautiful flap operation, taken from
the mside of the hand, and covering the knuckle.
Rahan shrank at first from it, crying out most lustily,
and abusing us and Baraka for having brought this
misfortune upon him. At last he said, “Go on: do
it.” When half through, he pulled away his hand, and
gave a tremendous scream ; but with great coaxing the
affair was finished; and, without having tied up any
arteries, in a very few days he had the use of his hand,
and recovered his temper.

We never could understand the disease that was


28 MULE DISEASE.


fatal to the mules and donkeys. Speke and our Tots
would have known a tzetze fly had they seen one,
and we therefore concluded that their deaths must have
been caused by their eating deleterious grasses, for they
lived on what they could themselves pick up, having
neither corn nor hay. Here are the notes on one case :
“30th Dec. ’60.— Mule (the last red one) swollen
all over the body for the last two days; breathing
thickly ; discoloured water oozing from the body ;—
on making incisions, blood and water came freely ;
not relieved; half of tail cut off; no blood, only
water came; on pressing the body with thumb, the
impression remains. Miracle if he recovers ”—which
he never did. The donkeys had much more spirit
than the mules. We lost only three out of five dur-
ing the march, though overladen with bundles, pots,
and kettles. The wild zebra and donkeys mingled and
fraternised by distant neighs.

Some of the daily incidents seemed so strange and
interesting to me that I noted them rather fully, and
think a few quotations from the Journal now and
then may not be unacceptable. Extract: “8th Nov.
’60.—Peters reported ill yesterday; teeth clenched,
eyes rolling, body rigid, pulse 120; wouldn’t speak ;
had been asleep in the sun. I recommended bleeding.
To-day he had ridden the march on a donkey, but could
not sit up; had to be lashed to the beast. He now
lay on the ground seemingly unconscious, his stomach
violently heaving. At 3 p.m. the caravan was under
way again. Lashed Peters on the saddle like a
Mazeppa! Fever still upon me.” “ November 9th—
‘The man is dead,’ said the corporal, while we were


busy painting. We were all shocked. He had died


FUNERAL OF PETERS THE RIFLEMAN, 29


calmly without the knowledge of his comrades. I[
had fever to-day.” “ November 10th.—Funeral, 5 a.m.
The body sewed up in an American cloth; carried in a
blanket, four Tots with a corner each. The corporal,
Speke, and myself formed the procession, the corporal
carrying a hatchet and two sword-bayonets to extend
the grave if necessary. Found only a grave one foot
deep, and partly filled in with grass. Hatchets and
bayonets were used, and we got a place large enough.
I read the service, and afterwards returned to camp.
Sketched a ‘Goodee’ tree. Had fever, no ague, but
mind wandering; very drowsy; disturbed rest. All
the niggers exceedingly jolly—singing, playing bells,
horns, drums, &c.”

At our first camping-ground by the coast there was
not a drop of water to be seen—a sad calamity! But
Bombay, an old traveller, and always ready-witted,
relieved the minds of the Tots by telling them that a
well would be dug after the camp had settled down
a bit, which literally was the case. While near the
Kingani—a true African-looking river, with its tall
reed edges—we had abundance of water, but mawk-
ish, It was a white, muddy, sluggish stream 40 to
50 yards across, with steep clay banks 16 feet above
the water, and winding so much that no steamer could
make its sharp turns. Canoes ferried it. One well,
or puddle, a short distance from this river, made our
plated spoons quite black, and turned blue test-paper
red. In Ugogo the wells were from 11 to 15 feet
deep, of bluish clay upon rock, the water nitrous, and
nearly the price of beer. Sometimes, when there was
no water for thirty miles, a small quantity would be
carried in gourds, where, from the shaking and heat,


30 CULTIVATION OF THE GROUND.


it soon became nauseous or insipid. Our Zan-
zibar Seedees have a very polite custom: when they
see any one of the camp arriving fagged, done up,
and parched with thirst after a long march, one’s
thoughts perhaps running on displays of fruit in shop-
windows, ices, or lapping water in a stream, they run
out, like good fellows, to meet you with a drink. Let
it be hot, bitter, or black as ditch-water, thirst is
allayed; and, on looking to see whence the luxury
came, you observe the men standing in a miry pool,
like dogs on the 12th of August, while the poor birds,
disturbed by the intrusion, wait their turn in the trees
overhead.

There is not a plough in the country; a broad hoe
answers equally well. Men with small axes cut down
the forest; the trees and rubbish are burned; the
long-handled iron hoe, chiefly in the hands of the
women, turns over the light soil; and the seed is
dropped into a hole made by the woman’s toe, and
covered up. Manure is seldom used; six months’
fallow would seem to be its substitute. Fields close
to villages occasionally get manure, or red clay heaps
are spread over the dry, drifting sand-soil of Ugogo.
We had no opportunity of seeing the reaping. Copal
holes are only found between the coast and the Afri-
can chain of hills. The country produces chiefly
sorghum, bajra, sweet potato, and Indian corn, with
tobacco, pumpkins, a small quantity of rice, manioc,
ground-nut, and grains mentioned in Appendix to
Speke’s book. Mushrooms grow wild, and are eaten
considerably. Tomato is not eaten. Tamarind, figs,
honey in hollowed logs placed up trees in the forest,
rich and good. The chief staff of life is stirabout,


CATTLE AND FOOD. ob


made from the sorghum, and from this grain they also
produce a coarse, intoxicating, thick liquor, tasting like
wort. In Ugogo they manufacture small pillars of salt
by evaporation, but it is dirty in colour, with a dis-
agreeable bitter taste. owls, eggs, and goats were
occasionally brought into camp to be bartered for
cloth, tobacco, or beads, as there was not a coin—
copper, silver, or gold—that they would take in ex-
change for their produce.

We met with no cattle, except those collected for
export at the coast, until we had proceeded twenty
marches into the interior, at which point, and farther
on, we saw a small humped breed, the prevailing
colours being white and red—the bulls with large
humps and small horns. The goats were of the
ordinary short-haired sort, never used as milkers ; and
sheep, though rarely seen, were of the “doomba” or
fatty-tailed variety, the size of a year-old Leicester,
costing nine yards cotton stuff. Small bandy-legged
brindled dogs followed the Wagogo.

Food was not abundant. As it was the dry season,
we had to trust to chance and our rifles. One night
our entire dinner consisted of two ears of Indian corn,
eaten with salt; nothing besides, neither bread nor
rice. Bombay very kindly, in the middle of this re-
past (which was laid out on our “service” of reversed
tin lids placed on the tops of wooden boxes as tables),
went and brought a cold grilled chicken, very small,
and awkwardly flattened out. Though our hunger
prompted us to accept the offer, we declined with
many thanks. But, while sitting rather silently over
our empty tin covers, he again appeared, having
foraged five live chickens—thus securing for us not


OZ THE RHINOCEROS.


only that night’s supper, but food for the next two
days. Our supplies of grain frequently ran out in
camp, but the sportsman need never starve in the
country we passed through; for although we could
not always find large game, there were sparrows,
doves, or guinea-fowl to be had; while persons who do
not sport may take note of the herbs gathered by the
natives, and live upon them at a pinch. The spirit of
our men sank, and a deep, gloomy silence hung over
camp, when we had no grain, and continuous days of
bad sport with our rifles. Not a man would obey
orders ; they refused to march, and discipline had to
be upheld in several instances by inflicting corporal
punishment for the crime of stealing cloth to buy food.
One Seedee, a powerful fellow, roared for mercy during
the flogging, and disclosed to us who had been his
accomplice in the theft. He was therefore excused
the third dozen of lashes, and carried away bound, to
be expelled from camp next morning.

We foraged zealously for the camp, and succeeded
in giving to every one a little meat. The black rhin-
oceros would rarely charge, even though he saw us
standing close to him ; but they always afford consid-
erable excitement by the feimts they make, and by
their deep hoarse grunt. Their ears were often torn
and their tails mutilated, apparently in consequence
of their fighting with each other. Our whole camp
ate heartily of the rhinoceros; but the flesh, though
sweet, requires very sharp teeth. ‘Their young would
seem to have great affection. Wounding a large female
one night, I next day traced her spoor for four miles,
and suddenly came on her squatting like a hare in her
form, with her back towards me. There was a great


ZEBRA-HUNTING. oo


deal of whining or puling near the spot, which I took
to be her dying cries. Advancing cautiously, a differ-
ent rhinoceros cocked its ears at me, and I felt for an
instant at a loss which to fire at: both barrels from
“ Blanshard” went at my new young friend, who rushed
off crashing through the underwood, and I only then
saw that the poor old lady was cold dead, and she
proved so heavy that three of us could not move her.
It was the young one weeping over its mother that
caused the plaintive cries I had heard.

Zebras seen cantering in open forests of bare-poled
trees without a vestige of underwood, form a beautiful
sight; they can be stalked very easily, and, unless
made aware of danger by antelopes feeding with them,
they will turn round and stare at you, some even ad-
vancing a few paces, like the wild horse of Thibet.
When I first heard the cry of the zebra I took it
for the call of a bird, with a little of the donkey at
the end; but, listening for some time, and seeing the
animal, I would describe it as a half-bray, or cross
between a foal’s and a donkey’s call. They are perfect
in symmetry, and barred jet black to the very hoofs,
which are large, wide, and well cared-for by nature’s
farrier, the grass in the forest. Two of our Tots
would not eat them because they had never eaten
horse-flesh; but every one else was glad to get “ five-
year-olds,” or even “aged” ones, though of all wild
animals I considered it the worst food, tasting so very
strong. After the tongue or any portion of the meat
had been boiled, it smelt of a stable, and caused
instant disgust and nausea. Cut in long stripes, sun-
dried, and toasted in ashes, was the only way of mak-
ing the zebra flesh lose this flavour. Had we had any

C


34 WILD ANIMALS,


salt, probably pickling it might also have answered.
The paunches were in several cases lined with clusters
of maggots, a disease known amongst sheep in this
country.

Buffaloes gave Speke some dashing home-charges ;
but though I sought them everywhere, I never had a
shot. Their meat was as fine as that which any Ene- -
lish butcher can produce—the men eating of it day
and night as long as it lasted. Brindled gnu is
equally good, but far more beautiful in the field.
Fearfully shy, they look at you for an instant only,
then scamper off, lashing about their switching long
tails; and after giving a short spurt, they turn round
again, take another furtive glance, and then bound
madly away.

Giraffe are such wary animals, their heads peering
over the tops of the acacias on which they feed, that
only one specimen, a bull, was shot. This was done
with a Lancaster ball through the heart, and I thought
the latter small in proportion to the size of the animal.
On asking for the head to be brought for preservation,
I found that the Wezcee porters had cut the ears off,
and were already frizzling them for dinner. The hairs
of the tail are so stiff, thick, long, and such a hand-
some black, that the natives value them very much
for stringing bead-necklaces. It being a thorny acacia
country, our men benefited by the giraffe’s thick skin,
which they converted into excellent sandals. For
days afterwards, as they passed to windward, the
odour of a menagerie was unmistakable.

Lions were fired at once during a moonlight march;
others were heard both day and night making short
coughing noises, but never “roaring like a lion.” They


WILD ANIMALS. 35


kill cattle, and, if trapped, are carried lashed im a Iit-
ter as royal property to the sultan. Tracks of the
elephant were numerous in Ugogo. Here we saw
some hunters, Mukua, from the Lufigi, with long
“Tower” flint-muskets, looking as perfect as when
new. With these they watch the elephant at night
by solitary pools of water, and fire a volley into him ;
but they consider that the best place to strike him is
just in front of the ear orifice. land, hartebeest,
black antelope, &¢., and several smaller species, were
shot or observed in our constant pursuit for specimens.
There is a charm about the bark and spring of the
startled saltatrix, a chamois-sized antelope, or when
seen standing proudly on the face of the shelving rock,
that reminded us of the goorul or chamois of the
Himalayas. ‘Their fore-feet hoofs are immensely long
in the heel, enabling them to cling to the rocks.
The hirax, or coney, basking on the rocks, is also
very interesting: he is about three times the size of
the hare. We saw very few of the latter; they were
the same colour as the English, but smaller, with ears
disproportionately large ; they seemed to run more like
rabbits than hares. Lungoor and monkey we seldom
met with; the latter are hunted for their skins by
the common pariah dog in Uzaramo, but the natives
do not eat them. Squirrels occasionally cracked nuts
on the forest-trees: they were of the usual size and
beauty, most difficult to “twig,” and having a white
longitudinal stripe running down either side. There
were weasels, brown ferrets, small foxes with black
muzzles, and red foxes, jackal-sized, white-chested, with
the perfect bark of a dog, and extremely graceful, with
elegant dark brush. Mangy-coloured, impudent hy-


36 WILD ANIMALS.


enas prowled and howled round the camp, much to
every one’s amusement ; they are such wary, cunning
beasts that only one was shot, and our men had no
delicacy in carrying it into camp for examination
and dissection. In India private servants would re-
fuse to touch such a piece of carrion.

The ugliest monster is the wild boar—head narrow
and long, with four warty protuberances, and the skin
between the two tusks as broad as it 1s between the
eyes. The mane is immense, but behind it there is
little or no hair; however, nothing looks prettier or
more like a race of Arab horses than a herd in full
flight gome across the forest with erect heads and
straight-up tails. We saw a crocodile, the colour of
a tiger, lying on the bank of the Kingani, where
the spoor of hippopotamus was visible. We came
across very few chameleons or serpents, but saw a puff
adder 24 feet long, with abruptly short tail and four
fangs. There were many species of lizards ; one twelve
inches long, very handsome, with vermilion head and
shoulders, and bright-blue body. Shooting two of
these amongst some rocks cost us twelve cloths, as
Iwas told that [ had encroached on sacred ground.
Rats, bugs, and musquitoes seldom gave us trouble.
During rain, frogs and crickets were deafening. In-
sects and white ants (eaten by natives) seemed to enjoy
themselves by attacking us and the candle at night ;
and small yellow butterflies, apple-green underneath,
fluttered in suspense over the edges of little puddles.

Of birds of song there were remarkably few: a
species of lark on the coast had a short sweet note.
Of game-birds, the ordinary guinea-fowl, weighing
34% to 34 Ib. was the most common, and ate deli-


BIRDS AND TRAPS. 37


ciously after being kept two days. larly in the
morning they roost lazily in tall trees, and in the
evening they may be found near cultivations, chas-
ing insects or grubbing up sweet potato. We killed
one rare species, red round the eyes and on the throat,
having a standing-up purple collar of loose skin, a
ridge of ostrich-like black feathers from the back of the
head to the nostrils, weight about 3 lb., and in running
it seemed to have a more compressed body than the
ordinary species. ‘There is something peculiar about
the shape of the “merry-thought,” which differs from
that of a fowl. The best-flavoured bird we found was
the florikan, which has a rough gritty call; but few
were shot, as they were extremely shy. Green pigeons
are handsome, and after they have fed on the wild
fig, no bird looks plumper on the table. Rock-pigeon,
snipe, quail, plover, and several species of partridge,
we shot occasionally; also a very pretty species of pin-
tailed dove found in Ugogo. Pigeons, generally white,
and not differmg from those at home, are sometimes
kept as pets by the villagers. Of ostrich we saw only
one gang on the bare plains of Ugogo, where the
natives make handsome wreaths of their plumes ; and
among the other birds seen were crested cranes, hawks,
a solitary raven or two, a few parrots, but scarcely
any crows. The natives capture all these beasts and
birds by means of pitfalls and nooses. The former are
cut like a wedge, most disagreeable to look down upon,
eight feet deep, and but one foot across the top, which
is coyly covered over. The nooses were formed of an
elastic bough, stripped of its branches, with the noose
hung perpendicularly, neatly concealed and placed in
an antelope-frequented track. Diminutive traps were


38 FISH-CATCHING.


set for partridge, quail, &c.; and if intended for soar-
ing birds, the noose is laid on the ground horizontally.
The animals are struck with spears and killed, and are
eaten by all; while the tendons are made into bow-
strings, the horns used as charms, and the skins rudely
dressed for wear.

Fish are rarely met with. On the coast, women
standing in a circle up to their waists in the sea use
their cloths as nets, and encircle small fish. Stake-
nets in the form of the letter U, turned in at the apices,
were seen. In the interior, upon the clear, gravel-
bottomed river M’gazee, a party of fishers were seen
wading down the stream, the men leading with hand-
nets, while boys in their rear thrust spears into the
holes in the banks. A number of slimy-looking fish,
18 to 20 inches long, had been caught, and were slung
by their heads to a cord tied round the waist, sur-
rounding the wearer like a Highland kilt.

The four native races were as follows:—

I. The Wazaramo.—A smart, dressy (though nearly
naked), well-to-do-looking people, with a most self-
possessed air, and fond of ornaments in beads, sea-
shells, or tin. Their heads are covered with wool,
elongated with bark fibre into hanks, and their bodies
smeared with an oily pomade of red clay, which soon
soils their only covermg—a cloth wrapped round the
loins. The dress of the women is slightly longer, but
they leave the neck and chest uncovered. Their arms
are spears, and bows and arrows, with a few flint-guns.
As they do not allow strangers to camp within their
villages, we saw few houses, but those into which we
were admitted were very tidy, with mud-and-wattle
walls and thatched roofs. The appearanee of these


WAZARAMO VILLAGERS. 39


people was prepossessing. ‘The attentions of the men
to their women were very marked. A man might be
seen in a field performing the office of hair-dresser to
his lady-love ; or, spear in hand, he would join a party
of women going to draw water, pitcher on head, and
escort them lest any of our camp should fall upon, steal,
or seduce them away. A very pretty girl and her beau
were coaxed to sit for their likenesses, and went away
with a smile; but two hideous old women screeched
at the pitch of their voices because they got but one
necklace of beads as payment for sitting before the
camera. This partly exhibits the boisterous nature
of the people: they killed a Kuropean named M.
Maizan, and I have no doubt that it was only the
warning guns fired by our Belooch guard every night
that prevented an attack, for which, however, we were
not unprepared.

The villagers en route turned out to see the white
men; amongst them, during a single march, we saw
two albinos, one of whom had black woolly hair.
Again, of an afternoon, we considered it an extraor-
dinary occurrence if our camp was not thronged by
people, curious and well-conducted, some bringing
their produce to barter. Women would sit at our
tent-doors suckling their infants while cracking jokes
at our expense. We saw no places of burial, but by
the roadside the skeleton of a traveller lay; and also
at other places single tombs, with large dolls of wood
or some broken bowls of delf, standing as emmortelles
at one end of the graves, which were those of Seedees
from Zanzibar. The only superstitious observance we
noticed was in a field at the foot of a tree; a grass
model of a hut was erected for the rain-god, as our


40 SPORTING COUNTRY.


men told me, and called, as usual, a “MWganga.” The
worst features in this Wazaramo race are, that they will
give travellers no aid, and will pounce upon stray men.
They are polygamists; their only faith is belief in
the “black art;” and though residing on the borders of
civilisation, they have no curiosity or ambition.

Il. Lhe Wasagara population live such an outcast
life on the tops of their conical hills, above the path
of the traveller, that we saw little of their manners or
customs. Parties from the coast attack them, to cap-
ture their people and cattle; and as we were considered
of this class, our followers had great difficulty in getting
supplies. We also suffered from a set of coast slave-
hunters, who gave orders that we were not to be sup-
pled with anything, because we had come into the
country to put down slavery. However, it being a
sporting country, we were more or less independent.
Guides were got with difficulty, but a short, sharp
fellow took me over a very fine range of stream-
beds and shady spots for buffalo and rhinoceros,
showing great cleverness and intelligence as a tracker.
We met with nothing but beds of llac convolvulus
in the woods. My guide’s chat, and his archery at a
leaf ten paces off, beguiled the time very agreeably.
He made me laugh at his sultan, Senga, who had four-
teen wives; but he himself, he said, could not marry
until his present wardrobe was increased, 1t consisting
only of what he then wore—a rag round his loins.

Ill. The Wagogo.—We did not enter their oblong,
walled villages, but I have a distinct and vivid recol-
lection of the people. Among them were smart, wiry,
active young fellows, who would make first-rate re-
cruits. Their woolly hair, elongated by working into it


INQUISITIVENESS OF THE PEOPLE. 41


hanks of bark fibre, flew in the air as they ran; beads
were at times strung on, or an ostrich-feather waved
about their heads; their ear-lobes were distended by
a plug of wood, &c. Their arms were five-feet-long
spears, knobsticks, and oblong shields of leather ; dress
generally a small loin-cloth. With a gourd cup they
drew water from their wells and filled it into earthen
“ourahs,” similar to those in India. Women carried
their children on their backs in a skin, with cross
supporting-straps ; and boys brought music out of a
stringed bow attached to a gourd as sounding-board.
We were so mobbed by the people in camp that a ring
of rope had to be placed round our tents; but this
only increased their inquisitiveness. When told to go
away, and not keep peeping under the canvass of our
closed-up tents, they laughed, telling us the ground
we pitched upon was theirs, and that they could take
our guns and property from us if they chose. A
porter of ours accidentally broke one of their bows ;
this was immediately turned to account, and a demand
made for something ten times its value. I shot a lz-
ard at some curiously outcropping rocks, and was told
I had hurt their feelings, and must pay for my folly.
Previously to firing [ had thought of the Indian super-
stition as to sacred spots and marks, and examined the
place well ; but seeing no trace of them, I reckoned
this fine had no connection with any such traditions,
but was knowingly imposed on us in the way of ex-
tortion, They told us we must not have lights out at
night—alluding to Speke making his observations.
Like all Africans, if they gave us any information a
present had to follow. The settlement of the tax was a
most harassing affair. The sultan, after receiving all


42 THE WANYAMUEZI.


he had demanded, said the cloths were not suitable to
his rank—‘“ you have better ones than you gave me,
and my head wife must get some.” In short, he so
bullied us by threats of attack that our main stand-by
of porters, 113 “ Wezees,” were frightened into the
dastardly act of deserting us at the most critical part
of the journey. ,

IV. Wanyamuezi.—The 115 porters we left the sea-
port with were of the class of the Wanyamuezi, and
we had good opportunity for observing their habits
and character. ‘They were average-sized, slim-limbed
negroes, many of them with handsome countenances
and incisions of caste above the cheek-bones; they
were dressed in goat-skins hanging loosely in their front
from the right shoulder; most of them with a shabby
small bow and a couple of arrows; a few of the better
sort had flint-ouns, which they carried awkwardly at
the long “trail,” and pointing to the men behind them.

They are frank and amiable on first acquaintance,
eating or taking anything from your hand, singing
the jolliest of songs with deep-toned choruses from
their thick necks and throats, but soon trying to get
the upper hand, refusing to make the ring-fence
round camp, showing sulks, making halts, or going
short marches, treating with perfect contempt any
message sent them even to sit apart from your tent,
as the smoke of their fires, the odour of their persons,
and their total want of delicacy annoy you. All
these grievances my companion bore with great
patience, and often got the offenders into humour by
suggesting a harangue at night, to be delivered by
their captain. On an animal being cut up into shares
one day, they so far forgot themselves as to dash


THEIR WOMEN. 43


upon it with the utmost rapidity, and bore off the
whole from our Zanzibar men, who were left in vacant
amazement without redress. On killing a goat, I ob-
served they never spilt a drop of blood, but smashed
its head with a stick or stone. Out shooting they
were invaluable as guides, first-rate spoorers, and
never at a loss for anything: a pipe would be made
by putting a grit of clay an inch or so into the end of
a tube of bark. “Duncan’s smoking mixture” they
preferred stuffing as far as possible up their noses.
When an animal was shot they always stole the fat.
They had extraordinary knowledge of edible roots
and herbs, and under almost any circumstances would
not starve. They had no particular superstitions or
sacred days, either in the week or year. ‘They were
intelligent and amusing enough, but had no claim to
honour or honesty—113 of them, although handsomely
paid, deserted us, carrying away a considerable quan-
tity of property. Perhaps they treated us in this way
in consequence of having been badly paid by Arab
traders on former occasions.

A few of their women accompanied us: quiet,
decent, well-conducted, tidy creatures, generally carry-
ing a child each on their backs, a small stool and et
ceteras on their heads, and inveterately smoking during
the march. They would prepare some savoury dish of
herbs for their men on getting into camp, where they
lived in bell-shaped erections made with boughs of
trees.


CHAPTER IV.


SOJOURN AT KAZEH, LAT. 5° §., LONG. 33° E.—PROVINCE OF
UNYANYEMBE—CROPS, CATTLE, ETC.—MOOSSAH, AN INDIAN
TRADER, HIS WIVES, ATTENDANTS, AND COWHERDS—THE
WATUSI — DISASTROUS EFFECTS OF WAR — MOOSSAH’S
ACCOUNT OF THE NORTHERN KINGDOM.


WE were delayed here for fifty-one days on account
of the falling rains, the flooded state of the river
ahead, and the impossibility of getting porters to
move at such a season, when grain was not procur-
able. Our arrival was hailed with great delight.
Moossah, an excellent friend of Speke’s, several
Arabs and many followers, all in holiday attire, came
out a mile to welcome our ragged -looking Indian
file. Guns were fired, yambos and salaams with
shaking of hands followed, and we were lodged once
more under a hospitable roof.

The country is surrounded by low bare hills, which
every morning till eight or nine were obscured by an
unhealthy coloured mist, filling the wide valley where
we lay. There was nothing to cheer the eye—no
river, no trees: it reminded Speke of the Crimea. Ralls
ran here and there through grass, and opened out on


REMEDIES FOR FEVER. 45


white sand: one of these, collecting in a pool, formed
the drinking water of the inhabitants. Scarcely a
man amongst us escaped fever. We arrived on the
25th of January, and by the Ist February several
were laid up. My first attack lasted seven days, the
2d, 4th, 6th, 7th, and 8th terminating in headaches
every morning. After twelve days another sharper
attack, with delirium at night, but no ague, lasted
three days. The third and least severe came on fifteen
days afterwards, with drowsiness and profuse perspira-
tion, and terminated in three days. All suffered from
after-weakness in the limbs; some from blindness of
one eye, the eyelid much inflamed and drooping,
accompanied with excessive watering; or no inflam-
mation of the eye, but total blindness of it, and no
disease or scale observable. Acute pain rarely accom-
panied this complaint. Our men ascribed their bad
health to not having got accustomed to the water of
the country. The natives had no efficient remedies
for preventing the recurrence of fever, but took
pinches of a pounded plant or wood to cure their
headaches, or cupped themselves in the following
curious manner: A man put some beeswax into his
mouth, applied a small cow’s horn to cuts made in the
temple of the patient, exhausted the air by suction, and
with his tongue shut the hole at the end of the horn
with the wax. We had only one fatal case. Quinine
and applications of blistermg tissue behind the ear
and on the temples partially restored health and eye-
sight. During our stay the prevalent winds were the
EK., N.E., and S.E., but the coldest were the west-
erly after rain. The mornings were foggy, the grass
dripped with the night-dew, which interfered with


46 CLIMATE AND AGRICULTURE.


Speke’s observation of the stars by dimming the
instruments. The days were often dark and hazy ;
pelting showers beat down from the N.W., but we
sometimes had a fresh English morning, with a clear
sky, a N.E. wind, and temperature only 69° at 9 a.m.
We had no striking or beautiful sunsets like the equa-
torial at sea, but in the evening the flowering grasses,
gorgeously lit up by the rays of the setting sun, had
a singularly fine effect ; and such evenings were often
followed by a few dry days, and a temperature of 82°.
This hot weather occurred when, at the short twilight,
the sun appeared to set in the east, and the whole sky
was an arched illumination. On an average we had
rain two-fifths of the time we halted, and the greatest
fall noted in twenty-four hours was two inches. These
African rains we did not find followed by the dis-
agreeable steamy or muggy feeling experienced in
India; all was cool and fresh after them. We had
thunder and lightning, but rain did not always follow.

This province of Unyanyembe has nearly four
months of rain, commencing in the end of November,
and winding up with the greatest fall in February.
As soon as the soil of sand, or black spongy mould,
has softened, the seed is dropped, and by the 1st of
February all is as green as an emerald. The young
rice has to struggle for fifteen days against the depre-
dations of a small black caterpillar, green underneath.
It is a precarious time for the agriculturist ; for if rain
does not fall the crop is lost, being eaten close by this
insect. Women walk in the fields, with small hand-
picks, loosening the soil, clearing it of weeds and
worms. There is only one crop in the year, and all
the cereals known in Zanzibar are grown here. Cotton


SUBURBS OF UNYANYEMBE. 47


was considered by an Indian resident to be as fine as
that grown in Kutch, but he said they had no use for
it, merely burning it as wicks. As the previous year’s
corn had been consumed, the poorer classes gathered
the heads of a wild grass (Dactyloctum Avgyptiacum),
and prepared it for stirabout by sun-drying, beating
on the rocks, and rubbing it into flour on their flag-
stones. They also fed upon mushrooms, growing
amongst the rank “dub” grass, after drying, roasting,
and peeling them. ‘They were five inches in diameter,
and sienna-coloured. Another variety was white, and
half the size. All the cattle and goats in the country
seemed to have found their way into the folds of the
Arabs, and had been captured in a war still going on
between them and the native population. The sur-
rounding country is devoid of game, but within a long
day’s march a forest was visited, where various ante-
lopes, giraffes, lions, and a few elephants might be met
with along the valley of the Wallah river. The scales
of an armadillo were seen worn as a charm, three
inches across, and striated or lined at one end. Our
men had a superstition that the person who found a
live armadillo would become a kine—meaning, I im-
agine, that it was so rare. However, we came upon a
pet one at 3° N. latitude. About the cultivations near
the village no singing-birds are ever heard, but the
plumage of those seen is often very brilliant. Flocks
of beautiful little birds, with black bodies, golden-
tinted scarlet heads and backs, pecked at the ears of
corn; or in the rice-fields the favourite of the Cape
farmers, the “locust bird,” black, and looking like a
curlew when walking, went tamely about. Crows,
with a ring of white round the neck, were seen in twos


48 MOOSSAH, AN INDIAN TRADER.


and threes. The matting in the houses was full of
bugs, or ticks, which pestered one while seated at
night, causing considerable irritation.

It is not a country for ivory, the natives seldom if
ever bringing any for sale. Grain was so scarce that
slaves could be purchased for two fathoms of calico.
One day a naked native passed us in charge of three
Seedees armed with spears. They had found him
stealing, and offered him for sale. No one would pur-
chase him, and he was taken to the sultan, who would,
as Moossah said, either spear him, keep him as a slave,
or allow him to be sold. Slaves from the northern
kinedoms of Uganda, &c., were considered the most
valuable, just in the same way as many persons con-
sider a country girl the best servant. They were held
to be more trustworthy than men from the coast, made
excellent servants, and were famous at killing or cap-
turing wild animals. The most esteemed women were
of the Wahumah tribe from Karague; they resembled
the Abyssinians.

Let me give the reader some idea of our life here.
Moossah, an Indian in whose house we resided, was
a fine benevolent old man, with an establishment of
300 native men and women round him. His abode
had, three years ago, taken two months to build, and
it was surrounded by a circular wall which enclosed
his houses, fruit and vegetable gardens, and his stock
of cattle. The lady who presided over the whole
was of most portly dimensions, and her word was law.
Moossah sat from morn till night with his “foondee,”
or chief manager, and other head servants within sight,
receiving salutes and compliments from the rich and
poor at the front or gentlemen’s side of the house,


MOOSSAH’S HOUSEHOLD AT KAZEH. 4g


while the lady presided over the domestic arrange-
ments of the interior. We had full access to both, and
no house could be conducted with greater regularity.
At three o'clock in the morning, Moossah, who had
led a hard life in his day, would call out for his little
pul of opium, which he never missed for forty years.
This would brighten him up till noon. He would then
transact business, chat, and give you the gossip at any
hour you might sit by him on his carpet. To us it
seemed strange that he never stopped talking when
prayers from the Koran were being read to him by a
“Bookeen,” or Madagascar man. Perhaps he had
little respect for the officiating priest, as the same
reverend and learned gentleman was accustomed to
make him his shirts! After a mid-day sleep, he would
refresh himself with a second but larger pill, transact
business, and so end the day. The harem department
presented a more domestic scene. At dawn, women
in robes of coloured chintz, their hair neatly plaited,
gave fresh milk to the swarm of black cats, or churned
butter in gourds by rocking it to and fro on their laps.
By seven o'clock the whole place was swept clean.
Some of the household fed the game-fowls, or looked
after the ducks and pigeons; two women chained by
the neck fetched firewood, or ground corn at a stone ;
children would eat together without dispute, because
a matron presided over them ;—all were quiet, indus-
trious beings, never idle, and as happy as the day was
long. When any of Moossah’s wives gave birth to a
child there was universal rejoicing; the infant was
brought to show its sex: and when one died, the
shrill laments of the women were heard all night long.
When a child misbehaved, we white men were pointed
D


50 MOOSSAH'S HEAD KEEPER.


at to frighten it, as nurses at home too often do with
chost stories.

The most important functionary about this court
was the head keeper or foondee, who had been a
slave all his life, and now possessed a village with a
farm and cattle. His daily duty was to sit within
sight of his master. On Speke calling to see his col-
lection of horns, and extract a bullet from the leg of
one of his slaves, the foondee made us heartily wel-
come. Stools were placed, and in gratitude for the
operation he produced some ripe plantain, and showed
us about his premises. He also took us to one of his
favourite shooting-grounds, where he certainly knew
how to make himself comfortable. His servants had
constructed for him a most luxurious waterproof hut
with broad stripes of freshly-cut bark, and a capital
bedstead of boughs. At night five fires were kept
burning round him to keep off the musquitoes. The
orate was most original: three stout pegs of green
wood driven into the ground, forming an equilateral
triangle, answered every purpose of an iron utensil,
and on it a frying-pan, made of bark, frizzled mush-
rooms and meat to the chief’s satisfaction. By his
own account, he had shot many a lion from trees; and
during the march to and from Zanzibar with his mas-
ter’s property, he, with a staff of under-keepers, used
to supply the porters with rations from wild animals,
which plan saved the expenditure of bead - money.
He had many sporting stories. The lion, he said,
seldom killed men; but, not long ago, one had jumped
the wall of the building and killed five cows, two of
which he dragged over the wall—the natives fearing
to impede his course.


MOOSSAH’S WATUSL COWHERDS. 51


Moossah’s cowherds were a very interesting set of
people—so well-featured, tall, and generally superior
to the Africans, that I took great interest in them.
They were Watusi from Karague. There were ten
men and women, all with woolly hair—the men leay-
ing a crescent of it unshaved. ‘Their gums were
blackened with a preparation from the tamarind-seed,
powdered, roasted, and mixed into a paste with blue
vitriol, and afterwards heated until fit for use. Their
ornaments were large solid rings of brass upon the
wrists, and iron rings, in masses, on their ankles. In
walking they carried a bow and arrow, a staff, and long-
stemmed pipe. The women were of a large stamp,
with fine oval faces and erect figures, clad in well-
dressed cow-skin from above their waists to their small
feet. Their huts were quite different from any we
had seen, being shaped like the half of an orange, and
only five feet high, made of boughs, and covered with
grass very neatly. There was but one door; the hut
had no chimney, the smoke finding its way through
the light grass roof. I observed a portable Indian
“choolah” or fireplace inside the hut, which was kept
tidily floored with hay.

These Watusi are a curious and distinct race. Pre-
vious to milking the cows in the morning, they wash
themselves, their teeth, and their wooden milk-ves-
sels or gourds with the urine of the animal, as they
consider there is some virtue in it, afterwards using
fresh water for cleansing. They are allowed half the
milk, and Moossah had his half milked into his own
clean vessels in the morning at eight o’clock. It took
the milk of two cows to fill one good-sized tin teapot.
A cow’s value was four or five dollars, though a first


52 WATUSI MODE OF SALUTATION.


class one would cost double, or £2. Men milked them
into a large crucible of wood or gourd im an open
yard; the hind-legs were tied above the hocks with a
thong of leather; one of their handsome women sat
on the other side with a bough beating off the flies, and
with a stick to keep away the calf which stood at its
mother’s head, a boy sometimes assisting. Should the
calf die, its skin is stuffed and placed before the cow,
otherwise she refuses her milk. The Wanyamuezi look
with great respect on this people. When two of them
meet, the Wezee puts both his palms together, these
are gently clasped by the Watusi, a few inaudible
words are repeated, and they pass on. The form of
salutation when a Watusi meets one of his women
senior to himself is gentle and pleasing ; he places his
hands on her arms below her shoulders, while her
hands hang by her side.

The way in which an African leads a goat or cow
is different from the manner in this country. The
fore-leg of the goat is held up by the man, who walks
briskly along as if he led a child. An unruly cow is
never tied by the head: a man walks behind it, hav-
ing hold of a rope tied tightly round its hock; this
plan seems to subdue or Rareyfy the animal most com-
pletely. For several days after our arrival, different
Arab residents sent us presents of eggs, some coftee, a
fatted cow, rice, or a goat—a very pleasing custom,
which was intended as their call upon us. We in
return sent each a handsome cloth, which they valued
very much. This friendly ceremony over, they freely
asked our advice when mecessary.

For two years, since the death of the chief of the
country, the people of Kazeh had been fighting against


DEATH OF SNAY, AN ARAB CHIEF. 53


the real heir to uphold the puppet appointed by them
in his stead. They had killed 300 natives, seized all
their cattle and goats, and lost two Arabs and sixty
slaves. A severe defeat occurred while we were there,
Snay, the chief Arab, and six others, with followers,
being killed. A panic ensued, and Speke was requested
to patch up a peace by inviting the rebel Manua Sera
into Kazeh to attend a conference. “Once,” they
said, “at our mercy, we can murder him!” We were
shocked at hearing this, but Moossah assured us that it
was no uncommon occurrence with them. The news
of their defeat was brought us by a man who may be
allowed to tell his own story :—“I was one of five in
charge of cattle; the rebel himself killed three of us;
and as I never fight, but run, I threw away every-
thing, and saved my life by coming here.” He had a
very good sword by him. “ Where did you get that
sword?” “Oh! it belongs to an Arab who was
killed ; I picked it up.”

It seems that Snay was a very brave fellow, who
in the midst of every fight whipped his slaves to pre-
vent them from running away; but this time they
got dispersed after plunder: he was left unprotected ;
and being old and too proud to run like his slaves,
he fell a victim. After this severe defeat many
plans were proposed - for affording relief. “The
single cannon must be sent in the morning.” Moos-
sah was tired of assisting them. “The Arabs stick at
nothing; they had expended twenty barrels of his gun-
powder and lost him five slaves ; a beautiful gun of his
was lost by his late partner Jaffir in this last fight.
Jaffir had just been killed, and yet they still ask for
aid!” So with true Indian parsimony he despatched


54. DEPOPULATION FROM WAR.


five slaves to the war, with only ten rounds of
wrought-iron bullets each, to fight the powerful rebel
chief !

This long-continued war had driven the natives of
the country away from the Arab settlement; the
bazaar supplied almost nothing—only one _ tobacco-
shop and one or two depots for grain; the most com-
mon iron-work could not be made. The villages
around had no inhabitants but the sick, aged, dying,
and starving, or idiots. We were told not to walk out
alone, as a man had been killed the previous month;
the country had been made dangerous, and the people
were getting exterminated. But when one of our
men cut through his hut and ran away one night,
having been suspected of theft, Moossah said with
confidence, “The Wezees will not harm him, neither
will they give him shelter; he'll be found ;” and so
he was, rifle and bayonet untouched. All the natives
were Hywans—that is, unable to count, write, or
tell their own ages. Some practised medicine, giving
one of our men, who suffered from weakness in the
limbs after fever, a black ointment made of roots.
The black art of the Damars and the chipping of the
Oovamba’s teeth are practised here, as noticed in An-
dersson’s Travels. During the illness of the late chief,
witchcraft was suspected to be the cause. A fowl was
placed in the hands of the suspected, dissected by a
seer, and verdict given accordingly. Similar fancies,
differing only a little in detail, long prevailed in the
Highlands of Scotland, a very common form being to
bury a black fowl in the exact spot where a person
had been first seized with illness. Moossah had never
heard of fowls being thrown up in the air to discover


MOOSSAH’S ACCOUNT OF KARAGUE AND UGANDA. 55


the sorcerer; and but one woman was killed to be
placed in the grave with the old king.

Our exploration of the northern kingdoms enabled
us to ascertain how far the mass of information
gleaned from our good friend Moossah was correct.
I can honestly say that, though he had never visited
Uganda,* his hearsay, on the whole, was a marvel
of accuracy :—“The Egyptian river flowed from the
Lake Nyanza. Copper and gold are found m Uganda.
[We discovered neither, however.| The king alone
wears clothes, killing all others who do so. He keeps
slaves, and has 3000 women. The people have 100
each, and the youngest fellow 10 to 20, whom they
steal or kidnap in war. The Karague people live en-
tirely on milk diet, yet they are men fit for war.
M'tezia, the king of Uganda, is a ‘boorra admi,’ bad
man; but being great friends with Rumanika (of
Karague), he will send you from 300 to 400 men to
escort you. Smallpox is rife in Uganda yearly. The
king has Zanzibar guns. At Uganda and Karague the
sultans do not, as in other countries, claim one tusk of
the killed elephant. Karague people carry about grog
in calabashes; one sort being an intoxicating, fiery
liquor, the other mild and good. Rhinoceros (white)
are numerous. The king of Uganda makes people
kneel in front of him, commanding them not to expose
their skin or feet before his 400 or 500 women. The
reed-grass huts of Karague and Uganda are so high
that strong fires may be burned in them. Musicians
of every sort there; king has five clocks sent him


* At Kazeh I understood that Moossah had never travelled farther
than Karague ; but I observe that Speke, in his Journal, states that
Moossah (or “ Musa,” as he writes the name) had reached Uganda.


56 DEPARTURE FROM KAZEH.


from Kazeh. At Karague they have three crops yearly
of murwa and sorghum. King of Uganda has a
menagerie of 200 wild buffaloes; will give as many
cheetah (leopard) skins as you like. The Wa-
humah of Karague have the most enormous arms,
bodies, and legs; cannot walk; always rest on their
elbows and knees; hands and feet very small; good
noses and fair skins. Karague sultan cannot write,
but sends a string of bark-cloth with knots upon it
corresponding with the number of elephant-tusks sent.”
All this exciting information made us eager for a
move, but Moossah kept delaying. However, by the
middle of March we had finished maps from observa-
tions, made collections, boiled thermometers, inspected
newly-purchased presents for the kings ahead, sketched,
written reports and letters to wait any chance oppor-
tunity for the coast, and recovered from sickness. The
rivers would soon be fordable, and a fourth of our
porters had arrived; the remainder dreaded coming
to us, aS War was waging. We pitched camp on the
15th, and marched north without Moossah on the
16th March 1861, leaving the bulk of our kit be-
hind, in charge of Bombay. In return for Moossah’s
hospitality, Speke gave him five hundred dollars
and a beautifully chased gold watch made to order by
M‘Cabe. We experienced one great privation here,
never receiving letters from home; but, odd enough,
those despatched by us reached their destination.


CHAPTER V.


JOURNEY TO UKUNI—DIFFICULTIES AT STARTING—PICTURESQUE
COUNTRY— ATTACKS OF FEVER—TREES AND FRUIT— MODE
OF MAKING BARK-CLOTH—-NATURAL HISTORY—NATIVE CLUB-
HOUSE—-DANCES AND GAMES—DESCRIPTION OF A SULTAN—
WOMEN OF THE COUNTRY—SLAVES IN IRONS—RELEASE OF A
SLAVE—NATIVE COOKERY—-THE NEGRO ON PARADE.


HoweEVER great was our desire to push on with the
journey, we could not impress the Africans with this
feeling. Porters would be ordered, and two days after-
wards you found no one had gone for them. A general
panic had seized the natives that the plundering Wa-
tuta race were on the wing. The villages to the north
were busy making defences, or a report had reached
them that the Arabs had killed two of their clan ;
how, therefore, could they take service with us, who
might do the same? Everything seemed to be against
us; they would accept no bribe. None of the slaves
of the Arabs would take service, though offered it,
first by Baraka, and then by Speke in person, who
walked 80 miles to induce them to accompany us.
Ultimately we moved off by detachments, and accom-
plished 90 miles, with 110 men’s loads, in 75 days.


58 ROUTE TO MINEENGA.


To describe this country and its inhabitants, I devote
the present chapter.

The whole route was fine; never once did we lose
sight of trees, wooded hills, or valleys, while water was
everywhere abundant. The forest was what might be
called “ Donkey or Zebra forest”—bare-poled trees and
no underwood. The hills, now close, now distant,
were richly clothed and exceedingly graceful, remind-
ing me of the Trosachs. Grey rocks looked out in
fantastic shapes from amongst the trees. Huge blocks
lay one over the other, or abruptly ended a range of
hill. The valleys had been cleared by the axe, the
wild grasses were most luxuriant, and palisaded vil-
lages were often met with. We had not to leave the
path in order to pluck the Indian corn. Our way led
from one valley to another, or threaded the green forest,
which rang with the songs of our followers. Gene-
rally the road was of fine sand, which, when lately
washed by the rains, was loose and yellow. Once it
crossed a quicksand, the only one I recollect seemg in
Africa—very shaky and watery—along which a patch
of rice grew. Two streams running west were forded ;
the Gombe, twenty yards across, there only 44 feet
deep—and with no current, merely a gentle flow of
mud-coloured water ; its banks well wooded and shelv-
ing: our men shouldered us across, but there were
some rickety canoes made of bark lying on the left
bank. The other we crossed at night in two channels
running also west, but said to be dry one half of the
year, although now it was breast-deep, with a current
that nearly bore me down in my weak state. Attacks
of fever came on about every tenth day, lasting
eight and ten hours, with from two to five days of


CAPE RIFLEMEN OBLIGED TO RETURN. 59


nausea and fevered brain. Speke, who had been so
long in Africa, was not subject to them, but our men
were constantly laid up. One died, and the poor Cape
riflemen were such martyrs to fevers and sore eyes,
that they confessed they could not stand the hardships
of the journey, and were sent back to Kazeh, saying
they were sorry they had come so far. We were told
that smallpox was the most fatal disease in this part
of the country, but we saw no cases. The general
elevation of the country is 3400 feet, rismg gently up
to the low ranges of hills everywhere around. It is
more open than Unyanyembe. Mists rarely he, except
on the hill-tops after ram. ‘The greatest fall measured
was three-fourths of an inch in half an hour, after a
storm, which burst overhead with fearful concussions
of thunder at 3 p.m. of the 13th April. This may be
described as the grand finale to the rainy season.
Every morning the dews lay heavily, and a 8.E. wind
blew, but the coolest breeze was when from 8. by W.
The daily temperature inside a hut was 78° to 80° at
1pm. During the day the sky was generally clear,
with a fierce sun; but the air in the mornings and
evenings was deliciously cool, a fire at night being
cheery and comfortable. No dust-storms troubled
us, otherwise the open huts would have been unin-
habitable. Drinking water was always sweet and
refreshing. At Mineenga a copious spring gushed
out of the shell of a tree lying level with the
earth in the centre of a rice-field. This was the well
of the village; from its position it was considered a
phenomenon, and was looked on with veneration, as
it afforded cool water the whole year round—a, rare


blessing.


60 FLORA OF MINEENGA.


The flora was new and interesting; but we were
amazed at not seeing better crops, as grasses with
pendent panicles grew luxuriantly ten feet high. The
surface-soil, however, was very light—merely the wash-
ings of the hill-sides brought down in a stream of red
clay grit. In this tract of country we came upon
eroups of palms, not met with since we left the coast :
they were converted into many uses—fences, thatching,
firewood, and uprights for building, &e. Toddy also
was occasionally extracted. The fruit hung down in
rich, large, tempting clusters, at the mercy of any
hungry traveller. We observed several of these palms,
with their leaf-stalks still remainmg on the tree, to
be the support and life of a species of ficus, growing
like a parasite, luxuriantly healthy, its roots not near
the ground, but forming a complete network round
the stem of the palm. ‘Tamarind-trees, so umbrageous
and beautiful in outline, were numerous. There was
also the rumex, from ten to twelve feet high; and the
tree, a ficus, whose bark affords the Waganda their
clothing, was here seen for the first time. The bark is
taken off in stripes, according to the size they can get
it, then damped and beaten by heavy wooden hammers
till pliant, and afterwards sewn into a sheet the colour
of chamois-leather, but much thicker; the outer bark
is thrown away. Near the villages a few scrubby
bushes of cotton were grown upon mounds made by —
white ants. Looms of the rudest construction con-
verted the produce of these into a hard, very stout,
heavy cloth, about four or five feet in size, with one-
fourth of it a black border, and worn by women only.
Sessamum grew in ridges with the sorghum; its oil,
and that extracted from the ground-nut, being used


HARVEST SCENE. 61


by the natives for smearing themselves from head to
foot, giving their skins a handsome colour, like the
gloss on polished marble. ‘To vary the colour, some
red clay isadded. The sorghum is sometimes affected
with a black bight, but the natives do not think this
any deterioration; all goes into the mill. They live
upon Indian corn, ulezee, and sorghum, made into
flour by rubbing the grains between stones as a house-
painter pounds colours. Their vegetables are sweet
potato, and the leaves, flowers, and fruits of pumpkins;
and they brought us daily ground-nuts, tobacco, and
fowls for sale. On the 3d of April the rice-harvest
was being gathered in; but we perceived no traces
of irrigation as in Egypt. Abundant rains gave an
ample crop. The reapers consisted of negro women
and girls, who sang pleasantly, though the scene was
marred by the sight of a gang of men-slaves, heavily
ironed together by their necks, with some superinten-
dents, gleaning. Those who had small knives cut the
stalk four or five inches below the grain, and held it
in their left hand till the hand was full, when it was
placed in a huge tub of bark lying in the field. In
this way a three-feet-high stubble was left standing,
to be trodden down by cattle. ‘The thrashing of the
rice was novel. A quantity of ears was placed upon a
cow’s hide, slaves in irons were made to work it with
their toes and feet, and winnow it in the wind; and
after being thoroughly sun-dried upon a clear space of
cow-dunged ground, it was fit for the process of shell-
ing in the large pestle and mortar. If a considerable
amount was to be thrashed, a bludgeon answered the
purpose of the negroes’ feet. The stubble would after-
wards be turned over with powerful long-handled hoes,


62 PRICE OF PROVISIONS.


beds of the soil made, and the suckers. or offshoots of
the sweet potato planted there by bands of twenty
or thirty villagers, shouting and singing the whole time.
If our Seedees had to clean rice in the wooden mortar, a
dozen hands would set about the work of two. It could
not be done without those who worked beating time
with the pestle to their song, the lookers-on clapping
hands and stamping with their feet. The work and
song never ceased till the rice was pounded almost
into dust—such joyous, reckless creatures are these
simple Africans! Yams are grown upon mounds of
earth placed all over a field, the branches of the plant
trained up a stick, or more commonly allowed to crawl
over the ground. They do not attain a great growth.
Grain is housed under the eaves of stack-shaped huts,
or a clustered mass of Indian corn may be seen sus-
pended from the bough of a tree, as exhibited in the
illustration of “Unyamuezi harvest,” in Captain Speke’s
Journal.

Provisions were all remarkably cheap upon this
route. A fat cow was purchased for four fathoms of
calico; another full-sized cow, and four small goats,
were got for eight fathoms; a single sheep was dear
at two fathoms; but three small goats were a bargain
at the same price; a donkey was offered for fourteen,
but he would have been dear at half the amount. For
a fowl, one native demanded a charge of gunpowder,
and would not sell it for anything else; another native
led in a goat to camp, saying if we repaired his old
flint-musket we should have the animal; he refused
to bargain for anything else. For two quarts of im-
pure honey, ten strings of common beads and a fathom
of calico were asked, but not given. Milk was not


CATTLE AND WILD ANIMALS. 63


always to be had, the people being afraid to keep
herds of cattle, as they would attract the plundering
propensities of the wandering Watuta race. Milk
sometimes cost three strings of beads per pint; twelve
measures of rice, one fathom of calico; sweet potatoes
were one-tenth of the price they brought at Zanzibar;
a basinful of ground-nuts or a load of wood cost but
one string of ordinary beads. In short, our men lived
luxuriously on their daily allowance of one string of
beads per man. The people preferred keeping a few
milk-cows, bemg more productive than oxen, which
were rarely met with, except one or two fattened up
to a large size on purpose to be killed on the visit of
a neighbouring sultan, or to celebrate some success in
war. After the cattle have been brought in at night,
a quantity of rubbish is allowed to smoke and smoulder
in the centre of their fold. It was amusing to watch
how each animal took up its nightly position, never
altering it, and thoroughly enjoying the smoke, which
prevented it from being annoyed by insects. The
sheep were very stupid-looking animals, small, and
wanting in rotundity. Their colour was either white
and black, black with white, or a bay brown; no
wool, but crisp hair; their tails tapered off from a
broad fatty base. The head was the only handsome
part; and two pieces of skin hung from the throat, as
is seen in the long-eared breed of goats in India.

Of wild animals we shot none on this route, though,
away from the cultivations, the spoors of buffalo and
antelope were seen. A herd of ten elephants had
passed through the district, eating up the sorghum
crop, but no one went after them. ‘The skin of a leo-
pard was brought us for sale. Its spots were jet black


64. BIRDS.


upon yellow ground, and shone almost like a mirror.
At this season of harvest the crops were favourable
for concealing lions; and after a native had been
killed by one, we were recommended not to go out
after sunset. When travelling at night, the natives
move quickly in bodies, blowing cow-horn trumpets,
which sound wild in the stillness. While we were at
Mineenga three men were chased by a pair of lions,
and just as the last man reached a hut, he was picked
off by a horrible man-eater. I went to see the spot.
There were the tracks of the poor victim when knocked
down and dragged, and where his blood was first spilt;
farther on, blood lay in quantities, as the body had
been trailed along; but of the body itself only a small
bit of bone was left. The incident had happened just
after sunset, said to be the most dangerous time.

Here Speke shot and brought in a load of four large
black geese, weighing 9 Ib. each, having curious horny
spurs to their shoulders, and taking to trees on being
wounded. Farther south I had seen the same kind
flapping their wings and pluming themselves between
showers on rocks in the bed of a stream, and I took
them for cormorants. Their wings were white outside
and black under. The natives came in numbers to see
these birds, such a load of them never having been
seen before. The wing-feathers were converted into
head-dresses, but the meat was rejected. Flocks of wild
pigeon and varieties of small hawks were constantly
seen about the groves of palms. We shot numbers
of the former, but they were not good eating, though
plump to look at: a large red wattle surrounded the
eyes; their plumage was extremely pretty; wings and
rumps blue, with one white bar across their black tails ;


UNYAMUEZI VILLAGES. 65


shoulders and elbows chocolate-coloured ; feathers of
the crop forked; and legs grey. The crested crane is
a slaty black or blue colour, the size of a heron, with
shorter hackles. His head is very handsome, the con-
trasts of colour being beautiful. He has a black bill,
a top of rich black feathers, behind it a straw-coloured
bunch of four-inch-long fibres, having a few black
featherlets near their roots; a chalky-white bare skin
on the cheeks, and a hanging scarlet wattle under-
neath, with quantities of beautiful blue down on the
rump; his call at night when roosting is harsh and
orating. Fish weighing three and four pounds were
- occasionally caught by our men in pools, but the na-
tives would not eat them, as they had not come out
of the sea. However, with the addition of eggs, we
thought these mud-fish (Makambara) as good as any
we had ever tasted.

The villages of the country are fortified by high
palisades ; many of them are of immense strength, hav-
ing a broad dry ditch, a quickset hedge of euphorbia,
a covered-way, and then a palisading. Sometimes a
very good attempt at a bastion of mud is made, to
give a flanking fire of arrows. Outside, opposite the
only entry of one village, an old hoe was stuck on a
mound, and protected by an awning of bark cloth:
we were told this was to repel the evil eye. To
give a general idea of these villages, I may mention
that, on entering at the low doorway, you see before
you an avenue of palisades; to the right and left sets
of houses are similarly railed off. Until lodging had
been obtained inside the village, we rested with our kit
at the “iwansa” orclub-house. It wasa long room, 12
by 18 feet, with one door, a low flat roof, well blackened

E


66 UNYAMUEZI DANCE.


with smoke, and no chimney. Along its length there
ran a high inclined bench, on which cow-skins were
spread for men to take their siesta. Some huge drums
were hung in one corner, and logs smouldered on the
eround. The young men of the village gathered at
the club-house to get the news. They smoked, pulled
out each other's eyelashes and eyebrows, filed their
teeth, and cut their marks of caste on the face or tem-
ples. Dances would take place in the space in front
of it, either by day or night. The regular Wezee dance
is as follows :—A strip of bark or cow-skin is laid on
the ground, and a line of men, the tallest in the centre,
stand on it; the drums commence, a howling song joins
in, and with hands on their haunches and heads bent
down, they thump in unison with their feet. Female
spectators look on silently from behind, and men in
front join in the chorus. A shout of laughter, or burst
of admiration, winds up each dance, and never was
there a more truly primitive scene of joyous riot.
Our Seedees had a much better performance, which
they went through to the music of their voices, hands,
and feet. Two stood in the centre of a ring, kick-
ing high at one another lke Frenchmen, clapping
hands and dodging about most ingeniously, while the
mob sang a lively song, clapped hands and stamped,
all keeping perfect time, and enjoying it with the
most thorough good-humour. They also had a favourite
teetotum game. ‘T'wo sides were formed facing each
other, and all sitting on the ground. Hach had before
him a stump of Indian corn and a teetotum of gourd
in his hand. The object was to knock over with the
spinning-totum the adversaries’ stump, and the efforts
on each occasion caused immense merriment.


EARLY MORNING SOUNDS. 365


In a Wezee village there are few sounds to disturb
one’s night rest: the traveller's horn, and the reply to
it from a neighbouring village, an accidental alarm,
the chirping of crickets, and the cry from a sick child,
however, occasionally broke upon the stillness of our
nights. Waking early, the first sounds we heard were
the crowing of cocks, the impatient lowing of cows,
the bleating of calves, and the chirping of sparrows
and a few other unmusical birds. The pestle and mor-
tar shelling corn would soon after be heard, or the
cooing of wild pigeons in the grove of palms. The
huts were shaped like corn-stacks, supported by bare
poles, 15 feet high, and 15 to 18 feet in diameter ; some-
times their grass roofs would be protected from sparks
by “michans,” or frames of Indian-corn stalks; there
were no carpets; all of them were unswept, and dark
as the hold of a ship. A few earthen jars, made like
the Indian “gurrah,’ for boiling vegetables or their
stirabout, tattered skins, an old bow and arrow, some
cups of grass, some gourds, perhaps a stool, constituted
the whole of the furniture. Grain was housed in
bandboxes of bark, and goats or calves had free access
over the house. The goat-skins worn by the Usagara
natives differed from their neighbours in Unyanyembe,
bemg neatly dressed, so as to leave an edging of fur
upon them. The cotton-cloth of the country, or a
piece of soiled calico, generally covered the loins of the
women. We saw here a man wearing the skin of a
new antelope, the Nzoe, afterwards discovered in the
Karague Lake.

A description of one of the sultans will suffice to
give a general impression of the appearance, manners,
customs, &c., of the three Wezee clans we had passed


68 UNYAMUEZI SULTAN.


through, keeping in mind that this dignitary was the
finest specimen we had seen, and was supposed to be
enlightened, though he did not know his own age,
could neither read, write, nor count beyond ten, and
had no names for any day of the week, for any month,
or for any year! After we had been about a month
in his district, Sultan Ugalee—z.e., Stirabout—arrived
at Mineenga on the 21st of April, and was saluted by
file-firing from our volunteers, and shrill cries from the
women. He visited us in our verandah the day follow-
ing. He looks about twenty-two years of age; has
three children and thirty wives ; is six feet high, stout,
with a stupid, heavy expression. His bare head is in
tassels, black hanks of fibre beg mixed in with his
hair. His body is loosely wrapped round with a blue
and yellow cotton cloth ; his lois are covered with a
dirty oily bit of calico, and his feet are large and naked.
A monster ivory ring is on his left wrist, while the
right one bears a copper ring of rope pattern; several
hundreds of wire rings are massed round his ankles. He
was asked to be seated on one of our iron stools, but
looked at first frightened, and did not open his mouth.
An old man spoke for him, and a crowd of thirty fol-
lowers squatted behind him. Speke, to amuse him,
produced his six-barrelled revolver, but he merely
eyed it intently. The books of birds and animals, on
being shown to him upside down by Sirboko, the
head man of the village, drew from him a sickly
smile, and he was pleased to imply that he pre-
ferred the animals to the birds. He received some
snuff in the palm of his hand, took a good pinch, and
gave the rest to his spokesman. He was led to look
at my musquito-curtamed bed, and on moving away


UNYAMUEZI WOMEN. 69


was invited to dine with us. We sent him a message
at seven o'clock that the feast was prepared, but a re-
ply came that he was “full,” and could not be tempted
even with a glass of rum. The followimg day he came
to wish us good-bye, and left without any exchange of
presents, being thus very different from the grasping
race of Ugogo.

The arms of the people consisted of spears, bows
and arrows, and leather shields shaped like the figure
8. Boys in the villages were fond of practising war,
by pelting each other with Indian-corn stumps, using
leather shields of defence.

We had daily visits from the women of the country,
who came in parties. They were copper-coloured and
flat-featured, and wore round their necks a profusion
of pendent bead necklaces of the colour of the moun-
tain-ash berry; their ankles were concealed with
masses of wire rings. For hours they sat silently be-
fore us, smoking, nursing, and shampooing the lmbs
and necks of their infants; some wore the heavy cloth
of the country, others had soiled robes of calico. Young
girls, many of them with pleasing faces and plump
round figures, wore merely a diminutive cloth about
their loins, and infants had a fringe of beads. These
women were rarely accompanied by men, but on Speke
having taken a woman’s likeness, the husband _ re-
quested him to write his (the husband’s) name on the
picture, so that the people of England might know
whose wife she was! We saw some decidedly hand-
some N’yambo girls on this route: their men at-
tend upon cattle exclusively, while they stay at
home doing household work, cooking, coquetting, and
showing off their beautiful feet and ankles. Two, in


70 WAHA WOMEN.


the bloom of youth, sat by us with their arms most
affectionately twined round each other’s neck, till
asked to sit apart that they might be sketched. The
arms were at once dropped, exposing their beautiful
necks and busts, quite models for a “Greek Slave.”
Their woolly hair was combed out and raised up from
the forehead and over their ears by a broad band from
the skin of a milk-white cow; this contrasted strik-
ingly with their transparent light copper skins.

The Waha women are somewhat similar, having
tall, erect, graceful figures even without crinoline, and
with intelligent features. They are looked upon as
an inferior tribe to the Watusi (described at Kazeh),
though wearing the hair bound up, and having naked
arms, &c., similar to them; but their cow-skin cover-
ings from the waist to the ankle are different, being
of a yellow-ochre colour. We put up one day at the
settlement of a trader, Sungoro-bin-Tabeeb, of whom
we had heard a good deal, as he travelled always
in a double-poled tent, and kept sixty wives, who
lived like goats inside his tent. We saw five of his
women; one was a Hubshee, or Abyssinian, whose
appearance disappointed us. Her mouth was large,
and, though fair for a negress, and with distinctly
bridged nose, she was a poor specimen of her race.
Another was of my favourite caste, always distinguish-
able by their intelligence and easy, polite manner—
a Watusi, a beautiful tall girl, with large dark eyes,
the smallest mouth and nose, thin lips, small hands,
&c. Speke said she much resembled the Somal ; her
noble race never will become slaves, preferring death
to slavery, and they refuse to touch fowls or goats.
It was to be regretted that she had not a better


SIRBOKO OF MINEENGA. rail


husband, for Sungoro had been in jail for robbery,
committed by order of his Arab master. His master,
however, by way of compensation, left him his ill-
gotten wealth.

Two years previous to our arrival in this dis-
trict, the wandering Watuta, whose women are said
to use the bow and arrow, treacherously inviting up
their enemy, had come in thousands to plunder cattle
from the villages; but after fighting against the sul-
tan for five days and losing three men, they left, not
being able to make way against the muskets of a See-
dee named Sirboko. We lived for some days with
this excellent man, who was most anxious to get back
to Zanzibar, but the sultan would not hear of his
departure ; because, in return for his having protected
his country, he had made over to him a considerable
tract of land, on which he was expected to reside for
life. This was a rare instance of generosity. While
living in his clean, comfortable, thatched bungalow,
waiting for porters, Sheikh Said communicated to us
by letter from Kazeh that we had better get on with
our journey as fast as we could, for the Arabs there
had meditated putting us to death, believing that we
were the accomplices of the rebel chief Manua Sera!
However, on our friend Moossah taking a solemn Mus-
sulman oath that neither he nor we were thus guilty,
the affair was supposed to have blown over, but they
would not allow Moossah to join us. Since poor
Snays death Mohinna was the chief of the Arabs,
and had taken offence at us, probably because he was
requested not to beat so brutally his women-slaves,
who one day came weeping and wailing to us at
Kazeh for protection. The result of our good-natured


72 | SLAVES IN CHAINS.


advice was that, though he promised he should not
again offend, the poor women got another and more
severe beating, and were put in the stocks to prevent
their coming near us to complain. The class of Arabs
we met were certainly a most degraded set, and in-
stead of improving the country had brought ruin upon
it by their imperiousness and cruelty. All traded
in slaves, whom, for security’s sake, they were often
obliged to treat harshly. At Mineenga, we met
several parties or gangs of slaves in chains, and my
thoughts reverted to the happy village-life in our own
country, a pleasing contrast to such painful and re-
volting scenes.

Clad each in a single goat-skin, the slaves kept
themselves warm at night lying near a fire. Never
is the chain unfastened day or night. Should one of
the number require to move, the whole must accom-
pany him. All ate together boiled sweet potato, or a
spinage made from the leaves of the pumpkin plant,
and were kept in poor condition to prevent their
becoming troublesome. One day a woman-slave, on
seeing our cook casting away the head of a fowl he
had just killed, picked it up, and gave it to a poor
convalescent slave, who grasped it with the eagerness
of a dog. Any meat or bones left over from our
dinner were always given them. A small lad, whose
ears had been cut off (probably a Uganda boy),
watched or accompanied the slaves, and treated them,
I thought, with unfeeling coarseness. A sick slave
having recovered, it was the boy’s duty to chain him
to his gang again, and it was grievous to see the
rough, careless way he used the poor emaciated crea-
ture. Beyond bringing in firewood for themselves


RELEASE OF A SLAVE. 73


and cleaning corn, they were not much worked. The
sole object of the owner was to keep them alive, and
prevent their running away till sold at the coast. Ten
men and five women had lately deserted, chains and
all, from Sirboko, so that he did not approve of taking
off their irons ; “the birds would soon fly if he did.”
They looked generally sullen and full of despair; but
might be seen dancing, and even riotous at times, till
a word from the earless imp of a boy restored order.
One amongst them was of a cannibal race to the N.W.
of the Tanganyika. In appearance he did not differ
from the rest, but he was laughed at for his cannibal
propensities, which were not entertained by them.
Another who had been five years in chains was heard
by Speke to say that “life was a burden to him; he
could stand it no longer.” We had observed him to
be a good fellow, the leader and conductor of his gang,
and we released him from bondage ; his chains were
struck off with a hammer while he lay calmly with
his head on a block. Once on his feet, a freed man,
he did not seem to believe the fact ; but when attired
in a clean sheet of calico by Baraka, he strutted about,
the pet of our Seedees, and came to make us his best
bow. His life had been hazardous, as proved by the
spear-wounds in his body; he had been captured by
the Watuta, who cut off several of his toes, and also
some of his toe-nails. This man never deserted us
the whole journey. It was his good fortune to reach
Cairo, with the character of a faithful servant ; and if
any of his companions attempted to assault his bene-
factor Baraka, he would instantly fly to defend him.
The curiosity of the people was sometimes trying to
our tempers; but it was excusable, as they had never


74. THIEVES.


seen white men before. There was not the slightest
privacy even inside our tent; they were certain to
peer in. Sitting in the open air under a tree was tried,
and succeeded best, for they saw you till they became
tired of looking, or at your laughing at or mimicking
them. very one, except an old woman, was easy to
manage. She would pester you with questions you
didn’t understand, didn’t mind being laughed at, and
would not leave till led away by some villager who took
compassion on us. Another woman was most anxious
to see my feet. “What had I under my shoes and
socks? She had never seen such coverings.” I told her
she could not be gratified till the evening, when I would
take them off. The men were generally fawning, very
inquisitive, and fond of putting their arms round Bom-
bay’s neck to try and get him to give them some pre-
sent. Little satisfied them ; and though we had all our
kit without lock or key, we never suffered loss by theft
in a Wezee village. At Sirboko’s, thieves came one
night, were caught, beaten, and dismissed. Hxactly
one month afterwards they again came, carrying away
a tin case with clothes and writing materials, seven
ivories of Sirboko’s, &e. &e. Our Seedees were as
active as policemen, flying about the whole night with
torches, looking for the stolen goods, and at break of
day they found the tin case, minus some things, in-
cluding four tusks. To recover the rest a quack
doctor or Mganga was sent for, an elderly-looking
man, and he found the whole, except an ivory and a
flannel shirt, in a couple of days. The thieves, in fear,
had placed the articles at the doorway of the village.
Our men were most excitable creatures. If a cow
attempted to break out of the village by jumping fences


SEEDEES AS SERVANTS. 75


and defied capture, they never thought of calming
her, but all would arm with guns, spears, swords, and
sticks, and chase her down till stupefied with fear. If
they had been behaving badly, it did not prevent them
from asking to have a cow given them; and on being
refused, they never sulked, but took it out of you some
other way by studying their own wishes, comforts, and
wants in marching, halting, eating, drinking, or steal-
ing whatever they pleased, and at night giving us the
benefit of their laughter, shouting, and riots or how!l-
ing, in imitation of a Wezee who has smoked bhang.
Our cooks (Seedee boys) were most difficult to teach,
though they had learned a little from the Cape men,
who had always done this duty. The only idea these
black roughs had of cooking for themselves was to
stick a wooden skewer into a piece of meat and scorch
it over the ashes, or make stirabout. No great cuisine
could therefore be expected. Being anxious on one
occasion to get some soup after a fever, and knowing
the larder to contain only a wild duck, I asked Rehan,
“Could you get me some soup for breakfast ? I cannot
eat meat.” “Yes.” “What!” said I, “out of a duck?”
“Oyes.” Thinking him a clever fellow, I gladly con-
sented; but his soup was only a thin watery stew, placed
before me with the most perfect complaisance. Again,
at 7 P.M., he came up asking would I lke some dinner?
He had not thought of preparing even a boiled potato.
Such were the men we had as cooks for our entire
journey. On the march a party of them tried, by
holding out for three days in not accepting their
rations, to extort double allowances, on account of the
price of provisions; but finding it of no use, they
quietly submitted. Again, they told us our donkeys


76 SEEDEES AS SOLDIERS.


would not live long if they were made to carry beef ;
and this I believe was only a device to get the meat
themselves.

When detained for want of porters at Mineenga, we
taught our men the sword exercise for an hour every
afternoon. They were apt at learning, did remarkably
well, and enjoyed it very much, though kept strictly
to it for the time they were out. Not understanding
discipline, if a shower of rain fell, they thought them-
selves at liberty to run off our parade-ground; and
when I brought a cane in my hand, they could not
resist a titter, thinking I had brought it to enforce
orders, and not merely to show the sword positions.
On the coast we had taught them the platoon exer-
cise and target practice, but they never would take
care of their ammunition, ramrods, or stoppers—al-
ways firmg them away. On the arrival of a detach-
ment, salutes of welcome must be fired, and always,
on new moon being visible, each one would try to be
the first to fire his gun. But with six months’ drill
and strict discipline, we saw that a negro could be
made into a good light-infantry soldier; and if he
only becomes attached to his officer, there is no more
devoted follower in the world.

On arrival outside a Wezcee village, generally a set
of armed men would meet us, bounding on the grass,
running in circles, making feints at our caravan, either
in delight, or in attempts to frighten us. A shot in
the air would cool their courage, though our porters on
hearmg it would sometimes drop their loads and fly
in fear, but speedily returning when reassured. Men
were in abundance in the country, and if a solitary
one ran away, he could always be replaced. For


FOREST GUIDES. ro


instance, a father saw his son carrying a load in our
caravan; he led him angrily away, and we soon got
another. But to collect one or two hundred we found
a most difficult task: they are as fickle as the wind.
A wave of a flag will attract them, while one mis-
placed expression will send them away discontented.
They higele pertinaciously about their hire; and after
they have been induced to accept double wages, they
suddenly change their minds, think you've got the
best of it, and ask for more, or more commonly dis-
appear.

One of the most pleasing sensations in going
through an immense forest is suddenly to come upon
the traces of man. The Wezee experience this, for,
in their forest south of Kazeh, they erect triumphal
arches with poles, over or by the side of the path. These
they ornament with antelope-skulls, having the horns,
or with elephant-dung, bones, bows, or broken gourds.
It cheers the traveller, and gives fresh vigour to his
wearied limbs, for he knows that camp and water are
never far distant, and that the trumpet of the caravan
leader must soon sound the welcome “halt.” In
travelling through these forests, the Unyamuezi rarely
loses his way, as he is accustomed to range in woods,
and to mark his route either by breaking boughs or
noting the position of the sun.

During my fifty-five days’ detention at Mineenga,
Speke had been away for sixteen days at Kazeh try-
ing to procure porters by means of the Arabs. The
third day after his return, the 18th of May 1861, I
marched northward with a detachment of forty loads,
making for Ukuni. He picked me up on the 2lst,
and I again went on alone, and reached it on the


78 BLACKSMITH AT WORK.


27th. The Journal of the last two days may perhaps
possess some interest to the reader, as it introduces
him to Ukulima, the sultan, in whose place I was de-
tained one hundred and nine days. It is as follows:—

“26th May.—Speke keeps the larder well filled.
Last night, three guinea-fowl and a large tree-goose.
I went early amongst the Watusi; handsome people,
beautiful rounded small heads, prominent large eyes,
thin noses, rather compressed upper jaws; all so clean
and trim; no resemblance to the dirty Wezee, who are
coarse and mannerless in comparison. They make their
own baskets of osier-like twigs, with a sharpened
spear, and work with their feet very neatly. They
got a cow down by pulling its hind-legs to a post,
and then carefully washed its eye, which had been
injured. The blacksmith was working amongst them
making wire anklets from long rods of iron; bellows
very small, of wood, with cane handles, which a man
worked up and down. The hammer was a massive
mason’s chisel: they worked squatting. A whole
family were very curious to hear the tick of my
watch. The fighting Watuta had one open-field
combat with the Watusi, and obtained a victory over
them; both are afraid of each other. I see that the
slaves of the Wezees are very well dressed, and
treated with great kindness, never doing but what they
choose: quite different from slaves at Zanzibar, where,
as Bombay tells me, they would be made to work all
day, and, by some, be made to steal all night. The
orthodox custom at Zanzibar is five days’ labour for
master, and two days’ for the slave himself. Rehan
(the new cook) came to say ‘there was no grease to
roast with.’ ‘What are you to roast?’ He pointed


MARCH TO UKUNI. 79


to his breast. ‘You ought not to roast a brisket.’
He brought a tongue, hump, and double brisket,
smelling, all of which had been boiled yesterday,
and now he wanted to roast the brisket already
done. |

“7th.—Bombay and I march with 38 porters to
make a start of it to Nunda, in Ukuni, and to see
Sultan Ukulima. Distance was eight miles through a
very pretty country, with rocks jutting out fantasti-
cally, and lying now and then one on another; culti-
vation all the way. Sighted the village when within
a mile of it; quantities of spring water coming down
from a rocky height to our right. After we had en-
tered the first milk-bush enclosure, there were several
cleanly-swept windings. Village nearly empty. A
heavy old man sitting on a stool with half-a-dozen men
round him, induced me to say ‘ Yambo;’ he returned it,
and I went looking for a house. Came to the palace,
a very high round hut, smelling strongly of goats and
cattle. I asked permission to live here, and the old
man, who proved to be the sultan, said, ‘Doogoh
yango’—‘ Come along, my brother. Sweeping out
the verandah of goat-dung, my bed was soon made.
The sultana, a fat, fair, gentle old lady, welcomed me
with both hands asif I had been her son. She was
so surprised at the bedding as she sat upon it, and
everything she saw, saying ‘Heh, eeh!’ and nodding
her head: indeed, all were surprised. Bombay got
some pombé; the drunken old sultan himself carried
a basket-cup of it. He drank first (through a straw),
and then I had some, and very good it was. Then he
drank again, and I drank again, laughing heartily.
People in hundreds came. I went to sleep, though


80 PEOPLE OF UKUNI.


drums beat all day in honour of the arrival. Their
politeness was remarkable ; they retired as I sat down
at meals. Milk very dear, and got with great difh-
culty. Lads excited with drums, jumping in the air,
and flymg about. Did not see old man for the rest of
the day ; he was in a state of pombé!”


CHAPTER VL.


VILLAGE LIFE AT UKUNI, MAY 27 TO SEPTEMBER 12, 1861—THE
COUNTRY WELL CULTIVATED AND WOODED—THE SEASONS,
WINDS, ETC.—BLIND MUSICIANS—FOOD OF THE NATIVES
— WOMEN AT HARVEST—COINAGE AND MANUFACTURES—
FLORA OF UKUNI—DOMESTIC AND WILD ANIMALS—SINGU-
LAR CEREMONY WITH A DEAD LION—-ATTACK OF ANTS—
SULTAN AND SULTANA OF UKUNI—AFRICAN WOMEN ARE
GOOD MOTHERS—DRUM MUSIC—-SUPERSTITIONS—-SYSTEM OF
BROTHERHOOD.


To commence with the country around, I may state
that its general elevation above sea-level is 3260 feet.
All the lands run southwards, and are cleared for cul-
tivation, while the low hills are well wooded, their
ridges capped with huge masses of rounded rock, some
single blocks forty and fifty feet in height, balanced
on each other, or forming gorges and passes between
one valley and another. The village of the smaller
sultan of Roongwa, seven miles to the N.W., has
some remarkably pretty landscapes in its neighbour-
hood. Upon gently-swelling lands gloomy peaked
masses of granite rise amidst the dense foliage, re-
minding one of a baronial castle at home, with its
parks and clumps of trees. Sometimes large water-
F


82 THE SEASONS.


cavities are seen in those boulders; one contained
sweet pure water in a basin fifty feet in circumference
and six to eight feet deep, which had been worn out
by the crumbling of ages.

During the months of June, July, August, and twelve
days of September, we had but one or two slight
showers of rain (Gn July), which were preceded by
dull cloudy weather every night, that prevented our
seeing a comet in the constellation of Ursa Major.
The sun rose and set in a haze, which obscured the
sky for 40°. During the day, unless the regular 8.8.E.
wind blew very hard, a veil of mist lay about. This
wind from the 8.E. was very unhealthy, making every
one sneeze, and giving hard coughs and colds. It
generally began about 8 a.m.; but by the 12th of
September it changed to a more easterly direction,
and brought with it beautiful clear weather. The
June mornings were piercingly cold, and at night the
naked boy who looked after the calves might always
be seen sleeping with his head pillowed upon them to
keep himself warm, and our Seedees would lie out for
the night with a sheet-covering, and a blazing fire at
their backs. By the end of June the trees had shed
their leaves. Nothing but evergreens were interesting
in the forest; the grasses had been burnt; the fields
lay in fallow baked in the sun, or were of powdered
dust, where cattle had trodden: the aspect was de-
cidedly wintry. In August the trees began to bud,
and the grasses, where they had been set on fire,
were sprouting with fresh leaves. I have alluded to
the 8.E. wind being unhealthy—not a man of us es-
caped it. Speke suffered most dangerously from its
effects while separated for three months from me. His


DISEASES. 83


heavy cough had been brought on by constant anxiety,
and by his walking about the country trying to per-
suade men to lead, or proceed with us in our journey
northwards. My fever came every second day from
the 29th of May till the 4th of July, lasting six hours,
making me feel weak and tottering. In July I had
colds, discharges of mucus from the nose, and a large
abscess burst—all of which staved off fever for a time ;
and I had only one or two attacks, of nme hours
each, during the two following months. In the in-
tervals of fever I generally managed to go for a stroll
with my gun to shoot a dove or guinea-fowl for the
sultan or myself. Of ten Seedees who formed my
body-guard, servants, &c., only half were generally fit
for duty, or, perhaps, four in ten, at this 8.E. wind
season. Their complaints were of the chest, cough,
fever, abscess, ulcers, and venereal (the soczal evil was
evident every evening in the frequented part of the
village). Our medicine - chest was at every one’s
service, but some Seedees applied to an old-lady
doctor, who, instead of cure, brought tears and screams
from them whilst applying her remedies to ulcers,
bandaging them up with cow-dung and leaves to ex-
clude the air. To cure headaches, the men cut their
temples and rubbed in a paste of gunpowder. Blood
would scarcely appear, but the mark was indelible,
and the cure said to be complete.

The diseases observed amongst the inhabitants were
swollen legs, resembling elephantiasis, itch in children,
scales on the eyes, a few smallpox-marked and blind
people, one harelip, and a shrivelled infant without a
thumb. One blind man used to visit periodically, and,
without even the guide of a dog, knew every turn in


84 BLIND MUSICIANS.


the village ; he was welcomed everywhere, as a smile
for ever played upon his lips. By moonlight he would
stand singing for two hours at a time with a crowd of
a hundred people, men and women, the sultan amidst
them, all round him, joining in a chorus of almost
devotional music. He had the power, by placing his
hand to his mouth, of sending the deep, pleasing tones
of his voice away to a distance, which gave delight to
every one, the women in particular showing approval
by a shrill peculiar falsetto noise, which they make
by tappmg the cheek or shaking the lower lip with
the forefinger and thumb. Another blind man, deeply
marked with smallpox, gathered the village boys around
him and taught the songs of their country, while he
beat time with his foot. They have several fine na-
tional airs.

Their funeral ceremonies are simple enough. Chiefs,
and most of the respectable classes, are buried under
the floors of their dwellings, or more commonly in
cattle-sheds ; while witches and slaves are thrown into
the jungle without interment. I observed one of the
latter lying, tied with his face to a pole, in long grass,
with some rags round the waist; the limbs were
trussed up much in the same way as an infant hes
asleep.

Though residing in the verandah of the chief house
of the M’teme or sultan, or in the most central part of
the village, I rarely saw any men at their meals, unless
when assembled round pombé. They seemed to take
pot-luck at any hour of the day, and at any house
where the signs of eating were going on—getting a
boiled sweet potato here, a drink of pombé there, or a
snack of beef as a rarity. Women were more regular


THE SULTAN AND SULTANA. 85


in their living. The lady of my house, seated on a
wooden stool in the open yard, had always some guests
to dine with her, generally women of her own age and
some little children, and never by any chance did her
husband, the sultan, eat with her on these occasions.
The food—some boiled sweet potatoes—would be
brought on a wooden tray, and placed on the ground
by a servant-maid, who knelt on one knee, or a bowl
full of pombé would be presented in the same way.
The sultan had seven wives. Hach had her own
separate house and establishment, which he visited
daily, though at night he always slept in a place not
much larger than himself, surrounded by charms and
hons’ paws. He lived almost entirely upon pombé,
drinking it three or four times during the day, com-
mencing as early as seven o'clock, and ending the day,
if he was not already stupefied, by having it at supper-
time. He was a very hale, healthy-looking old man,
apparently about seventy, and most active in his habits.
Different houses in his village held daily “ receptions ”
for him, when he presided, and he was the first to
~ taste the bowl of beer. The female population drank
separately, and were presided over by the sultana.
The liquor took five days of preparation: the grain
(sorghum) had to be cleaned, ground, soaked, boiled,
generally with cow-dung as firewood, allowed to cool,
and was drunk, without filtration, in a fermenting
state, out of bowls neatly made of grass by the women.
With honey added it was tolerable, but without it the
beverage was coarse and heady to a stranger. Our
men were constantly tipsy; but the natives who fed
upon it had a healthy appearance, and rarely became
drunk. Their active early habits conduced to this result,


86 HARVEST AND FOOD.


for all of them were in the fields before sunrise gather-
ing the crop, or were doing varied works inside their
enclosures. The women on the 3d June were clipping
with a knife the tops of the sorghum, putting them
into baskets, and carrying the whole on their heads to
the village, where the grain, after beg thoroughly
sun-dried, was thrashed out by lines of men with long-
handed rackets, as seen in the illustration, “ Unyamuezi
Harvest,” of Speke’s Journal. They sang and beat the
orain to a chorus, winnowed it in the 8.E. breeze,
divided it into shares, and by the 1st of July all was
housed for the year; and porters, had they chosen,
might have gone with us to Karague, but they preferred
tasting the new year’s grain. After the harvest, the
poorer people were allowed to glean the potato,
eround-nut, and grain fields, glad to have some refuse,
as, should the previous season have been a poor one,
‘they must have lived upon dried potato, or what wild
herbs they could pick up. Our Seedees, all of whom
except ten were away with Speke, could not afford to
purchase a cow or goat, and they felt the want of meat
considerably, but not to the extent that a European
does. My gun almost daily provided a guinea-fowl or
pigeon, and the Seedees lived upon stirabout or fish ;
while, clubbing their daily rations, they could afford to
purchase a fowl, or by doing some office for the natives,
such as sewing, &c., they always secured friends. The
coin we at first used was rose-coloured beads, called
“ooolabee.” These were great favourites ; and when
exhausted, the price of everything rose to double—n
fact, the new coinage of sea-green beads, or “magee
bahr,” was refused point-blank ; they wouldn’t circulate.
Pure whites, “ Kanyera,” were tried ; they also failed.


COINAGE AND MANUFACTURES. 87


Indian reds, or “ Kudunduguru,” were utterly refused,
as only taken in unecivilised northern countries!
“ Kutu’mnazee,” cocoa-nut leaves, at last passed
muster, and milk was procured for our tea. It was
a regular strike in the market. All this rubbish of
beads was merely the equivalent to coppers. Silver
was represented by webs of unbleached calico, 30 to
32 yards long, 1 yard wide, and weighing 10 Ib.,
stamped in blue, “ Massachusetts Sheeting.” The man
who got this stamped portion—* Keerole,” or looking-
glass, as they called it—was thought a considerable
swell, and took care to show it across his loins.
Sovereign coinage consisted of coils of brass and
copper wire, thicker than that used for telegraphic
purposes, and converted into bracelets by the natives.
The blacksmith is never allowed to work inside the
village, perhaps because he has ample space outside,
and it is considered safer—not that his caste pro-
hibits it.

The nodules of ore are generally smelted in the forests,
and brought in a lump to the smith, who, by means
of stone anvils and stones as sledge-hammers, converts
it into a long rod; and finally, by a hand-vice, and
grease from a small pot he carries, it is tied between
two posts and drawn till it becomes a thread. It is
now fit, after being once heated, for being twisted
neatly with the finger and thumb round a few hairs
from the tail of a cow, or the thicker hair of a giraffe.
Tn this state it is worn in rings ornamenting the ankles
of men and women, fifteen of them costing one string
of beads, value a halfpenny, and fifteen copper or brass
ones being double price. Iron hoes, adzes, grass-hooks,
small knives, pincers, &c., are all made up by the


88 ABRUS SEEDS.


natives in the above rude way ; and this is the extent
of their knowledge in ironwork.

The women have no needlework. The men, if they
make a web in the loom, sew it all themselves; but
the former are very neat-handed at working in straw
and matting. They grind the corn and attend to the
house. There is no fine earthenware, such as cups
and plates, in the country; they are not requisite.
Straw or wooden ones suffice to hold water, beer,
or vegetables; and European pots and kettles are
represented by earthen gurrahs, like a sphere with a
slice off it. Salt is extracted from the soil, as prac-
tised in Uhiao, and is considered better than that
taken from the ashes of plants.

The forest at this dry season did not afford any
amusement in its flora: everything was in a dormant
state, and few or no flowers could be gathered, except
some jasmine-scented bushes in the stream-bed; the
beautiful little seeds of the abrus peeping out of their
open curled-up pods, and the plant twining delicately
round a small tree ; some thorny bushes of a vermilion
flowerimg-shrub, and large umbrageous trees of the
ficus order, used for bird-lime by the natives ; several
sweet plums now ripe, but nearly all stone. The most
useful tree to the natives here is the Miombo ; it
makes a brilliant fire, and lasts the whole night, just
to suit the African, who luxuriates in its heat. Most
of the trees are bare-poled, admirably adapted for
palisade purposes, and seldom heavier than can be
carried by two men. The wands from the Miombo,
a kind of banyan, afford the natives the fibre which
they attach to their wool. Its manufacture is simple :
split the wand longitudinally, separate the inner from


DOMESTIC ANIMALS. 89


the outer bark, and chew it well till the next wand
is ready ; use soon blackens it. very tree and fruit
has its separate name and use in this country.

The sultan owned three hundred milch cows, yet
every day there was a difficulty about purchasing
milk, and we were obliged to boil it that it might
keep, for fear we should have none the following day.
This practice the natives objected to, saying, “The cows
will stop their milk if you do so.” The calves drank
most of it. Butter, except when rancid, we could not
procure, the people using it for smearing their persons.
They seldom had butcher-meat for their dinners, pre-
ferrig to economise their cattle ; and on my informing
them that a cow lay in a neighbouring jungle with its
leg broken, and ought to be cared for, a party, headed
by the sultan’s son, went at night, killed the animal, and
brought over the carcass. It had belonged to another
village. They kill all their animals with bludgeons,
hunting them down through lanes and amongst houses.
The goat’s head is twisted; 1t never is killed as is done
in this country, because it is thought the skin would
thereby be injured for wear. The dogs are no better
than the pariahs of India, and quite as prolific; a
favourite, which was fed by me daily, had twelve pups,
two of which were drowned. Pet pigeons, of the
ordinary dovecot sort, flew in circles round the village,
or would evince alarm at the sight of a large bird.

We met with no new wild animals here, and killed
no lions. The natives used to trap game by means of
nooses and pitfalls, and the lads of several villages
would assemble with dogs, horns, and spears, to have
a battue of the different forests—partridges, hares,
coneys, and sometimes antelopes, being the result. In


90 WILD ANIMALS.


my morning walks (I could not leave the property for
a single day’s shooting) after guinea-fowl, when they
had become so wild that a rifle was necessary, I once
stumbled across two full-sized rhinoceros; both at-
tempted to run up to me, but at 20 yards’ distance
turned off, showing their full lengths, hobbling in their
canter lke httle pigs, the leader with cocked tail. A
steady aim at the shoulder had no effect, and in case
he might charge, I looked for my shot-gun, but my
two followers were in full flight. They had observed
the animals, and had been calling out to me to take care,
but allowed me to go right upon them without a stalk.
We tracked, and found that the two had separated.
All animals wander so, that you never know which to
keep in your hand, the gun or rifle. I was fortunate
in knocking over with shot a hght bay hornless female
antelope, which was new to me: it had four white
cuts across its saddle, the spinal ridge and inside of
legs white, spotted sides, and tail a tuft of long hair.
Altogether I was proud of my prize, as there was no-
thing whatever in the larder. My single follower
made many excuses that he was not able to carry it
home, but I assisted till close up to the village, when
I was ordered to go and ask whether the sultan would
allow it inside, my attendant saying, “ Wezees gener-
ally have an aversion to it.” “ M’weeko”—.e., “it’s
not customary;” “it’s a ‘phongo,’” “never eaten,” &c.
Disgusted at having wasted two charges of English shot
upon it, | thought there was a chance for me through
the sultan. He looked surprised, and flew into such
a rage, that the men round him had to explain—“ If
you eat it youll lose your fingers and toes, get scab
all over, and if it has spat on you the part will be-


WILD ANIMALS. 91


come asore.” I begged that the skin might be allowed
inside the village ; no, not the skin even, nor its tail,
so I could only sketch the animal. By-and-by a na-
tive caravan, carrying loads of salt, arrived, and the
men were glad to get it to eat. Our Seedees said it
was called the “bawala” in their country, and was
never eaten; but to look at, it was as nice as any
antelope [ had ever seen. The smaller animals were
N’geeree, a pig which the Wezee is very fond of:
wells are dug by them in the forests. Another animal
of the same size, but which it is not customary to eat,
is the N’grooweh; and from the description given of
it, it must be an antelope, having no tusks, but teeth
like a goat and hair lke a buffalo. There are also
wild-cats, deep brown, and barred across—very bold,
fearless-looking creatures. Troops of that beautiful
little animal the mongoose, which becomes so tame
in the house, we saw searching for water: they are
called “goozeeroo.” Their dark bodies are barred
across to the tip of the tail. On one of them being
wounded by a bullet, another commenced to tear it
with the greatest viciousness.

Lions and lynxes are considered the sole property
of the sultan, and form part of his right and revenue.
When carried in, lashed on a frame on men’s shoulders
and placed at his door, drums are beat, the women
shout, great excitement prevails, and a dance usually
takes place about the carcass. I had the curiosity to
measure the length of one lion, and found it was three
steps from the root of the tail to the nose, and in passing
round it I was said to have subjected myself to a fine
of two fathoms calico; but this I refused, and never


did pay, because I had not stepped over it. The putrid


92 WILD ANIMALS.


flesh is cut in pieces, and boiled by the sultan in person.
All the grease is preserved as valuable magic medicine,
the tail and paws are hung over his doorway, and the
skin, skilfully pegged out in the sun to dry, is pre-
pared for the sultan’s wear, as no one else dare use it.
The colour of a young male lion was a pale ochre, with
distinct dark spots on his hind-lees. The lynx is even
more highly prized than the lion, though only the size
of, and a little heavier than, an English fox, with a
stumpy, short, curled-back dog-tail, and tips of hair to
his black ears. He has immense, powerful, thickly-
formed little arms, great length of body, and is said
by the natives to kill even the lion and buffalo. This
I believe, for he gives one the idea of bull-dog courage.
He is said to watch his prey from a tree. The colour
of the lynx is a dusty red, indistinctly spotted ; a per-
fect cat’s head ; white round the eyes and underneath
the body. The ceremony observed on the arrival of
either a lion or lynx is curious :—The sultan, sultana,
and the sultan’s wife next in rank, sit on stools placed
in the open air, with the dead animal in front of them,
the crowd all round, squatted or standing. <A small
lump of serpent-dung is made into a paste with water
upon a stone. Spots of this white ointment are placed
by the sultan’s own hands upon the forehead, chest,
tips of shoulders, instep, and palms of hands of himself
and the two wives, and drums and dancing continue
afterwards for some hours. The serpent-dung is sup-
posed to have the charm of bringing plenty, or “ bur-
kut,” to a house, because it gives many young. No one
but kines may make use of it.

Vultures always hover where a dead body is thrown
out of the village into the grass. This did not prevent


BIRDS AND FISH. 93


the natives from making use of their feathers, or those
of the adjutant, for head-dresses on occasions of mer-
riment, or on the march. Another bird of prey is
a slate-coloured hawk, possessing a powerful flight,
quite able to knock over a guinea-fowl, and altogether
of noble appearance. Of eating-birds, there were three
species of partridge, a few quail, the florikan, blue
wild-pigeon, euinea-fowl, and a knob-nosed duck. The
“kengo,” tree-partridge, resembles the painted one of
India, has yellow legs, beautiful plumage, and weighs
about a pound; the natives trap them in nooses of
hair. The “kewtee” or “neene,” only half a pound
in weight, is a very plump little partridge, found in
open places, scratching and scraping the ground like a
hen; and in colour it is almost the same as the quail.
It has reddish legs, with a button-like pearly spur. A
third kind of partridge is the “qualee:” it is more
common than the others, and has a handsome blue
full plumage and red legs, with sometimes an appear-
ance of a double spur. The most game bird in plum-
age was the florikan, weighing from 14 to 24 Ib., and
forming even better food than the Indian species. A
few parrots, a long-tailed bird of paradise, with the
most graceful airy flight, some handsome yellow birds,
about the size of the blackbird, and others with black
bodies and white primaries, taking languid, short
fights, were the most remarkable we saw during a
morning or evening walk.

Our Seedees killed nearly all the fish in the country.
They were caught by raking the still, waist-deep pools
in the stream-bed by means of a hurdle of sticks. The
large 20-pounders were often left for another day, but
a good load of fifty smaller fish was generally brought


94. FEROCIOUS ANTS.


in to be split up, dried over the fire, and kept for con-
sumption. Two species, the “makambara” and “ go-
go,” were usually taken—the former and largest is
scaleless, large-headed, and lank-bodied ; the latter is
only 2 lb. weight, and resembles a stickleback.

Rats, fleas, and ants very often made our nights
miserable. ‘The calves alongside broke through their
pens, and roused every one, while an alarm of “ seafoo,”
or ants, and “bring a light,” would be shouted by our
Seedees. In a moment these vicious insects fixed
upon our skin, biting and clinging like leeches till
killed in their death-grip, and it became a desperate
case for us whether we turned out or they turned in!
A line of burning charcoal was placed to scare them
away, and then you could again recline without further
molestation or after-effects. But what was to be done
to prevent their return the following night lke an
invading army? The sultan very properly would not
allow the reckless Seedees to place charcoal round his
house during the night, but he had about a hundred
goats brought in, and kept there three nights and days
to pollute the place and make it obnoxious to the ants,
and this was found to be an effectual remedy for the
time. These ants are no larger than ordinary ones in
England, but bite with the greatest ferocity.

The description given of the sultan at Mineenga
will answer for all the natives in the “ Land of the
Moon,” 2. e., “Unyamuezi.” They are a sottish and
unambitious race, even the best of them, though by no
means incapable of improvement. My friend Ukuli-
ma of Ukuni was a fine old fellow, although he had
his failings. As I resided in the verandah of his
best house, the inside of which was occupied by the


CHILDISHNESS OF THE SULTAN. 95


old sultana, some goats, and female servants, he passed
or saw me daily, always saying “ Yambo,” or, if in
extra good-humour, calling me “ Doogo yango,” bro-
ther, or even “sultan.” Constantly, till I was tired
of him, would he sit by me in my iron chair, greasing
it all over, and playing the fool in various ways, such
as opening the medicine-chest, helping himself to
quinine, which he would put in his beer, or give it to
a neighbour, to have a laugh over its bitter taste.
Lucifer-matches he delighted in seeing lit, though
afraid to hght them himself. One day he felt dis-
satisfied because I would not give him magic medicine,
and when he left, he with great difficulty put on my
thick shoes, strutted about the village with them, and
collected all the little boys as he trailed his feet on the
eround. If a pigeon was shot, he would be most
childish in begging it of me, saying, “Go and shoot
another, as I want two.” If this was not done, he
would not be content with the one, but leave it in
a pet, saying, tauntingly, “There will be pombé
to-morrow.” My Bible, sketch-book, or the book of
birds, he would turn over, smiling at each new leaf or
picture, and asking what it meant. When he saw
that I never asked a fee for the medicines given to his
wives or followers, he thought I must have some object
in it, and redoubled his little kindnesses; or, as I was
so friendly, he would suggest that I should give him a
recipe by which he could distinguish friends from foes !
He inquired anxiously why we were going on to
Karague; we should get killed. “The people there
plant their spears in your foot, and demand, ‘ What do
you want?’ You must return to the coast, and I will
send my own son in charge of you.”


96 EXTRACT FROM JOURNAL.


All this was very good; but, on the day of our de-
parture, having already received and expressed satis-
faction with the presents from Speke, he showed his
true character by demanding a separate present from
me. He so far forgot himself as to seize two cases of
ammunition and a gun, and drove my porters out of
the village with his stick. Poor old man! some cloth
and beads sent the following day softened his anger,
and my effects were allowed to leave his dominions.
He was much respected in the country, and most of
the neighbouring sultans visited him with great for-
mality. On these occasions my guns were asked for
to fire salutes. ‘The procession would be headed by
spearsmen, then followed the lady visitors carrying
gourds of pombé, drums beating furiously, shots, sham-
fights, &e.; and the sultan would ask me to join in
the dance. After a time I was called upon by the
strangers, and every book, box, blanket, &c., was
minutely scrutinised by them.

On the morning of the 8th June, my journal re- |
marks :—“ A.M., One shot knocked over two guinea-fowl
—a blessing—nothing to eat ; people pleased at seeing
them. No fever. Sultan still here: whole village at
pombé ; had a potful sent me, but cat turned it over.
Bombay and Rehan asleep all day. Called for dinner
at usual hour, fire black out; asked for the roast-fowl
of the morning—Rehan had eaten it. Took all this
philosophically, and got two fellows to prepare a
guinea-fowl by 74 p.m. Not many drunken men
about—all asleep.” A batch of tall Watusi men paid
me visits; my umbrella was much fancied by their
chief. He offered me his pipe for it; and, finding this
was not enough, he brought me another day an iron


THE OLD SULTANA. 97


hoe! ‘To get rid of the subject, I asked him to sell me
his forefinger, and said that twenty cows wouldn’t buy
my umbrella, which at last made him understand my
meaning, as they value everything by cattle. The
natives had great faith in the “ Wazoongoo,” white
men. Our very paper, which they called “pupolo,”
was considered by some to have virtues ; but we hadn't
much of it to give, having had no communication with
England for nearly a year.

The custom of the Arab in this country is to take
presents for everything he does, and the same idea was
formed of us. For instance, if a gun had to be re-
paired, a bullet to be extracted, an old sultan to be
cured of dimness of vision, or the split lobe of an ear
to be mended, for any of these services a cow or cows
were at hand to be paid when the task was finished.
When slaves were brought us for sale and declined,
they could not understand our indifference to such
trafic, but would turn from us with a significant shrug,
as much as to say, “ Why are you here, then ?”

Kvery morning the sultana and myself met, cordially
shaking hands and asking how the night had been
passed ; previously to this her grandchildren had been
in to her bedside, bidding good-morning. Every re-
spect was paid the old lady by her family and by the
lower classes, who stooped, knelt, or twice clapped
their hands as they met her. She was active like her
husband, an excellent housewife, gave herself no airs,
but still maintained her dignity. She might be seen
nursing an infant, kindly carrying it about on her
back, or at times shouldering a log of firewood. If I
had refused pombé from her husband and son, she
would bring me a cupful, put it to her lips, and with

G


98 WOMEN OF UNYAMUEZI.


a gentle, ladylike curtsy, ask me to accept it; refusal
would have been boorish. Her old eyes were getting
dim, and on her hearing that I had made up some
wash (from filings of zinc), thinking in her ignorance
it might have a virtue for impaired vision, she begged
for a little. On our getting to Cairo, some beads and
trinkets were sent her ladyship wid Zanzibar, which it
is to be hoped have ere this reached her.

The women, through my servants, soon found out
that I had a looking-glass. They took it into their
hands, and held it there, continually looking at them-
selves, but it was evident they were not altogether
satisfied with their appearance. They busied them-
selves with field operations, even using the flail, and at
night a band of them would meet to dance in the moon-
heht. Their manner was to twist their bodies, stamp,
and sing, till, exhausted by their antics, they paused to
breathe and laugh. ‘Two quarrelled one day, and came
at last to blows, striking out lke men, and drawing
blood, but they were separated by our Seedees. They
are very masculine in several respects ; two of them ac-
companied me as volunteer porters when going to join
Speke, and were even more inveterate smokers than
the men. Their entire dress was one cloth wrapped
round the loins from below the breasts to the calf of
the leg, below which, down to the ankle, were immense
masses of brass or iron wire rings, as before described.
The head wool, dressed with an oily preparation, looked
as if they wore a scalp of shining black beetles, among
which were interspersed hawthorn-berry-coloured beads
or rings of brass ; others wore their hair in tassels, with
seed-charms, &c. Necklaces of beads, brown or rose-
coloured, adorned their necks; they had no rings on


WOMEN OF UNYAMUEZI. 99


their toes. Men often allow the nail of the small
finger to grow long. The meeting of two women of
unequal rank is a pleasing sight; the inferior sinks on
her knee, and droops her head, while the other lays a
hand on her shoulder muttering something. Both re-
main silent for a moment, but on rising they chat and
gossip. The curtsy is also observed by them. When
the wife hears that her husband is about to arrive
from a journey to the coast, she dresses herself in a
feathered cap and in the best costume she possesses,
and proceeds with other women in ordinary dress to
the sultana’s, where they sing and dance at the door.
These Wezee women do not practise much tattooing,
merely making three lines on each temple, and per-
haps a line down the forehead reaching to the bridge
of the nose; but some of the Watusi females were
observed to have their shoulders and breasts very
handsomely tattooed to imitate lady’s point-lace in
front, and crossed like a pair of braces behind. The
waists were also marked in the same way. They pre-
pare their dress of cow-skin to look like thick Irish
frieze-cloth : a needle teases the leather fibre into this
appearance, and the turn-over part at the waist is
made ornamental by strips from the skins of variously-
coloured cattle. J have understood that some East
African women. live in the forests as much as fifteen
days before the expected birth of a child, having a hut
erected for them. This practice was not observed
here, but the children are as fondly cared for by the
mothers as in any part of the world, and not an in-
stance is known of one of them selling her offspring,
even when tempted to it by famine—they would sooner
die. The boys practised many manly games as seen in


100 SKULLS ON THE PALISADING.


our own gymnasiums,—such as jumping over sticks
—shooting, with bolted arrows, partridge or pigeon, or
teaching small birds to sing—making model guns out
of cane, going off with a trigger and having a cloud of
sand for smoke—copying our double-barrelled guns, and
making them, with nipple, hammer, trigger, &c., out of
mud, with cotton for the smoke. They had also made
cross-bows; and generally they evinced great powers of
imitation. Seeing the ingenuity of the little fellows, we
could not help longing for the happy day that should
introduce amongst them more valuable improvements.

The habitations of the country have been described
in the previous chapter. It only remains to add
that there were no wells in the villages, water being
carried from distant springs—that the dust was very
annoying from the dances, &c.—that ground-nuts
were not allowed to be roasted inside the bbmah—and
that outside the village human skulls and skeletons of
hands (those of enemies killed in action) were stuck
on the tops of the highest trees, or fixed on poles at
the top of mounds. When the boundary of the vil-
lage was to be enlarged, bare-poled trees for palisades
were carried from the forest by Watusi, crying like
jackals. On putting them into position, skulls of ani-
mals (or human), broken stools or baskets, land shells,
&e., were stuck upon them.

On the 27th of June we had cries of “ War, war !”
In an instant the place was alive, and thirty poor-
looking creatures, each with a bow and from four to six
arrows, rushed out of the village, followed slowly by
the sultan, carrying two spears. All got upon a mound,
looking in the direction whence the noise proceeded.
A party from a distance here jomed them, and after


AN OPEN COURT. 101


skirmishing and larking in the grass, all again turned
into the village to have their pombé! There was a
second attack on the 4th July. The people of a
M’salala village had captured some cattle. A few
men with short-handled hatchets, spears, bows and
arrows, all the “troops” that could be spared, paraded
under the command of a red-robed leader; in ten
days they returned all alive and safe, reporting the
death of six of the enemy, and bringing the trophy of
one head, which was stuck upon the palisading over
the eastern gate, with the face to the zenith. Great
rejoicing and pombé took place in the evening.

On the 17th, at 1 pM., a dance took place for an
hour, after which a court assembled on the same
ground to hear evidence regarding the M’salala war.
In the centre space lay the tusk of an elephant. Only
the sultan and his wuzeers or officers sat on stools.
The women were most attentive listeners to the
speeches, and all was marked with the utmost de-
corum. For an hour the sultan addressed the crowd,
sometimes stopping to think, and pulling out hairs
from his face with iron tongs. There were bursts of
laughter at his jokes, and when he had finished, a
general conversation began. A wuzeer now spoke
very sharply, and after each of his sentences there
was a great clapping of hands and assent of “hums.”
Two of the crowd then delivered addresses, which
were received with a single “viva,” and the court
abruptly broke up. Except the ridiculous part of
pulling out the hairs of the sultan’s beard, there could
not be a more impressive or orderly court. It again
assembled two days afterwards: the tusk still lay in
the space, and was presented by the chief of M’salala


102 IMPEDIMENTS TO TRAVELLING. |


in token of submission to the court’s decision against
him. ‘Thus, by simple arbitration, ended their war of
four-and-twenty days, which had entailed no greater
loss than half-a-dozen men.

A great talk and excitement was caused on the 4th
August by the discovery of a man throwing a pair of
human hands into a bush in the forest. As he could
give no satisfactory account of himself, and was sus-
pected of murder, he was at once made prisoner, but
unfortunately he made his escape. It seems to be the
established rule here, that when such trophies are
proved to be those of war, the chief of his village kills
a cow and gives a feast. This was sufficient for the
prisoner, and for many others, no doubt, to commit
murder, and it was the only case I heard of that
created any very great sensation amongst the natives.

Owing to such incidental circumstances, trade and
travel are very much impeded, as single individuals
can never with impunity move from one district to
another, and are sure to be plundered, if not murdered.
Two of our men fell behind upon one occasion, when
their guns were at once seized, and to recover them it
was necessary to pay a tax of two fathoms of cloth,
after which the men were allowed to pass on. War
causes retaliation in every direction. A M’salala
caravan on its way through Ugogo from the coast was
plundered by the natives. The latter on their part
attributed their ill fortune to the Arab traders, who
had brought war on the country, and to revenge
themselves they seized the property of an Arab trader
passing through their territory, and meant to treat all
foreigners visiting them with the same rigour, until
the lex talionis was fairly vindicated.


AMUSEMENTS OF THE NATIVES. noe


The sepoys of the sultan consisted of about twenty
idle young fellows, who tried to dress jauntily, and
were the fast men and pick of the place. If an
order had to be conveyed from one of the sultan’s
villages to another, their word was law. If an escort
was necessary, they were employed, and when war
broke out they collected levies all round the country
from their own class or from poorer natives. None
of these soldiers would deign to carry a load for us;
they were, in their own estimation, the life-ouards-
men of the state, consequently led an idle life, play-
ing at pitch-and-toss, bao, beating the drum, &c.
Without coins one would imagine that pitch-and-toss
could not be played; but has not bark got two sides ?
Circles of bark were used, also a few leaden discs pitched
in the air, while the gamester clapped his hands and let
the discs fall upon a cow-skin placed on the ground.
My wonder was how they fell so fairly on the skin,
and also that the game was not known by our Zanzibar
men. The stakes were bows, arrows, arrow-tips, and
ankle-wires ; the counters were made of pieces of stick.
Bao is a coast game, played by two, with a board
having thirty-two cups or wells in it, and sixty-four
counters of seeds, called “komo.” The sultan sat
down with any one he could get to play this rather
skilful game.

Kivery large country has its own style of drumming;
that of Unyanyembe was more musical than the jum-
ble of drums here. The conductor had always the
largest drum; the rest watched him for the time,
while at his feet a little black youth rattled as hard as
he could, without ceasing, at a wooden trough. If the
noise of it was not heard, the music lost its stirring


104 SUPERSTITIOUS FEARS.


effect ! The drums were of wood, three to four feet high,
and slung on a beam at a convenient height ; the sticks
were twelve inches long. At these dances the head
men were present to preserve order, and to prevent, as
much as possible, the use of spears or arrows in their
antics. On the arrival of a distinguished guest, such
as the son of the sultan, who owned a neighbouring
village, a roll from each of the four drums was given
In succession, and as he entered the place every one hid
in his house from shyness. If a lon or a culprit was
brought in, the “assembly” was beaten furiously.
Single taps at short intervals, and gradually increas-
ing to a roll, were given in a case of murder, at
five in the morning, and again an hour afterwards.
The previous days had been, night and day, celebrated
by incessant drumming on the part of a dark set of
wandering beggars or gypsy lads, richly necklaced with
beads, to commemorate some event which appeared,
from the scant information I could obtain from my
interpreter, to be celebrated once or twice in three
years. This, if true, shows that they mark a period,
announced by gypsies, whom I observed but twice
during my stay at Ukuni.

Of religion, idols, Sabbaths, or holidays they have
none, but of superstitious fears and beliefs they have
an ample store. On the occasion of the arrival of
Speke with a detachment at a village, the natives shut
their doors against him, and for three hours inhospit-
ably kept the party in the sun. They had never
before seen a white man, nor the tin boxes that the
men were carrying ; “and who knows,” they said, “ but
that these very boxes are the plundering Watuta
transformed and come to kill us all? You cannot be


SULTANS DAUGHTER POSSESSED. 105


admitted.” No persuasion could avail with them, and
the party had to proceed to the next village.

Three stones, placed in a triangular form, surrounded
the dwelling-house of the sultan of Ukuni, and within
them it was believed no harm could ever happen to
him, even if a gun were fired at him. One of our men
sitting on one of these stones, jumped off, as if stung,
on being told of the sacred character of the place.

The ceremony of driving out an evil spirit, or
“ Phepo,” is elaborate and curious. The sultan sits at
the doorway of his hut, which is decorated with lion-
paws. His daughter, the possessed, is opposite him,
completely hooded, and guarded by two Watusi women,
one on each side, holding a naked spear erect. The
sultana completes the circle. Pombé is spirted up in
the air so as to fall upon them all. A cow is then
brought in with its mouth tightly bound up, almost
preventing the possibility of breathing, and it is evi-
dent that the poor cow is to be the sacrifice. One
spear-bearer gives the animal two gentle taps with a
hatchet between the horns, and she is followed by the
woman with the evil spirit and by a second spear-
bearer, who also tap the cow. A man now steps for-
ward, and with the same hatchet kills the cow by a
blow behind the horns. The blood is all caught in a
tray (a Kaffir custom) and placed at the feet of the
possessed, after which a spear-bearer puts spots of the
blood on the women’s forehead, on the root of the neck,
the palms of the hands, and the instep of the feet. He
spots the other spear-bearers in a similar manner, and
the tray is then taken by another man, who spots the
sultan, his kindred, and household. Again the tray is
carried to the feet of the possessed, and she spots with


106 BLACK-ART CASES.


the blood her little son and nephews, who kneel to
receive it. Sisters and female relatives come next to
be anointed by her, and it is pleasant to see those
dearest to her pressing forward with congratulations
and wishes. She then rises from her seat, uttering a
sort of whining cry, and walks off to the house of the
sultana, preceded and followed by spear-bearers. Dur-
ing the day she walks about the village, still hooded,
and attended by several followers shaking gourds con-
taining grain, and singing “ Heigh-ho, massa-a-no,” or
“masanga. An old woman is appointed to wrestle
with her for a broomstick which she carries, and finally
the stick is left in her hand. Late in the afternoon a
change is wrought; she appears as in ordinary, but
with her face curiously painted, her followers being
also painted in the same way. She sits without smil-
ing to receive offerings of grain, with beads or anklets
placed on twigs of the broomstick, which she holds
upright ; and this over, she walks among the women,
who shout out “Gnombe !” (cow) or some other ridicul-
ous expression to create a laugh. ‘This winds up the
ceremony on the first day, but two days afterwards
the now emancipated woman is seen parading about
with the broomstick hung with beads and rings, and
looking herself again, bemg completely cured. ‘The
vanquished spirit had been forced to fly!

Black - art cases were duly tried, and generally
ended in conviction. A cowherd who had sold me
some fish died very suddenly; one of his two wives
was suspected of having poisoned him; and being
tried, she was convicted and condemned. She was
taken to the dry bed of the stream, her arms tied
behind her, and was killed by having her throat cut


CASE OF ADULTERY. nO 7


from ear to ear. No hyena touched the body, which
still more confirmed the belief that she was guilty;
for my Seedee cook said, “ Has not the hyena the soul
of a man? does he not know your thoughts when you
determine on shooting him ?”

On the 10th of July my servant asked permission
to go and see the uchawé. I accompanied him to the
outside of the bomah (village fence), where a woman
and lad lay on their faces with their arms bound
painfully tight, and writhing in torture. Poor crea-
tures! they met with no sympathy from the jeering
crowd, but the ropes were slackened at my request.
They had been apprehended on suspicion of having
bewitched the sultan’s brother, who lay sick for fif-
teen days, and unless they could work off the magic
spell they must die. The lad said, “Take me to the
forest; I know an herb remedy.” On the seventh
day from this scene (during which the lad was out-
side the village, and the woman kept by the sick
patient in the stocks) the former was killed and the
woman released. I went to see his body the follow-
ing day, but the hyena (I was told) had taken it
away. Nothing remained but blood and the ashes of
some hair by a fire. Could they have tortured him
by burning? A case of adultery was punished in the
most horrible manner, too painful to describe minute-
ly. They had no Divorce Court! The strapping
young fellow who had found his way into the harem
of the sultan, was tied to railings, stripped, certain
parts of his person were smeared and covered with
rags, then set fire to by the sultan in person, and he
was dragged to the fire outside the village; but before
he could reach it, assigais from the hands of the son


108 MAKING BROTHERHOOD.


and daughter-in-law of the sultan pierced his neck
and chest, and he was drawn out by one leg like a
dog through the gate. The woman who committed
this act came in fear to me at night, saying, “ Give
me protection: it is said I am to be killed for stabbing
the adulterer.” ‘Though for the moment I detested the
woman, I endeavoured to calm her by saying my guns
would be her protection, and my men should sleep in
her house. On asking her “ Why did you soil your
hands with such a deed?” she replied, in the most
animated way, “Oh, did I not glory in it! did the
fellow not come to my bedside one night making pro-
positions to me, and I never could get hold of him
since?” The following day she, as usual, wished me
good-morning, but I shuddered to think that so hand-
some a woman and so kind a mother, with four beau-
tiful children who must have seen all, could have
committed such an act. ‘The woman who had offend-
ed was a middle-aged good-looking person. Nothing
whatever was done to her, though she had once be-
fore been the cause of a man’s death under similar
circumstances. Previous to this event she would
come often to look at herself in my mirror, but after-
wards I did not see so much of her.

Several of our men made brotherhood with the
Wezees, and the process between Bombay and the
sultan’s son, Keerenga, may be mentioned. My con-
sent having been given, a mat is spread, and a con-
fidential party or surgeon attends on each. All
four squat, as if to have a game at whist; before
them are two clean leaves, a little grease, and a
spear-head; a cut is made under the ribs of the
left side of each party, a drop of blood put on a


CAUSE OF DELAY. 109


leaf and exchanged by the surgeons, who rub it
with butter twice into the wound with the leaf,
which is now torn in pieces and strewn over the
“brothers’” heads. A solemn address is made by the
older of the attendants, and they conclude the cere-
mony by rubbing their own sides with butter, shaking
hands, and wishing each other success. Ten rounds of
ammunition are then fired off; a compliment from
each of the four drums is sounded, and they parade
the village all the afternoon. This was the form ob-
served by the Wanyamuezi. An Uganda lad, the
magician of the sultan, made brotherhood with Rehan,
the cook, by cutting marks on his chest and rubbing
in the fat of lions. This young wizard of Uganda,
with his bamboo tube, could blow away all the
enemies of the sultan, or, if persuaded to go out shoot-
ing with you, a second blast from his trumpet would
make the animals of the forest stand before you!
The last of their unintelligible customs I shall men-
tion, was that of a number of men amusing themselves
by running fast through and about the village, singing,
at every third or fourth step, “Queri” or “ Hairy,” and
“(Queri Mahamba.” I had seen the same custom across
country, outside the village ; and on the nights of this
oreat stir, dancing would also take place.

To give a description of the difficulties and disap-
pointments we experienced for nearly four months in
procuring men to carry our luggage, would be tiresome.
I shall only mention a few instances. Speke was away
sixty miles in advance of me with a portion of the pro-
perty: neither he nor I could proceed a step ; we were
like two planets compelled by a fixed law to preserve
our distances. He resolved on making a flying march


110 WE SUCCEED IN MARCHING.


to Karague, in the hope of sending me relief from
thence. Our own Seedees mutinied ; they would not
hear of this plan, as the country of Usui was danger-
ous,—it was certain death to accompany white men,
who were considered sorcerers of the deepest dye, and
they insisted that we had not enough of presents
for the chiefs. Speke, ever active, to my utter sur-
prise, walked back the sixty miles to announce this
failure tome. “ What has happened? I thought you
were in Karague!” What was to be done? Our
beads and cloth were running short; my sultan would
not give usa man. Unyanyembe and the Arabs must
be appealed to, and carpenters might be got to proceed
to the south end of Lake Nyanza, make a raft, and so
escape the danger of Usui. This plan was carried
out with success. Speke returned on the nineteenth
day from the Arabs, having, in going and returning,
accomplished a journey of 180 miles. He had
ordered from Zanzibar a fresh supply of bartering
goods, of which we heard nothing till our arrival in
England two years afterwards. The raft scheme had
been dropped, and he had brought with him trusty
euides and interpreters for Uganda. Here more than
a month elapses; his guides desert, his men are more
mutinous than ever, and Bombay is on his way for new
ouides, as his master is struck down with illness, which
I knew nothing of for twenty-seven days, and had no
prospect of seeing him. Suddenly a party of coast
men arrive from the north, saying, “ Every chief there
waits you; go on, get porters; the road is clear;”
so, after days of obstinate resistance and final outbreak
by my old sultan, on the 12th September I was able
once again to be on the move to join my companion.


CHAPTER VIL


UKUNI TO KARAGUE, SEPTEMBER 12 TO NOVEMBER 25, DIS-
TANCE 200 MILES—-COMMENCING THE JOURNEY—ATTACKED
ON THE MARCH—-THE WATUTA RACE—THE COUNTRY BE-
TWEEN UKUNI AND KARAGUE — WATERFALL — VOLCANIC
MOUNDS—THE KING OF BIRDS—THE WANYAMBO—THE WA-
LINGA, OR WORKERS IN IRON—A NATIVE BEAUTY—LAN-
GUAGE OF THE COUNTRY.


KaracuE! how charmed we were to get there; its
fine hills, lake scenery, climate, and, above all, the
gentleness of the royal family, were all in such contrast
to what we had experienced elsewhere of Africa and
Africans, that, 1f surrounded by our friends, we should
have been content, for a time at least, to take up our
residence there. But before describing the country,
the thread of our narrative must be taken up to show
what had to be undergone to reach this haven. In
September 1861, when preparing to move, I found
that before a start could be made on an African march,
particularly after a long halt, there were hundreds of
annoyances unknown in other countries. No one
believes you wish to move till a display is made of
your beads, by counting them out, stringing them, and


112 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL.


packing up the loads. The sight of these rouses the
sultan: he, his family, and all the people of the place,
begin to pester you for presents, and you would give
worlds to be away from such intolerable bullying.
Half your number of porters at last being collected to
receive their pay, a momentary suspense takes place :
the first man hesitates to accept the hire he had agreed
for; each man strives to lay the responsibility upon
another ; but as soon as one accepts, stantly the rest
scramble for it. Here are some extracts from my
Journal previous to the march :—

“ 8th September.—Attempt to push all the engaged
men ahead with their loads, in charge of Said, but fail,
and half the day is lost by the native procrastina-
tion. Said no better than the rest of them. After a
long day of it, started off 40 loads and three donkeys
ahead to first march, where they will wait for us. Ten
paid-up porters not present. One says, ‘My wife is
il; I return my hire:’ another, ‘My father and
mother won’t allow me to accompany you.’ I chastise
him ; he puts himself under the protection of the sultan,
and bolts, leaving his hire of calico blackened by one
day’s wear. A third will not go because I refuse him
the leadership. Last night my men returned from
searching for porters, saying, ‘None will go unless you
give them four times the usual hire.’

“9th.—Three of my men have been away all day,
and have not brought back a man. Wezees had pro-
mised to come, but I have no faith in what they say;
others ask triple hire. ‘T'welve loads sent out by men
of the advanced camp.

“10th.—Cannot see a prospect of marching from
here. Ordered Manua to Roongwa for porters; saw


EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL. LIs


him at night. ‘Have you been for porters?’ ‘Yes,
there and back.’ I laughed at this cool assertion, and
asked, ‘How many did you get?’ ‘Four are coming
inthe morning. This was too much, as all the Seedees
satisfied me that he had never been out of the place ;
I therefore ordered him to receive two dozen. Rehan
(cook) said, ‘£ won't give it.’ ‘You must, I said;
but ultimately the matter was settled by Manua run-
ning away, all the Seedees after him! (Manua after-
wards became a great friend of mine, as he knew the
names and uses of every plant and tree in the country.)

“11th.—Yesterday sent a note to Speke, but find
the bearer did not start, because he had a Wezee
lady in tow. Verily these Africans are a self-pleas-
ing and most trying set. Two men off for porters.
My leader reported sick. Manua (the man I ordered
to be flogged yesterday) not to be found. Four por-
ters arrive, but won't start till to-morrow, as they
feel tired !

“12th—Start three loads; fourth man not pre-
sent; he had gone away to sleep in another village.
Ten men came in from camp ahead to carry away
my remaining traps. Sultan demands a present,
but on consulting my men, we all agreed that as
he had already got eight fathoms of cloth, a large
quantity of beads, some gunpowder, and had lost four
cows placed in his charge, no more was necessary for
him. At this decision he struck my porters and drove
them out of his village, and seized some cases of
ammunition and a rifle. The quarrel was made worse
by the drunkenness of my chief interpreter, Rehan,
who in this state threw his gun and accoutrements
at my feet, spat upon one of my men, and gave his

H


114 EXTRACTS FROM JOURNAL.


support to the sultan. After bearing these insults,
and seeing the powder, &c., recovered, I walked out-
side the village and sat down, feeling sick, sore at
heart, and exhausted from the detestable strife, but
thankful to God that I had so much command of
temper. A servant reported that he and another
must sleep that night with their loads in the village,
as security for my paying some cloth and _ beads.
Anything to get away, and I marched to my advanced
camp, eight miles off, reeretting that I had not bid
adieu to the sultana.

“13th.—Sent back the cloths to the sultan by
Uledi. So jolly and civilised-hke to have a note
brought me by three or four Seedees from Speke,
wanting me up sharp! Uledi returned at sunset,
having satisfied the sultan. Said, Rehan, and Baraka
sent word they would be up in the morning; so like
an African’s system of procrastination, winning the
mornings and evenings from us, and saying the day
is too hot to move.

“14th.—March three miles to a wretched village.
A number of men hanging on for hire; one man pro-
mised for Karague, and backed out of it because I
frightened him by writing his name down. ‘Tried to
make an afternoon march, but’ no one would stir; be-
sides, three loads were behind.

“15th.—Under way outside the village by six A.M. ;
eight loads still on the ground, no porters to carry
them, and loads in the rear belonging to men sleeping
in other villages. very day seems to be won from
me. Countermand the march till the afternoon; a
panic had struck the porters. ‘The Watuta are at the
next ground from camp. I took the chief porter,


WE ARE ATTACKED. 115


walked there and back, 20 miles, by 34 P.m., and
found this much-dreaded tribe had left that morning.
“16th—Having aroused my camp, a noisy con-
versation soon began with some strange armed men,
who had been sent by Sultan Myonga to insist on my
visiting him with my caravan; but as I saw yester-
day that his residence was completely out of my route,
and as Speke had laid down that no further present
should be made to him, his ‘soldiers’ were told this; but,
at the turn to their master’s village, they planted their
spears in defiance, and dared us to proceed by any but
their way. We laughed at them, and held on our road
for seven miles, when out of some thick cover came a
howling of voices. I was about the third from the head
of my Indian file, when a troop of about two hundred,
with assigais, bows and arrows, burst upon us, spring-
ing over the ground like cats. Passing the van,
apparently without any intention of molesting us, or
‘showing their colours, no one stopped even to look at
them ; but of a sudden they broke in upon the centre
of our lime, and, with uplifted assigais and shouts,
frightened the porters to give up their loads and fly,
if they could escape the hands of the ruffians who
were pulling their clothes and beads from them. See-
ing my goods carried off, I tried, without blood-
shed, to prevent it; for they were too numerous
to attack, as [ had but one of my gun-men and two
natives. On searching for others, | found Rehan with
rifle at full cock, defending two loads against five of
the men. He had been told by Manua that he was ‘a
fool to think of the loads; fly for your life!’ but the
property, he said, was his life. On making for the
village of the Sultan Myonga to seek redress, I was


L116 OUR PORTERS DESERT.


told not to fear; all would be returned me: ‘to go
and reside in the village of his son, where all would
be brought.’ On proceeding thither I found that the
natives had dressed themselves out in the stolen
clothes of our men. I felt like a prisoner ; my bright
hopes were wrecked; and they all laughed at me as
I stood amongst the mob of insolent marauders jeering
and exulting at their triumph. Very little at that
moment would have set things in a blaze; but though
honour was dear, the safety of the expedition was so
also, and one false step would have endangered it.
They threatened, presenting assigais at my breast; but
though I was defenceless, my rifle in its case resting
harmlessly on my shoulder, they did not venture to
strike, but scattered over the place.

Fifteen of my 55 loads were returned during the
day; 15 of 56 porters reappeared ; two Wezees were
reported killed, but mstead of finding even a trace
of them, I came upon three others concealed in the
orass with their loads. Myonga was said to be in-
furiated at his people; he had cut off the hand of
one of his men, and promised that all, except the
property of my porters, should be restored. The fol-
lowing night the sultan sent, saying everything in
his possession had been given up, but by my account
there were still wanting six bead-loads, some cloth, my
teapot, looking-glass, basin, pewter mug, a saw, a goat,
&c. Every load was partially plundered; our most
private keepings had been ruthlessly handled; and
cases were destroyed by rocks and stones in trying to
break them open. My porters, who had received their
full hire to Karague, deserted; the march was de-
layed ; and we had all been dishonoured. On making


NEGOTIATING WITH MYONGA. 117


this representation to the sultan, he expressed great
sympathy at first, saying, ‘Your property will all be
restored, and you shall have men from me to convey
your goods to Karague.’ This was a mere ruse. In
four days after the attack I was in a position, by aid
sent me from Speke, to march ahead; but the Wezees
said, ‘If you attempt a forced march, and leave with-
out obtaming the sultan’s permission, we will run
away. In reply to my request to be allowed to leave
his country, saying I was satisfied with having re-
covered so much, he very coolly replied, ‘I want no
present from you, but must have your Seedees with
their guns to aid me in an attack against a neigh-
bour of mine. But though two of my men volun-
teered to go, intending to escape from him during
the night, the proposal seemed preposterous; and,
to settle the affair, a scarlet blanket was taken from
my bedding and sent to the sultan, along with some
other cloths. These were returned contemptuously,
with a message that | must aid him with men and
guns. The Seedees would not hear of my going
to see this ruffian of a sultan, neither could they man-
age him themselves; their remonstrances and _ plead-
ings had become stale. The natives in the mean time
were boisterous, refusing our bead coinage. I tried to
make use of my rifle in the jungles, but failed to get
anything. In my rounds I only saw the brutality of the
people towards travellers in pouncing upon a party of
four women and two men, demanding their bows and
arrows, which I saved by interference. Again, the
coarse fellows struck so brutally a donkey which Speke
had with him on his former journey to Lake Nyanza,
that the animal, then in foal, died. For this no re-


118 IN TREATY WITH MYONGA.


dress could be obtained, because the offender was said
to belong to a different village. But how were we to
get away from these annoyances, which were exhaust-
ing to one’s strength and patience? Our porters began
to desert, saying, what was the use of staying there—
there was nothing to eat ? I was almost driven to giving
up a gun or more, as I had seen the country traversed
without them; but on reference to Speke, who lay pros-
trated with sickness twelve miles from me, I was told
on no account to give guns, but to settle the tax, and
join him at any sacrifice. Some Seedees under Bar-
aka, who had a great deal of native bluster about him,
arrived with a bound and dash, bringing Speke’s mes-
sage; and having armed himself and a dozen fol-
lowers with ten rounds of ammunition each, Baraka
went to the sultan, carrying an offer of forty fathoms of
calico and ten wires of copper. The chief did not see
why: he should be treated so stingily! ‘Other men of
his rank get much handsomer presents; he merely
asks for twenty coloured cloths, no guns, but he must
have four barrels of powder, and don’t forget the gentle-
man’s blanket!’ To settle the matter, as we had been
delayed seven days, one case of gunpowder, double the
quantity of cloth, the scarlet blanket, and a bundle of
beads were sent sorrowfully, but in the full hope of
success. No; we could not leave his country till one
case of powder was given; so the case was rendered,
and his men were requested to take it to him. They
then got up a noise because a box of percussion -caps
had been taken out, and before going to their sultan
they requested each a cloth for their trouble. Baraka
again went to appeal; the box of caps was not wanted ;
the men were rebuked; one goat was given by the sultan


THE WATUTA OR ZULU KAFIRS. 119


to Baraka; and we marched that afternoon, the 23d
September, having been detained seven days, with
wounded feelings, and with every howl of the exulting
natives sinking deeply into our hearts.

Some remarks upon the Watuta race may not be
out of place here. They had lately been assisting
Boleema, a chief of the district, to defeat my friend
Myonga, and had succeeded in capturing thirty of his
cattle, and striking terror into the country. Although
we never saw one of the tribe, we came upon their
deserted camps, and had two men amongst our fol-
lowers who had once been taken prisoners by them.
To these two I am chiefly indebted for the following
information. ‘Their M’foomoo, or sultan, M’Tookoolla,
has his headquarters at Malavie, a province bordering
on the north-west shore of Lake Nyassa. A brother
of his, called M’Tumbareeka, has wandered north to
Utambara, and there formed a royal residence. They
seldom go themselves in search of cattle and slaves,
but send their wuzeers or officers, with several thou-
sand followers, roaming over the country, leaving
nothing but waste behind them. If they find a vil-
lage without cattle, they demand slaves instead, never
giving up the siege till some tax has been extorted.
Some cases are told of their besieging a place for
months, with their superior numbers encircling the
village to prevent escape; those who were so fortu-
nate as to break through this Watuta cordon being
looked upon by the country afterwards as having had
a charmed life. The only race in the south that ever
mastered them, and can pass through them, are the
Wabeesa, living to their west. We had one of these
people in camp, a young lad, so bold that he would


120 THE WATUTA OR ZULU KAFIRS.


show fight against our strongest follower. Men from
the coast are sometimes found to enter their camp
fearlessly; but, as a rule, every race in the interior is
in continual dread of their arrival. They have large
boats, with which they navigate the Nyassa lake,
landing and making raids on the people of Nyassa
and Uhiao. The pure race adopt the costume of the
Kafir in their extraordinary coverings; but as they
are made up of many who love a life of freedom, or
had been captured from villages in childhood, the race
must be a very mixed one. Their arms are two or
three very small short spears, which they never throw,
but, with a leather shield in the left hand protecting
their own bodies, they close upon their foe; and, if
he resists being captured as a slave, stab him. We
once were encamped in a village when, at night, the
drums beat the alarm—tap, tap, slowly, increasing to
a tremendous roll. This was to warn all that the
Watuta were on the move in the vicinity, and might
take this village on their way; however, they did not
come to it till some days after we had left it, when
the people got warning and escaped. We saw their
camp in a circle of fence, completely surrounding a vil-
lage, at a distance of 200 yards. Forked sticks were
stuck in the ground to support the cow-skins which
their women carry to shade them during the day from
the sun. Most comfortable beddings of grass lay on
the ground; or, when long in one place, their huts
were a half-orange shape, very low, and surrounded
by a fence made from the euphorbia, which is ima-
gined to be poisonous, and only fit for the use of the
Watuta.

The chief Myonga, who plundered my caravan, and


OUR SEEDEES STRIKE FOR DOUBLE PAY. 2h


the eight or ten other petty chiefs whose country we
had to pass through afterwards, were not a whit better
than the Watuta, and the wonder is they did not take
everything from us. It was only because they feared
being shot or bewitched, or come down upon by their
neighbouring chiefs, that they desisted. When one
is known to possess wealth, obtained by tax or by
plunder, jealousy and quarrels are the certain result.
We no sooner heard the vile sound of the war-drum
to collect the natives, and intimidate our party into
the settlement of the tax, than our porters would
desert ; and when the drums beat a “receipt” for all
demands, and we were free to move out of their
clutches, our Wezee porters would get up a row with
us, and demand more cloth, thus causing us to suffer
as much annoyance from friend as from foe ; and often
they would run away in a body as soon as they got
what they wanted. Nothing we could devise seemed
to succeed, till their bows and arrows were seized, and
they had got so far on the journey that going back
through these boisterous races to their homes without
arms would have been as bad as death to them. One
trouble over, we had others: our Seedees, who had
been engaged and paid at the British Consulate of
Zanzibar to accompany us, struck for double pay and
increased allowance for rations. Their complaints
were calmly listened to; and when it was told that
they might leave our service but lay down their arms,
they surrendered them, but thought better of it the
following morning, and only three of them deserted.
These constant drains upon our resources had one
good effect—they lightened our baggage; and after
the enormous tax levied by the sultan and under-


122 A WATERFALL.


chiefs of Usui, we were far in the interior at Kara-
gue, with certainly not enough of beads to last us six
months.

The first sixteen marches from Ukuni were through
very pleasant undulations of tall soft grass and um-
brageous forest-trees, spots here and there being cleared
for cultivation, and capable of yielding grain for one
or two thousand travellers throughout a season. On
getting into Usui the watershed had changed ; all ran
to Victoria Nyanza. Our path crossed three or four
escarped hills, tailmg gently off to lower ground in
the north. About Lohagattee there was picturesque
scenery. Delightfully wild rocks and crags inter-
spersed with trees overhung the valleys, reminding
one of the echoing cliffs over the Lake of Killarney.
A waterfall, too, added a rare charm to this part of the
journey. The water fell upon hard, black, volcanic-like
boulders of conglomerate, in a cascade of two cubic
feet from the top of the escarpment seventy feet in
height. Amongst the spray beautiful ferns and mosses
orew in great luxuriance, recalling many a ramble at
home for plants and objects of natural history; but
though crabs were about the water, no land-shells were
found. The natives came into camp asking why the
fall had been visited by the white man. Did he mean
to stop the water that supplied the whole valley, by
turning its course or drinking up its waters? Their
chief, we heard, when rain is required, goes through a
propitiatory ceremony at this spot to bring it in abund-
ance; but as this year rain had fallen at its usual season,
their fears were easily calmed. The rain-doctor had
put out his magic instruments under a tree by the
20th October, and expected it abundantly at new


CRYSTAL WATER. 123


moon, fifteen days afterwards, when his year would
have expired. He begged for a piece of paper to
assist him, and on getting half a sheet of foolscap,
said he would prefer paper written over! From the
26th of September, and during October, we had very
pleasant showers and sheht thunderstorms. At new
moon, on the 2d November, as the doctor predicted,
we had a heavy wind-storm, with pelting rain; but by
the 5th, owr magical horn, the rain-gauge, had worked
its charm and stopped the rain! When in low ground,
or where water was lying near the surface, the mornings
were so cold that gloves would have been a comfort.
During the day the sun was oppressive, but in the
shade, with a N.E. wind generally blowing, it was
agreeably cool. Water was everywhere abundant the
first half of the journey, in wells dug outside the vil-
lages, and in the boggy dips which drained the country
to the north im the latter half. Tor the first time in
Africa, we got clear crystal water bursting from under
the hard stratified rock of the parallel ranges of Usui ;
and whether it was that the water was purer, that the
season had changed, or that we were in a finer climate,
the men suffered less in health during the months of
October and November than during any previous time
of the year. Speke was rapidly recovering from his
dangerous chest complaint ; and instead of my fever
visits, [ had only periodical nausea in the morning,
occurring about every ten days during the march.
Geologically, the country of Uzinza has a great deal
of interest, being broken up into so many varied forms.
One day, from the path of splintered rock, you may
contemplate the face of a long, bare, sloping hill, the
surface of which is half rock half bog, giving it the


124 THE PLANTAIN FIELDS.


wild dreary look of a Highland moor im the heart of
Africa, but with this difference, that a garden of plan-
tain forms part of the landscape. Again, pick up a
walnut-sized nodule of iron, covered with a rusty red
dust, and think how rudely, how quietly, they turn it
into a spear that glistens like steel! Again, see the
long high escarpments, and wonder at the power that
had raised them into such a position. The volcanic
mounds in Kishakka, seen from the spur above Vi-
hembé, were most curious, so many of them rising in
one part of the horizon like mole-heaps on the earth’s
surface, some of their tops nearer us being sterile and
of red grit, their sides strewed over with white quartz
fragments ; others clothed with pale green grass to
their very summits, and dotted with trees sweeping
down to, and shading with verdure, the valleys below.
Their forms were saddle-shaped, horse-shoes, and frus-
tums of cones; many were crowned with rock, and
nearly all had stratified splinters bristling from their
sides. The eastern slopes below the escarpments,
where the debris lay, were more cultivated than the
western rocky parts. ‘The natives bestowed great care
on their fields, hoeing them up by the 8th October for
the expected rain, collecting the weeds in heaps with
a forked stick, and burning them. Fields of plantain-
trees were grown, each tree six feet apart. From the
fruit a sweet spirituous wine is made, tasting some-
what like still hock, and quite as pleasant. The de-
cayed leaves and stems of the plantain were allowed
to remain on the ground to preserve the roots and
soil from the heat of the sun, and afford nourishment
to a crop of beans, “maharageh,” peculiar to this coun-
try, and often grown in the shade of the trees. The


CATTLE AND GAME. 125


other crops seen ripening in November, were Indian
corn and manioc; sweet potato was ripe and abun-
dant ; sorghum, “ M’tama,” at that season, was scarce
and dear; tobacco, fowls, goat, and cows were more
expensive than we had found them in Unyamuezi.

The cattle looked wildly at our dress, and were here
a different breed—namely, the heavy, ungraceful, large-
horned variety of Karague, without humps, and many
of them probably from Unyoro, hornless, like the Tees-
water breed, but bony and gaunt from bad grazing.
All night the people allow their cattle to remain in
the field, without any fence, standing round smoulder-
ing fires by their habitations. I observed at cow-
milking time the skin of a calf placed in front of one
cow, when she licked it all over, and while her hind-
legs were tied with a thong, the milk was taken. In
a goat that was killed, a black glazed ball of hair very
much resembling its own was found inside: no cattle
diseases were heard of. The manner our men had of
getting hold of a vicious cow was quite African. A
noose is laid on the ground, she is driven over it till
by perseverance she is caught; or if she is to be killed,
they chase her with a sword-bayonet, and either ham-
string or break the bone of a hind-leg.

In the southern forests of Uzinza, hartebeest, eland,
zebra, pig, and various species of antelope might be
shot from horseback or on foot, as there is a wide
range of fine country for them; but the greatest num-
ber and variety of animals I saw in Africa were in the
valley of Urigi, which is the boundary between Uzinza
and Karague; all the above animals, with the rhino-
ceros and giraffe, might certainly be seen any morning
by the sportsman. The valley or plain is covered with


126 GAME-BIRDS.


four-feet-high grasses, is from three to four miles
broad, and probably twenty miles long, evidently once
forming part of Victoria Nyanza. We counted four-
teen rhinoceros upon the plain below; they were so
numerous that while marching they were often within
eunshot, affording us excellent sport had we chosen
to follow them up. Instead of bemg frightened, one
of these rhinoceros walked up towards me till I whistled
at sixty paces, which was close enough; but the bul-
let from one of the men’s rifles only made him put
a twist in his tail and trot off proudly over the grassy
plain for three miles, tripping repeatedly, and halting
for an instant to give himself a shake, asif he had been
stung. No elephants were seen—it was too open a
country for them; hyena were rarely heard; porcu-
pine-quills were picked up in the woods; serpents, we
saw few or none; beeswax was never met with, though
hives made out of logs were occasionally. Of game-
birds the most plentiful was the guinea-fowl near the
cultivations. The natives of Usui will not eat the
fowl, but the Walinga, a class of people who work in
iron and its nodules, have no objection. Florikan were
shot; also a species of partridge quite new tome. I
was attracted by their curious gait in running with
their bodies thrown back: their call, too, was strange
—“cock, cock, ko-cock,’ or “chick-a-chick, chick-a-
chick,” not unlike the Himalayan cheer-pheasant’s
voice; our Seedees called it the “Booee.” Its throat
and round the eyes were an orange red; one was
double-spurred, and weighed 14 lb.

While delayed by the sultan of Usui for fifteen
days in settling his tax, we found the above partridge
amongst the bushes of the valley; also numbers of


SWALLOWS AND THE KING OF BIRDS. a


pretty birds of no value except as specimens. We
observed three fine species of swallow on the wing ;
the prettiest was entirely black, except on the fore-
head and under the lower mandible, where it was
snow-white; a smaller was black all over, and both
had forked tails, and frequented cragey ground.
A larger species have red belly and chest, whitish
throat, some white under the wings, long forked
tail and general colour black, frequenting ground
covered with brushwood. The smallest seen was
black with white belly, red over forehead and under
the lower mandible, with forked tail. Black birds
the size and shape of robins flew from tree to
tree ; water-wagtails were familiar with our camp ;
creepers hopped amongst the bushes; smaller genera
were in flights; and a peculiar-looking bird, with
plain brown plumage and long tail, was shot amongst
the rushes. Though mentioned last, our Seedees
considered this the king of birds. He is called the
“Mlinda,” and he moves escorted by a staff of little
birds, whose duty it 1s, should a feather fall from the
king, to tear it to pieces, thus preventing its being
put upon an arrow. A similar tale is told with refer-
ence to the tippet-monkey, who is said to believe his
handsome skin so much coveted, that when wounded
he tears out all his beautiful long hair, to prevent
your making use of it! The skin of the M’linda
is as thick as that of a mouse, the feathers might be
called hairy, the bill is stronger than a linnet’s, and
the feet are soft and red. Our men were much pleased
during a march to meet with a bird they called the
“kong-ot'a:” we were certain to have luck attending
us when it was seen !


128 THE SULTAN OF USUI.


The most powerful chief on our route through
Uzinza was Suwarora of Usui—a Wahuma, by caste,
but a superstitious creature, addicted to drink, and
not caring to see us, but exacting through his subor-
dinates the most enormous tax we had yet paid. His
chief officer or “sirhidge” was a Watusi; and when
he called upon us dressed in the most ridiculous
costume—a woman’s crimson cotton gown, a red-
check turban, and “saharee” thrown round his shoul-
ders—he was treated with every respect, and got a
chair. We had time to make his acquaintance. He
was middle-aged, with a dissipated, reckless look, full
of animated conversation, very black, with flat nose
and prominent teeth. His legs were masses of iron
wire, fitting as tight as a stocking. He had many
favours to ask; he would like so much to have a pair
of our shoes, &c. He had sent two men, bearing the
royal rod of his “ M’kama” or sultan, to convey us
with safety into the country. He hoped they had
done their duty, for no Arab had ever such an honour
paid him. There were ridiculous stories going about
regarding us—as that we were possessed of super-
natural powers, that we killed all the inhabitants of
the country we passed through, and that we took
possession of all countries; but, on his consulting the
M eanga, these reports were proved to be false, and we
were admitted into the country. He paid us a second
visit, dressed in a much less gaudy suit; and while
he sat, eating coffee from a little basket he carried, we
suggested that the tax had better be settled soon ; but
he treated the matter with great indifference, saying,
“Oh, don’t press it; let it take its time! My brother
will arrange it the day after to-morrow, because I have


THE WANYAMBO OF USUI. 129


to go into the district to see some patients; and now
I must bid you adieu.” The previous night he had
sent us a message that some handsome cloths would
be acceptable if we would have the kindness to present
them. We did so, and in return he gave us two goats,
and we saw no more of him.

The brother of the sirhidge, a more morose person,
now came into the field, and said, “ Before I can even
broach the subject of your arrival here to his highness
the M’kama (sultan), I expect a present ;” and so the
treaty dragged its length for several days, till officers
appeared in camp pronouncing the demand, with little
sticks to represent each article. About five men’s
loads of copper were paid and carried away for the
chief by our men. Although the tax was heavy, it
was conducted in a gentlemanly, quiet way, and much
quicker than we had expected, on account, it was said,
of their fear to detain magicians longer in the country.
The last extortion was, that guides must escort us to
the frontier, and they had to be paid a load of copper
between them.

The people of the country, generally called Wan-
yambo, dress in nothing but goat-skins, the leneth and
shape of the tails of a shooting-coat, without pockets
or buttons; a thong of leather ties this smartly round
the waist, right side uppermost, and is slackened on
sitting down; this forms their entire costume. With
a variously-shaped spear or a bow and arrow (some-
times poisoned), they looked very active, slim fellows,
having a far greater air about them than the Wezee.
A tuft of wool is often left on their crowns; some-
times the teeth are entire, or the two upper incisors
filed inside, but none are ever extracted. Some of the

i


130 SHOOT THIEVES.


people cover the body and arms with artificially raised
solid blisters, in circles, waves, or lines. Their address,
when it suited them, was that of cringing politeness,
showing great respect every morning ; but they could
also be boisterous and insolent. The Wasui race can
seldom be induced to carry loads; but amongst them
numerous Wezees, driven from their homes by the
Watuta, reside, and the traveller receives aid from
them. A M’sui will carry a load on his head, but not
upon the shoulder. On coming into camp to see the
novelties, all the better class had a gourd of pombé in
one hand, and generally chewed coffee-beans. Round
their ankles was a profusion of wires, generally more
upon one leg than another. One stranger I saw
wearing round his neck a flat piece of stone, which I
thought to be malachite.

In this country we were more troubled by thieves
than we had been anywhere else. After sunset our
porters when beyond camp were assaulted, and their
cloth coverings torn from them. At night they made
several attempts to get inside our ring-fence of thorns,
and the thefts became so numerous that we had to shoot
two or three found plundering. The people rather
approved of our doing this, and complimented us on
being so alert and watchful durmg the night. They
seemed generally to be an industrious people, with
comfortable “ crofts” round their houses.

The Walinga are workers in iron, scarcely distin-
cuishable in dress from the Wasui. Their furnaces
are in the heart of the forest; charcoal and lumps of
iron cinder (like a coarse sponge, and of a “ blue bottle”
colour) usually mark the spot ; and four lads, squatting
under a grass roof with a double-handled bellows each,


A WATUSI QUEEN. od


blow at a live mass of charcoal which has the nodules
of metal intermixed with it. In this calcining nothing
else seems to be used, and the metal melts, descending
into a recess, much in the same way as I have seen at
the Cumberland lead-works.

One morning, to my surprise, in a wild jungle we
came upon cattle, then upon a “bomah,” or ring-fence,
concealed by beautiful umbrageous large trees, quite
the place fora gypsy camp. At the entry two strap-
ping fellows met me and invited my approach. I
mingled with the people, got water from them, and
was asked, “ Would I not prefer some milk?” This
sounded to me more civilised than I expected from
Africans, so I followed the men, who led me up to a
beautiful ladylike creature, a Watusi woman, sitting
alone under a tree. She received me, without any
expression of surprise, in the most dignified manner ;
and, after having talked with the men, rose smiling,
showing great gentleness in her manner, and led me
to her hut. I had time to scrutinise the interesting
stranger: she wore the usual Watusi costume of a
cow's skin reversed, teased into a frieze with a needle,
coloured brown, and wrapped round her body from
below the chest to the ankles. Lappets, showing
zebra-like stripes of many colours, she wore as a “ turn-
over” round the waist; and, except where ornamented
on one arm with a highly polished coil of thick brass
wire, two equally bright and massive rings on the
right wrist, and a neck pendant of brass wire,—except
these and her becoming wrapper, she was au naturelle.
I was struck with her peculiarly formed head and
graceful long neck; the beauty of her fine eyes,
mouth, and nose; the smallness of her hands and


132 WOMEN OF USUI.


naked feet—all were faultless; the only bad feature,
which is considered one of beauty with them, was
her large ears. The arms and elbows were rounded
off like an egg, the shoulders were sloping, and her
small breasts were those of a crouching Venus—a
perfect beauty, although darker than a brunette !
Her temporary residence was peculiar—it was formed
of grass, was flat-roofed, and so low that I could not
stand upright in it. The fireplace consisted of three
stones; milk-vessels of wood, shining white from
scouring, were ranged on one side of the abode. A
eood-looking woman sat rocking a gourd between her
knees in the process of churning butter. After the
fair one had examined my skin and my clothes, I ex-
pressed great regret that I had no beads to present
to her. “They are not wanted,” she said: “sit down,
drink this buttermilk, and here is also some butter for
you.” It was placed on a clean leaf. I shook hands,
patted her cheek, and took my leave, but some beads
were sent her, and she paid me a visit, bringing butter
and buttermilk, and asking for more presents, which
she of course got, and I had the gratification to see
her eyes sparkle at the sight of them. This was one
of the few women I met during our whole journey
that I admired. None of the belles in Usui could
approach her; but they were of a different caste,
though dressing much in the same style. When cow-
skins were not worn, these Usui women dressed very
tidily in bark cloths, and had no marks or cuttings
observable on their bodies. Circles of hair were often
shaved off the crowns of their heads, and their neck
ornaments showed considerable taste in the selection
of the beads. The most becoming were a string of the


CAIRNS OF STONES. 153


M’zizima, spheres of marble-sized white porcelain, and
triangular pieces of shell, rounded at the corners. An
erect fair girl, daughter of a chief, paid us a visit,
accompanied by six maids, and sat silently for half an
hour. She had a spiral circle of wool shaved off the
crown of her head ; her only ornament was a necklace
of green beads: she wore the usual wrapper, and across
her shoulders a strip of scarlet cloth was thrown ; her
other fineries were probably left at home. The women
of the district generally had grace and gentleness in
their manner. |

The plump little negro girls who came about our
camp, standing with crossed arms and looking very
frightened, are never allowed to shave their heads till
they get married, consequently the hair is in matted
tufts or mops, very ugly, with a triangular or square
space shaved on the crown: if ornamented with
cowries, the black wool appears to more advantage.
They are not allowed to wear the usual clothing of
women, but have the skin of a goat, with the hair in-
side, round their loins, and so arranged that from the
waist to the knee it remains open, exposing completely
the right thigh. Not having lived in their villages,
we could not see any of their customs. The chief of
Usur’s residence, entitled Quikooroo, was a set of grass
huts, encircled by three concentric fences of thorn, the
largest one being two to three miles round. ‘The other
huts in the valley had no fence whatever, except where
planted round with a dense quickset of euphorbia,
erowing from twelve to twenty feet high. Sometimes
by the pathway we observed cairns of stones, such as
are found all over the world, and our leading porters
generally threw their mite on the heap. In Hindostan


134. LANGUAGE AND DANCING.


they would be called “ Peer ke jaggeh,” places of devo-
tion; and our Seedees called them “M’zeemoo.” A
rock was also passed, on which our porters placed
pebbles.

The language of the country was quite unintelligible
to our men—I mean as spoken by the Watusi, who are
the reigning race here; but they did not find it diff-
cult to pick up some words and phrases. It was not
so hard as the dialect of Unyamuezi, which they con-
sidered more “bharee” (difficult). If one Seedee wishes
to address another by saying, “I say,” or “Old fel-
low!” he calls “Somoh!”—if a Muezi, “ Doogoh
yango !”—if a M’sui, “ Kunewani!”—if a Meanda,
“Awangéh!” There is no similarity in these; conse-
quently, to speak to any M ganda, two interpreters
were at first necessary, until our men picked up
some of their language; but in their numerals they
were almost the same.

The style of dance at Myonga’s seemed to be pecu-
har to the country. It was conducted, without arms
or any rough coarseness, by moonlight, in an open
space, all the lads and lasses collecting without music.
A circle was formed, singing and clapping of hands
commenced, and either a woman made her most grace-
ful curtsy to a favourite in the crowd, and retired
skilfully backwards to her place, or a young fellow
bounded into the centre, threw himself into attitudes,
performed some gymnastic feat, bowed to the prettiest,
and then made way for the next champion or fair
lady.

After I had joined Speke at Bogweh on the 7th
October 1861, a letter was received by him from
Colonel Rigby, the consul at Zanzibar, dated 31st


STRANGER VISITORS. 135


October 1860, advising the despatch of brandy, biscuit,
and cigars, &e.; and that our letters were in another
packet. We, of course, were delighted at receiving this
news—a whole year had elapsed without any commu-
nication whatever from the outer world; but where
were the letters and supplies? “Oh, they must have
been lost in Ugogo, where the Arabs had gone to
fight!” Whatever was the cause, our letters were cut
off from us for the period of twenty-seven months—
viz., from October 1860 to February 1863, when we
got to Gondokoro. We had consequently to content
ourselves with the news of the countries around us.
Stories from men who had seen snow on the top of
Kilimanjaro; with accounts of a tribe to the south of it
who rode on horseback, and a salt lake called Lebassa
in that direction; or the appearance of a M’ganda, tall,
stout, broad-nostrilled, seen for the first time, gave me
a longing desire, from his manly and true African look,
to reach his country. The dress of this people was
formed of gaily-coloured goat-skins and bark cloths,
well arranged, striking, and becoming; their accoutre-
ments and drums were got up with neatness and sim-
plicity ; their drapery perfectly concealed the whole
body, except the head, feet, and hands; and once a
strapping girl, of a tribe still farther off, was shown to
us as an Unyoro. Having since then seen her race,
known by the extraction of the lower incisors, I can -
state that we were not imposed upon.

In the next chapter will be described the country
of Karague, which reminded me of the English Lake
district. An Arab caravan, like our own, but of 250
loads, had got ahead of us, and having settled their
tax with the Usui chief, the men were plodding on to


136 OUR TABLE-ATTENDANT.


the ivory and slave mart. In their file two men and
a girl were in chains together—no doubt recent invest-
ments. Our Seedees, by their curious ways, continued
to amuse us. Our table-attendant, Mabrook, or Bur-
ton’s “ bull-headed Mabruki,” was a thorough African,
so opposite to what an Indian servant is. LHver naked
from head to waist (and looking gross with fatness), he
would come up to “lay the table,” whistling or singing,
with a bunch of knives, spoons, and forks in his hand ;
having placed the tin lids and pots at our feet, he
would squat on the ground beside them and dole out
our dinner. Should he have to clean your plate, a
bunch of grass or a leaf is generally within his reach ;
and, if he has to remove the plate, he seldom returns
without wiping his mouth. He chafis his comrades as
he sits by you; and dinner over, you see him eating
with your spoons and drinking out of the teapot or
the spout of the kettle.


CHAPTER VIIL


KARAGUE, NOVEMBER 25 TO APRIL 14, 1862—-THE ROYAL FAMILY
— HABITS OF THE SULTAN RUMANIKA — CRUSADER-LIKE
CUSTOM AT NEW MOON—IDOLATRY—THE SULTAN’S BROTHERS
— DESCRIPTION OF KARAGUE AND ITS NEIGHBCURHOOD —
ILLNESS OF THE AUTHOR—ENGLISH GARDEN PEASE—MAR-
KETS, COFFEE-TRADERS—EARLIEST INFORMATION REGARDING
THE NILE—THE TWO RACES OF KARAGUE, THE WAHUMA AND
WAYAMBO—THE PRINCESSES—-ROYAL RESIDENCE—MUSICAL
INSTRUMENTS.


THE royal family of Karague consisted of three bro-
thers and their families. Their father, Dagara, had
died about eight years previous to our visit. He had
lived to a good old age ; was almost a giant in height,
with leprous hands, of the Wahuma caste; was esteemed
a wise and sagacious prince, and was very popular with
the people. On his death, his body was sewn up in
the skin of a cow, and placed inside a hut, with several
women and cattle, who were there all left to die and
moulder to dust. The question of succession was dis-
puted by three surviving sons, and the test as to who
should ultimately rule was that some sacred emblem
would be placed before all, and whoever should raise it
from the ground would become the reigning sovereign.


138 RUMANIKA OF KARAGUE.


Rumanika, not the eldest, was found to be the only
one of the three competent, or who felt conscientiously
that he could support the dignity of the position by
raising this weight from the ground ; consequently he
was elected. From that time a younger brother, Ro-
geerah, became his bitter enemy, and fled to a corner
of the province, taking with him a great proportion of
the people with their cattle, as he was the more gener-
ous and the greater favourite of the two brothers.
But Rumanika’s mother had to be got rid of before
he could properly hold the reins of government; and
by some magic medicine she was killed, and he was
declared “ Wkama of Karague.”

Although illness prevented my seeing so much of
Rumanika as I should otherwise have liked, I could
not but notice that he was the handsomest and most
intelligent sovereign we had met with in Africa. He
stood six feet two inches in height, and his counte-
nance had a fine, open, mild expression. There was
nothing of the African look about him, except that he
had wool instead of hair. His dress was a robe of
numerous skins of small antelopes sewn together, and
knotted over one shoulder, with a loin-cloth underneath;
or an Arab cloak or shawl of bark-cloth hung from
his shoulder, reaching below the knee. Going about
with nothing on his head, his arms bare, except
common ornaments of beads or brass, with painted
porcelain beads on his ankles, and carrying a long
staff, he was altogether the picture of the gentle shep-
herd of his flock. His four young sons, of ages from
sixteen to twenty-four, were tall, smart, nice-looking
young fellows—quite gentlemanly in their manners,
and very cleanly in their persons and dress. There


HIS WIVES AND FAMILY. 139


was a younger son, an infant, always kept at the royal
residence, and not allowed out. The five wives of the
king have been described by Captain Speke: several
were of enormous proportions, unable to enter the door
of an ordinary hut, requiring a person on each side to
support them when moving from one place to another,
and expressing great dehght at any present the
“ Wazoongo” (white men) should send their lord and
master. ‘Their diet, and that of the sons and daugh-
ters, was generally boiled plantain or milk. They
considered their existence depended on the latter
article of food, and certainly they all throve admirably
upon it—the sons were full of vigour, and the women
were fat and healthy, though not prolific. On Captain
Speke asking to be allowed to take a young prince to
England for education, the cry was, “They had never
been more than ten miles from home; how could
they go?’—there would be no milk for them—they
would die.” Probably they had also some dread that
the lads would be made slaves of. All of them were
very particular and fastidious as to their diet.

The sultan drank milk; thought the meat of goat
and sheep unclean; would not eat fish, fowl, or guinea-
fowl; rarely or never touched stirabout; and merely
sucked the juice of boiled beef. He drank very little
plaintain-wine, and was never known to be intoxicated.
He had many superstitions; he would not drink out
of the vessel that we or any commoner had used, and
he combined the offices of prophet, priest, and king.
As prophet, he would place the tusks of an elephant
upright on the ground, fill them with charms, seal
them, and predict rain, although his calculations
were not always correct. As priest, three days after


140 KING'S FONDNESS FOR CURIOSITIES.


new moon, he sat concealed, all but his head, in the
doorway of his chief hut, and received the salutations
of his people, who, one by one, shrieked and sprang in
front of him, swearing allegiance. His head on these
occasions was wonderfully dressed, and made to look
quite patriarchal, with a crown of beads and feathers,
and a false white beard of considerable length, giving
him the look of an Indian “khitmutegar” or Jewish
rabbi. He was very fond of curiosities, and amongst
the collection he had obtained from Arab visitors were
stuffed birds, an electric battery, looking-glasses, a
clock with eyes in the cast-iron figure made to roll
with the movement of the pendulum, &c. He expressed
surprise that we had brought nothing to amuse him,
so that all our ingenuity was put to the test in order
to try and gratify his highness. A jumping-jack
made of wood was sent him for his infant son, and
he said he must have me make him one the size of
life before I left the country. He had a three-pounder
brass gun brought him unmounted from the coast ;
and on a picture being sent him, showing how we in
India drag guns into action by means of elephants,
nothing would satisfy him till he had ordered fifty
men to cut down trees, to be made into a gun-carriage.
I protested, saying, “ You have no iron—no elephant ;
who is to make the wheels?” Here was a dilemma—
a wheel to make before I could be allowed to jom my
companion, and nothing to make it with but a pen-
knife in my pocket! Luckily my friend Rumanika
was not pig-headed, and had compassion on me when
it was explained to him that ropes of bark, and men
to drag the gun, would not answer the purposes of
iron and elephant.


HIS VENERATION FOR LIONS. 141


This sovereign several times came to call while I
lay sick, one day bringing me a fish alive in a Jar
from the lake; this pleased me, as the Wahuma have a
prejudice against fish. But his chief delight seemed
to be in medicines and pictures. It was an anxious
moment when our tent was emptied of all listeners,
and we were pressed for a medicinal charm to bring
about the death of his brother Rogeerah. Then,
during the visit, the weight of the mercury, its reflec-
tions, &c., were looked at in amazement; the compass
—“was there water in it?”—our shoes, our bedding—
all were marvels. With the sextant he looked through
at the sun without fear; and when consulted one morn-
ing by my servant about some strange large animals
that came in at night to our camp, he recommended
that the next time they appeared we should challenge
them three times, and if no answer were received, to
fire at them; for “depend upon it they were enemies
sent by his rebel brother to lay a trap for him.”
Should they, however, prove to be leopards, they were
not to be molested. For all leopards they have a
great reverence, as Dagara, the late sovereign, is believed
to be still protected by them; and on an invading army
coming from Uganda, this sultan had the power to
send leopards to disperse them. ‘Their skins are only
worn by royalty or its followers. The sultan, on
seeing the picture of some of his milk-carriers, sent
for the sketch-book, turned out all idlers, and showed
them to a few favourite servants about his family.
His wives were quite clamorous about seeing them,
asking why Rumanika had not been drawn. The
back view of a naked young prince, enormously fat,
with clotted long hair concealing his neck, gave them


142 THE KING'S BROTHER, MNANAGEE.


oreat amusement, and they clapped their hands and
laughed with joy at the resemblance to the original.
All the princesses living in separate houses got jealous
unless they saw the sketches, so that my servant was
several times detained a whole day by them; and it
became so fashionable to look at the pictures, that for
days my camp was beset with people wishing to have
their curiosity gratified. M’nanagee, the brother of
the sultan, a man of six feet three inches in height,
brought his favourite bow to be ornamented with
pictures. There never was a prettier bit of stick; it
was exactly his own height, of ash-coloured wood, bent
merely at the ends, balanced beautifully, not a curve in
it that could hurt the eye, and it was strung with the
sinews of a cow. He could with ease throw an arrow,
by giving ita high fight, 150 or 200 yards. Wishing
to enlighten and amuse Rumanika, I sent him coloured
pictures of our soldiers, and of men in ordinary costume;
these he admired very much, but could I not show him
how our ladies looked? Certainly. Figures of three
ladies were painted—one in morning costume, one at
an archery meeting using the bow and arrow, and a
third in ball costume. He immediately hung all up
on the wall of his small hut; and on inquiring which
fioure pleased him most, the palm was given to the
evening costume.

Whenever he wished to spend the day at a spot on
the hill across the lake, where I think his father had
been interred, he was carried in a basket, made of
osiers, by four men. The band led the way with
music; several hundred followers surrounded him ;
and if he was on the return journey, small fat boys,
having their heads wreathed with water-lilies plucked


A BAND OF THIRTY-THREE DRUMS. 143


in the lake as they ferried over, danced and skipped
up the hill the whole way to the sound of the pleasing
drum and bugle band. His revenue was said to be
one jar out of every three of plantain-wine; and all
his guests coming from the neighbouring provinces
had to be fed by the farmers around. It has always
been the custom of Uganda, Usui, and Karague, that
when any one of their chiefs sends messengers to the
other, the royal bearers are free to settle where they
like, and to provision themselves as they require from
the stores of the people, no payment being ever taken
for anything. Plantain is so common that nothing is
said if a stranger is seen plucking a bunch from a
tree; but at night many disturbances and frequent
fights occur when a raid is made for goats. Stones
fly, spears are thrown, and all is in confusion, if any-
thing beyond a bunch of plantain is attempted to be
carried off.

We were asked to witness a new-moon ceremony.
This generally takes place three days after the first
appearance of the luminary, and it was celebrated as
usual by our men firing volleys in the air. The sultan
assumes the priestly garb, and dons his long, false,
white beard on this occasion. His whole body re-
mains concealed behind a screen, and he has beside
him his insignia of office, either a small drum, or an
instrument which no one but himself can raise. The
drums, generally thirty-three, are on the ground, in
a line, each having a large white cross on its head—a
strange Crusader-like custom. A man stands behind
each, and the leader, with two small drums, is in front
to give the time. On his raising the right arm, the
thirty-three drummers do the same, then the left arm,


144. STORIES TOLD BY THE SULTAN.


and they gradually beat the drums quicker, till end-
ing in a tremendous roll. This continues for three
hours, with intervals, and is repeated the day follow-
ing. A. band of hand-drums is near the sultan’s hut,
oiving lighter dance-music for the amusement of the
boys and girls, who must make merry as the new-
moon term comes round.

Rumanika was on excellent terms with the neigh-
bouring kines of Uganda and Unyoro, often exchang-
ing presents with them. He had sent to M’tesa of
Uganda a book printed in English (“ Kaffir Laws”),
which we saw on getting to Uganda; and they would
send to him for powder, cloth, &c., he being supposed
by the chiefs living further north to have easier access
to the coast. In return for these favours, or for the
oift of a porcelain cup, or neatly-made ankle or wrist
ornaments in brass or copper, &c., he would expect to |
receive ivory, cattle, or slaves. Curious enough, none
of these kings had ever visited each other, consequently
their ideas of foreign countries were very limited, and
they believed any story a designing traveller might
choose to tell them. Rumanika, for instance, expected
to have seen us always dressed in white cambric shirts,
instead of which we had no soap to wash our flannel
ones! Was it true that we made doors out of his
ivory? He told us the road to the north was a most
dangerous one ; we could not march through it without
200 guns! One race we should have to pass through
were pigmies ; others lived in trees, and seized women ;
dogs we should come across with horns, sheep with three
horns, and men travelled about with a stool tied be-
hind them. This last was partly true, for we found
the Wagani carrying little stools on their arms; and


SUPERSTITIONS. 145


“those living in trees” may allude to M. Du Chaillu’s
gorilla !

We could not trace any distinct form of religion
amongst this interesting race, but there were certain
indications or traces of Jewish worship. A piece of
copper, made up in the form of a grapple or anchor,
two feet long, lay near the door of the sultan’s hut.
We were told this was to represent the horns of cattle,
and had a sacred signification. It was placed upright
in the ground on the occasion of the monthly festivi-
ties, and looked like what the Brahmins of India
might have assumed as an idol. The cleanly huts of
the Wahuma race reminded me of Indians; also the
superstition of not drinking out of the same cup with
you. The moon in its different phases was thought
to laugh at us. A tree was considered the greatest
object in the creation, not even excepting man. Lions
protected the mausoleum of Dagara, the former sul-
tan! “No kingdom was so powerful as this; no one
dare attack us! Lions guard us!” Captain Speke
could not kill any hippopotami in the lake, because
he had made no present to the invisible god, or
“deo,” who lived upon it; and the sultan of Unyoro
could divide the waters of the lake with a rod!

A younger prince, Wnanagee, was equally tall and
erect with his brother Rumanika, and he was even a
greater prophet and priest. The natives had un-
bounded faith in his powers as a diviner. Daily did
he walk to a stone on the face of the hill, or he might
be seen going to visit some stuffed elephant-tusks
placed in the ground within an enclosure, for the pur-
pose of daily consultation with his gods. Although
Mnanagee had these peculiarities, he was friendly

K


146 MNANAGEE AND HIS SONS.


and gentlemanly, always ready to give any informa-
tion he might possess; rather formal at first, with a
haughty air, but ever kind in getting us provisions,
assisting in the knowledge of plants and herbs, and
very modest in his requests for presents. His dress
did not differ much from the people of the country;
the usual short leather wrapper hid his loins, and a
sheet of cotton check kept his shoulders and body
warm. ‘The head was shaved bare, and a strap, hold-
ing a charm, was tied round the back of it. Bunches
of charms hung on his arms and from his neck and
below the knee, and huge masses of wire were on his
ankles. He always carried a long walking-stick, with
a charm of wood tied at one end. <A small boy, very
fat, carried his chowrie, or fly-flapper, and a huge
black pipe, the size of half a goose’s egg, with a long
stem. On paying me visits he was seldom accom-
panied by any one. His eldest son measured six feet
five inches ; but, though quite as gentle as the father,
was not so good-looking, and seldom came to visit me.
A younger one, not more than two or three years old,
died while I was at Karague, rather suddenly, and
the father mourned greatly for the child, crymg most
erievously. The body was buried, the sultan said, in
an island on the lake, whereas his barber told me it
was placed under rocks on the face of the hill. I am
inclined to think the former statement correct, as the
islands in the lake are considered sacred ground ;
while the Wanyambo (the peasants of the country)
deposit their dead in the waters of the lake. M’nana-
gee had a firm belief in evil spirits. He knew them
to be about his country, and felt certain as to the
fact; but it was possible, he thought, for clever people


VALLEY OF URIGI. 147


like those at Zanzibar to confuse their designs for
certain periods.

A third brother, to whom we had to make presents
on our arrival in Karague, was named Roazerah. On
sending a gift of a red cloth and some beads, &c., he
asked what he could give in return. “ Would a tusk
be received?” “No.” “ Would they like a slave?”
“No,” said Bombay; “give them a couple of cows,
that their men may have a feast.” Though older than
either of the other brothers, he could not succeed to
the throne of his father, because he had been born
before his father became a crowned king. In lke
manner, none of the princes at present in Karague
can succeed to their father, as all were born while he
was a prince.

The chief possessions of this family are bounded on
the north by the river Kitangule. The valley of
Urigi divides the kmgdom on the south from Usui,
and its total extent 1s from 3000 to 4000 square miles
of hills, dale, and lake, standing at a general elevation
of 4500 feet above the level of the sea. Entering it
from the south, the hills, rising 200 to 300 feet above
the valleys, are covered with waving grasses ; a few
trees run in lines with certain strata, almost with the
regularity of plantations ; and very often dense brush-
wood, the refuge of the rhinoceros, crowns two-thirds
of their tops, or runs down the ravines or water-cuts
to the valleys helow. They have a very desolate
appearance, all the habitations being in the lower
grounds: a traveller is seldom met with. On the
more precipitous hills, rock-fragments and jutting-out
masses of sandstone-shingle lie at a steep angle on
their slopes; and the path, of splinters from these,


148 “TITTLE WINDERMERE.”


goes up and down, or makes long circuits to get round
the spurs, seldom displaying any pleasing scene except
the freshness of the young grasses after having been
burnt. These reminded me of the “Emerald Isle,”
and when the view on reaching the residence of Ru-
manika, the reigning king, burst upon us, all hard-
ships and trials were forgotten and forgiven. As you
stand on the greensward, you see, 1000 feet below
you, and two miles distant, the sweetly-lying lake of
Karague, “ Little Windermere,” reposing in oval form
amidst gently-swelling grassy hills, so surrounded as
to puzzle one to think where the waters come from,
and where they make their escape. On its western
shore, trees hang over its clear sweet waters ; wooded
islands dot its glassy surface, and a deep fringe of the
papyrus borders its southern side. But the most in-
teresting sight to us was looking away to the far west
over four distinct parallel ranges of hill, with water
(Lakes Kagzera, Ooyewgomah, &c.) showing here and
there between them; and occasionally about sunset,
after the foggy mists had cleared away, appeared a
sugar-loaf mountain, known to the natives as “ M’foom-
beero,” or Cook. It is the largest hil in the country,
and caused, on first view, quite a sensation, attract-
ing our intense admiration by its towering height.
Two brother cones, but lower, lie to its left, and all
are so steep, that the natives said few attempt their
ascent, having to do it on hands and knees. Their
distance from where we stood was calculated at fifty
miles. Unfortunately they could not be reached, as
they were off our direct route, and in a different
kinedom, and many obstacles intervened ; so that our


RAINY SEASON IN KARAGUE. 149


only privilege was to look at them when not veiled in
mists, at sunset.

The capital of Karague is 1° 40’ south of the
equator, within a complete belt of vapour the whole
year round. Fruitful showers seemed to fall con-
tinually. ‘There are no very marked seasons, as win-
ter and summer. On the same day, sowing, gather-
ing, and reaping may be seen, and from November
till April the fall of rain increases or diminishes ac-
cording as the sun becomes more or less vertical to our
position. The natives had their reasons for knowing
this also; for when asked, on the 2d December 1861
(when we were having abundant showers), “ How long
is this to last’—-when does your rainy season com-
mence ?”—they at once said, “ With the new moon,”
which corresponded with the time for the sun to re-
turn towards its more vertical position. Again, when
asking them, “When have you your heaviest rains ?”
the reply was, “At the time the Mohammedans call
Ramezan,” which is equivalent to our equinoctial
period in March, when the sun crosses our zenith, A
note about this time is as follows :—“17th March
1862. ‘The weather looks black, peals of thunder with
hehtning; 1.65 inches of rain fell straight and thick,
with occasional hail, in one hour.” ‘The fall increased
in quantity from this day till it reached its climax
about the 10th of April, when it began again to
decline. In December till January 7, the usual
maximum temperature in a grass hut open to the
south was observed to be 81°, and the minimum
56°, at an elevation of 5000 feet above the level of


the sea. We had a great number of dull English


150 CAPTAIN SPEKE DEPARTS FOR UGANDA.


days, very few bright ones, never an Italian sky, as
too many vapours hung about this equatorial region.
The dews were heavy, and lay long, and the mould
getting amongst plants was very disheartening to the
collector, obliging him to discard many a souvenir.
Brushwood was used instead of firewood, which was
scarce and dear, otherwise the chilly mornings and
nights might have been cheered by the watchfire.
The country was luckily so hilly, that, though the rain
dashed with the N.E. wind into the red clayey soil,
making the hill-sides stream with muddy rivulets, one
hour after the “pelt” all had run down, and a gleam
of sunshine made the ground not unpleasant to walk
upon. The health of the men did not seem to suffer
from wet. Zanzibar people are accustomed to getting
ducked. It keeps them occupied in repairing their
erass huts, collecting firewood, and making merry over
it, rather than causing despondency. With one case
of ophthalmia, and a few of fever, there were no other
cases of sickness amongst the half-dozen men left by
Speke on the 10th January, when he departed for
Uganda, leaving me behind sick. At first sight this
appeared to some persons at home as an unkind pro-
ceeding, leaving a helpless “brother” in the heart of
Africa; but my companion was not the man to be
daunted; he was offered an escort to the north, and
all tender feelings must yield to the stern necessities
of the case. “Strike while the iron is hot,’ applies to
Africa more appropriately than to any country I know;
another such opportunity might never occur, and had
the traveller’s determination of character been soften-
ed, and had he not proceeded without me at that
time, we might never again—so little upsets the


THE AUTHOR'S ILLNESS. dol


mind of an African chief—have had the road opened
to us.

The following account of my own ailments I give,
not with a wish to parade them, but in order to con-
vey information :—Having had fevers twice a-month,
in December my usual complaint assumed a new
form. The right leg, from above the knee, became
deformed with inflammation, and remained for a
month in this unaccountable state, giving intense
pain, which was relieved temporarily by a deep inci-
sion and copious discharge. or three months fresh
abscesses formed, and other incisions were made; my
strength was prostrated; the knee stiff and alarm-
ingly bent, and walking was impracticable. Many
cures were attempted by the natives, who all sym-
pathised with me in my sufferings, which they saw
were scarcely endurable; but I had great faith—was
all along cheerful and happy, except at the crisis of
this helpless state, when I felt that 1t would have been
preferable to be nearer home. The disease ran its
course, and daily, to bring out the accumulated dis-
charge, I stripped my leg like a leech. Bombay had
heard of a poultice made of cow-dung, salt, and mud
from the lake; this was placed on hot, but it merely
produced the effect of a tight bandage. Baraka was
certain that a serpent had spat upon my leg—“it
could not have been a bite.” Dr Mnanagee, the sul-
tan’s brother, knew the disease perfectly; he could
send me a cure for it—and a mild gentle peasant of
the Wanyambo race came with his wife, a young pleas-
ing-like person, to attend me. With the soft touch of
a woman he examined the limb, made cuts over the
skin with a penknife, ordered all lookers-on outside


152 RECOVERY FROM ILLNESS.


the hut, when his wife produced a scroll of plantain-
leaf, in which was a black paste. This was moistened
from the mouth and rubbed into the bleeding cuts,
making them smart; afterwards a small piece of lava
was dangled against my leg and tied as a charm
round the ankle. Two days afterwards he found no
improvement, and, having repeated some mystic words
behind me, another charm of wood and goat’s flesh
was tied above the knee and round the ankle, much
in the same way as a kind lady-friend in Scotland
once sent me a string of soda-water corks to be worn
at night as a cure for cramp! Paste, very like gun-
powder, was rubbed into fresh cuts, and this was re-
peated without any result, although the charms had
been on for two days. Mnanagee, seeing his medi-
cal adviser had failed, sent an herb to soak in water
and rub over the part; it had a very soothing effect,
but did not allay the pam. He had seen me apply
the leaves of the castor-oil plant as a hot bandage,
and forbade their use a second time as being injurious,
having given me a delirious fever, and causing a
counter-action of profuse discharge of water from the
limb. By the fifth month the complaint had ex-
hausted itself; at last I was able to be out of the hut
inhaling the sweet air, and once more permitted to
behold the works of God’s creation in the beautiful
lake and hills below me. Never did I experience a
happier moment! During this illness, the family at
the palace were very kind in coming to sit by me;
the young sons brought me plants in flower, birds’
nests, eggs, or other things which they thought might
interest me; while I sketched for them or their father,
and sent a servant to get the news, and ask for the


VISITS OF THE NATIVES. 153


king every morning. Since Speke had left, there was
considerable difficulty in getting supplies, and the
sultan was not so kind in this respect as he might
have been; but, African like, he had received his
presents, and until more were given him he withheld
sending goat, fowls, or other necessaries, which my
men had to hunt the country for. One poor fellow
lost his life in doing so. Two were together; the
natives set upon them while bringing home loads of
orain; they shot one with arrows, the other ran for
his life, and slept all night up a tree, afraid to go near
a village. On asking him, “Did you sleep?” “O
yes, I tied myself with rope to the boughs, and slept
several hours.” The sultan sought for redress from
the village, but all the people had decamped in fear.
Several other natives paid me almost daily calls—offi-
cers, barbers, ivory-traders, musicians, &c., in whom a
good deal of character could be observed. At night
my few men would gather round their fire, and, par-
ticularly after having an extra allowance of plantain-
wine, sing a ditty about my health. [rij on the
single-stringed zeze or guitar would commence— I
am Fri, | am Frij; my brother Grin (meaning Grant),
my brother Grin, is very sick, is very sick; we'll get a
cow, well get a cow, when he gets well, when he gets
well,” to which the others would all subscribe in a
louder voice, “Ameen,” with the most perfect solemnity.

My couch or bed, the height of a table, was- formed
of the trunks of plantain-trees covered with grass and
blankets. This was roofed over with a low grass hut,
having its gable end wide open to the south, where no
wind blew from at that season. Much to the surprise of
the natives, there was no fence round our encampment.


154 NATIVE CURES AND MEDICINES.


By day, dogs walked into our huts, and by night hyena
often carried away our fowls. Indeed, while lying
awake, one came sniffing with his nose in the air up
to my couch, and ran sulkily away on my shouting at
him. One cannot say whether he would have sprung
upon me had I been asleep, but the precaution of a
trap was taken for several nights following.

The most curious disease known in this country was
a case of dropsy brought to be operated upon. Some
days after having seen it, and declined the operation,
a number of watery globules, the size of common
marbles, were brought me upon a leaf, said to have
been extracted from the person afflicted. This opera-
tion they performed generally without fatal conse-
quences, and the disease was not uncommon. ‘There
were several leprous people, favourites about the court.
One, an old woman, who saluted us with “ Vihoreh,”
had flesh-coloured hands and colourless patches on her
arms. M’nanagee complained of not being able to
drink his usual fare of milk; and though his know-
ledge of herbs was very extensive, he could not cure
himself. One of his favourite medicines was a prepa-
ration from the long roots of nettles found growing in
the shallow end of the lake. These, I was informed,
were used in decoction as purgatives. On my request-
ing him to give me his tapeworm medicine, it was ob-
tained with considerable difficulty. The servant was
told to go to a certain bush on the hillside, never to look
back on his way thither, but to return without pluck-
ing the plant if he should meet a dog! Through
the kindness of MWnanagee, his nephews, and others,
a species of frankincense and many interesting plants
were examined and preserved.


KARAGUE, | 155


The country of Karague rarely affords space flat
enough for a single tent to be pitched, but there are
thousands of acres now in grass which are perfectly
capable of profitable cultivation. Captain Maury, of
the United States navy, at the British Association
meeting in 1863, stated his opinion that this region,
from its equatorial position and moist atmosphere,
would make an excellent coffee-growing country ; and
as many parts resemble portions of the Himalayas,
where tea is grown, and there are no frosts at Karague,
I think it is admirably adapted for the culture of
tea as well as coffee. Wild grapes were occasionally
gathered in the lower grounds, but no beds of gravel
similar to those at home or on the Continent, where
the vine flourishes in such luxuriance, are to be seen.
A few clumps of wild date-trees grow in the valleys, but
the natives are ignorant of the sexes of the trees, and
never have any fruit. Sugar-cane is seldom or never
erown. ‘There are two heavy crops in the year—sor-
ghum and plantain ; while pease (English garden), a
species of bean or calavance, called “maharageh,” Indian
corn, &c., are grown at other seasons. All these we saw
ripe or ripening, and fresh shoots of plantain were being
set, while other fields were prepared for the heavier crop
of red sorghum, sown in March. ‘Then squads of men
and women assemble, probably only one-fifth working
at a time, the rest standing, lounging, and laughing.
The men, with a hook having a three-feet-long handle,
slash down the weeds, women hoe them up, collect the
stones, clear the ground, and give it the tidy appear-
ance of agarden. In February great care is bestowed
upon the plantain, which affords one of the staples of
life mm this country throughout the year. Acres of


156 PRICE OF PROVISIONS.


it cover the hillsides, a rivulet sometimes dividing the
field; the trunks are trimmed of the leaves which
have been torn into shreds by the wind; fresh shoots
are planted; and the whole orchard is industriously
superintended.

The natives asked us ludicrous prices for their pro-
ducts. Our beads, the manufacture of Venice, were
of little value, from fourteen to twenty-five (size of
pigeon-eges) being given for a single goat, and a propor-
tionate number for a cow. This our Seedees thought
a great contrast to their native country of Uhiao,
where a bucketful of flour, with a fowl on the top,
could be obtained for one necklace of ordinary beads.
But here the women were double the size round the
waist that they were anywhere else, and they must
have beads enough to begird them once before a goat
can be parted with. They would refuse us milk and
butter, because it was not their custom to sell them,
and because we eat fowls, and the bean called maha-
rageh ; but on making them a present of several coils
of brass wire (thirteen), we could procure a quart-
sized wooden jar of butter. In November, grain is
scarce. The natives brought salt to exchange for it ; and
on. being offered meat instead, they have been known
to refuse it, because the allowance was not so large and
satisfactory to them as grain. When marching, the
head-men of the villages had orders from their sultan
to supply our camp with sufficient provision for the
day. <A quantity of sweet potatoes, some pumpkins,
fowls, and a goat, were generally given, and a present
of cloth and brass wire was made them in return.
Plantain-wine was seldom presented: it seemed to
have conveniently run dry on our arrival! English


TOBACCO AND PLANTAIN-WINE. 157


garden-pease were first seen in this part of Africa by
Speke, and with the aid of the sultan we were able to
lay ina supply of this delicacy, not in their green form,
but dry and dead ripe, boiling and making them into
a mash. They were grown broadcast in considerable
quantities about Meegongo. Tobacco, ripe in April,
we could always procure, but it was extravagant
in price—six pipefuls of the finest description cost-
ing the daily ration allowance of one porter. The
sultan smoked a very full-flavoured description in his
large pipe. We tried to discover from an old man,
his one-eyed tobacconist, the secret of its preparation ;
but he would not divulge it unless a handsome reward
was given. It had arich mellow aroma, more plea-
sant than any tobacco we had ever smoked; and
whether it was from rubbing the leaf in his perfumed
hands, using a secretion from the cow, or that honey
was mixed in it, we never could discover. He would
not allow that any ingredient was used—the tobacco
when green was merely rubbed in his hands. In
December beautiful granulated honey was offered for
sale. Though there were few bees to be seen in this
country, their produce was always procurable in small
quantities, and it was of excellent though sometimes
of highly flowery flavour.

Plantain-wine, called here “marwa,” was made
by every family that had an orchard of the trees. It
is a Sweet raisiny-tasting wine ; if aerated, nearly equal
to sparkling hock in richness of flavour. <A quart
could be taken with comfort, but after the third day
it becomes dead, sour, and intoxicating; our men got
so riotous from it that the sultan was requested
not to send us the daily allowance of one gourdful.


158 TRADE OF KARAGUE.


Ridiculous scenes of drunkenness would sometimes
occur. One Seedee with a gun would in his intoxi-
cation chase another through the fields; others with
euns would fly to prevent bloodshed. At last the
original offender would have so many guns pointed at
him that he would surrender, and then his gun would
be found not loaded !

The process of making plantain-wine in Karague
takes generally from two to three days. A huge log
scooped out, and looking like a canoe, is essential for
a large quantity. It is tilted at one end, and dammed
up with grass in the centre. Ripe fruit has clean
orass put amongst it. A woman mashes all at the
upper end with her hands or feet. The lquor strains
through the dam, and is again strained with grass till
clean. All the liquid is then placed for fermentation
in the “canoe” freshly cleaned. Some burnt, bruised
sorghum is placed in it; all is covered up from the
air, and allowed to remain in the sun or near a fire
for two or three days, when it 1s skimmed and fit for
use. Wine is never exported or bottled, and probably
not a drop of the brewing can be obtained after the
lapse of only four days. All, even the youngest chil-
dren amongst the peasants, drink it, carrying gourd-
fuls of it about with them wherever they go, as regu-
larly as we carry our purses.

Of the natural products of the equatorial regions,
such as slaves, ivory, salt, copper, iron, bark-cloths,
coffee, and sugar-cane, Karague scarcely yields any,
but it is a great depot for trade. Arabs and coastmen
bring up beads, cloths, and brass wire, and meet people
of all the nations around, and trade with them for
ivory and slaves. Copper and salt are brought from


TRADE AND PRICES. 159


beyond Paroro to exchange for brass wire. N’kole is
justly celebrated for its tobacco, though every hut
here has its garden of it. Ruanda sends her painted
matting, goat, salt, and iron wire, and requests the
sultan, who drives a stiff bargain, to fix the price of
each article—as, 160 ankle-wires = a single necklace;
a goat = twenty necklaces. The Wanyamuezi carry
salt from their country to exchange it for the ivory
brought by the people of Unyoro, N’kole, and Utumbi.
Bark-cloths are not made well in Karague: the people
of Uganda, Kittara, and Uhia excel in them. They
are sewn in four stripes, each a foot to 18 inches broad,
and, when well greased by the Wanyambo, make a most
comfortable, becoming square shawl to keep out the
cold and rain. During the 1861 war in Unyanyembe
(at 5° 8.) a slave might be purchased for something
under one shilling sterling, or, if estimated in beads,
ten necklaces. Ifa number of them were brought up
(as they have been in several instances) to the equator
and beyond it, they would each fetch a frasila, or 36
Ib. weight of ivory, equal to £12 im Zanzibar. This
is one of the inducements for Arabs and Africans to
speculate, but the instance is exceptional.

Trade encounters great difficulties in such a country,
where there are no regular laws, no roads, no carriage
conveyance, and the caravan is hable to losses from
heavy taxes, desertions, and attacks. For instance,
two traders, named Sungoro and Joomah, left Karague
while I was there for the south with a considerable
supply of ivory. On reaching the borders of the first
province (Usui), they sent forward to ask the sultan’s
permission to pass through his country. A demur was
made that the party was too strong, but they would


160 THE COUNTRY OF UHIA.


be permitted. When once in the chief's power, he
demanded half their ivory as a tax. Provisions were
very dear; they resisted, they complained, all to no
purpose ; and they were told to cultivate the soil if they
chose, but that they would not be allowed to depart
till the demand was paid. Rumanika interfered and
got them out of the trouble, otherwise they would
have been detained there for many months. In Ugogo
and Unyamuezi the chief claims a tusk of every ele-
phant found dead or killed; he gets the tusk from the
cheek that lies nearest the ground. There is no such
law in Karague. Amongst the curiosities in tusks,
we heard of one so large that it could not be carried ©
to the coast, and that one elephant had been seen with
four tusks! Both stories, like those about fences be-
ing made of them in some countries, are, of course,
among the fables of the natives.

Between Karague and the Victoria Nyanza there is
a country called Uhia or Mohia, whose people are
traders to the north. They also bring coffee to Kar-
ague for sale in bundles covered with plantain-leaf,
containing two handfuls, which they sell very dearly
at one necklace of beads. It takes a handful to make
a pint of very inferior coffee, as the bean, when the
loose husk is taken off, is not larger than half a grain
of rice. In this state the natives chew it as a sailor
does tobacco. It is pleasant, inducing saliva, and
leaving a comfortable flavour in the mouth. When
our store of tea and coffee was consumed, we found
this, when roasted and imfused for drinking, a substi-
tute, but very inferior, because the bean had not been
allowed to come to perfection when it was pulled.
The natives do not make use of it as we do, but refresh


THE NATIVES OF UHIA AND RUANDA. 161


themselves on a journey by throwimg two or three
beans, husks and all, into their mouths. Several of
these Wahia traders were seen — sturdy, very black,
middle - sized men, with bare, unshaven heads and
beards. Their dress was a cow-skin, having the leg
parts neatly rounded off, of a saffron yellow, and
friezed inside, knotted over the right shoulder, and
hanging to the middle of the thigh. This dress 1s
sometimes worn with the hair outside: above it they
generally wore a brick-coloured bark - cloth, well
greased. Their ornaments were a sheep or goat’s horn,
tied jauntily with a strip of leather round their bare
heads, and a few solid rings, crow- quill thickness,
worn round the ankles. Their arms were differently
shaped, as was their dress, from those of any race we
had met with. The spear-shaft was six feet long, and
the spear was heart-shaped, or like the ace of spades.
Jumah, a coast-trader, called them a bad, unsafe set of
people, probably because they were rivals in his busi-
ness. He also abused the Ruanda people, because
they refused to allow any coast-men into their king-
dom, which, he said, was even more populous than
Uganda. The specimens seen by us were merely men
from its borders, who had come with produce by water
in three days from the west. They were tall, lean
men, with the shortest loin-cover of skin I ever saw; of
the same pattern as, but even smaller than, those worn
by the natives of Usui. The above native gentleman,
Jumah, had travelled a great deal, had sailed on Vic-
toria Nyanza, had attempted the ascent of Kilimanjaro,
had made great friends with the king of Uganda, and
said he could converse in at least ten different Afri-
can languages. I begged to differ with him as to their
L


162 JUMAH'S STORIES ABOUT KILIMANJARO.


being distinct languages; but he insisted that each was
as different from the other as Baniani is to Hindoo.
He was of East Indian origin, though he could not
speak its language, and had acquired all the super-
stitious notions of the Seedee. However, during my
illness he paid me constant visits, afforded me a great
deal of amusement, and was a kind, hospitable man.
He told strange tales about the snow-capped mountain
Kihmanjaro, which has since been ascended by my
friend the Baron von der Decken, gold-medallist (with
myself) of the Royal Geographical Society for 1864.
When encamped at Chaga, Jumah could see it change
colour “five times during the day. First it was
white in the early morning, then changed into black,
ereen, brown, and, lastly, scarlet, ike a red blan-
ket. He thought the colours were not reflections
from snow—the sun was too hot for any to lie
there—they were stones! and he picked up several
carnelian-coloured pebbles at its base. He and all
Arabs firmly believe that the mountain can never
be ascended by either black or white man. Though
gold is there in abundance, no one dare dig for it—a
demon has possession! Even Speke could not go up
it, unless the devil should take fright at the face of a
white man! He mustered courage one day, and de-
termined to try the ascent, but he was struck with a
huge swelling im both limbs, which disappeared as
suddenly as it came. Was not this a caution? and
did it not show that it was possessed?” Jumah was
full of these tales, and of his brave fights with super-
natural characters. Of Uganda he gave me a great
deal of accurate information, describing the numbers


of people who are daily killed there by order of the


TRADE IN IVORY. ING) 33


king ; and he thought if M’tessa were asked not to rule


5?
so cruelly, that a greater sacrifice would be the only
consequence. “It was not from any love he had for


destruction of life, as he was an amiable young man,
but from its being the ancient custom of the country ;
and were it not done, the fear was that the people
would become rebellious. Besides which, was not the
country swarming with people? did it not abound
with food? did they not love the king’s rule, and
prefer his sentence of death to a natural one, as
being more princely?” Jumah had made M’'tessa a
considerable present, which will illustrate the manner
of trading in this part of the world. A gold-embroi-
dered silk scarf or deolee, value $50, a “mucknuff,” a
vold-embroidered vest, two men’s loads of blue beads,
half a load of brass wire, a small tiara, value $1, and
two flint-muskets without powder, constituted his gift.
The king, in return, gave him 700 lb. weight of ivory
(some of the tusks weighing 90 Ib.), seven women, and
fifty cows; besides which Jumah asked for his two
guns to be returned. In receiving these he considered
himself well repaid, as one-third belonged to himself,
the rest to his master in Zanzibar. He had been
trafficking for three years in this way without ever
visiting the coast, and meant to remain another year,
when he would have completed collecting 500 frasila,
equal to 17,500 lb. of ivory. This mode of fair deal-
ing is very different to what takes place at the Nile
trading-marts to the north of the equator. There guns
and bullets, in the hands of Nubians employed by
EKuropean, Turkish, and Armenian masters, assist in
capturing the herds of cattle used in paying porters
and purchasing ivory. If a tax is asked, all that is


164 FIRST TIDINGS OF THE NILE.


given, as one of them told us, is the muzzle of a gun.
It seems marvellous, therefore, that the Zanzibar
traders who pay as Jumah did, or buy tusks at the
market price of weight for weight in Venetian beads,
can bring their ivories into the same market as the
Nile men, who actually pay nothing for the tusk. But
this is the explanation: although they have been pur-
chased by plundered cattle, the master of those plun-
derers has to provide guns and ammunition ; he has
to pay the men, and also the freight of the ivory, and
its duty to the Egyptian Government. These are the
expenses which bring the price of Nile ivory up to
that which is taken to Zanzibar. But on either the
one or the other side of the equator no honest man
would have a chance against the present field of
traders, who do everything in their power to keep the
country as a preserve for cattle, slaves, and ivory.

As our narrative has here touched on the Nile, I
may as well mention what information we received
regarding it from the many travellers coming to Kar-
ague for the purposes of trade. On the 2d of January
1862, while Speke and I were together, we were
thrown into a state of excitement by being told that a
man had arrived from a country far away to the north,
bringing tidings that “a party having guns which
knocked down trees had been attacked by the Wagani
race, one hundred of them killed, the most of their
property seized and made over to one Kamarasi, a
king.” The extraordinary part of the story was, that
the strangers had not left the country, but still occu-
pied their ships, which were reported to be large
enough to contain cattle. Our firm impression was,
that this could be no other than Petherick, who had


FIRST TIDINGS OF THE NILE. 165


promised, when we parted with him in England, to
meet or have boats for us i November 1861 and un-
’ til 1862. Plans were at once formed to send him a
letter, and Rumanika gave us every facility, as the
king above mentioned was his connection, having
exchanged sisters with him. Although this intimacy
existed, nothing would induce Rumanika to allow us
to march there till a reply had been received. We
were to be kept for months in suspense, until Baraka,
the bearer of the despatch, should return. Although
we told Rumanika repeatedly that we expected boats
on the Nile for us, on the receipt of this important in-
formation he would not allow us to advance—it would
not be etiquette toward the northern kings! Mean-
while the king of Uganda luckily sent a message that
he was most impatient to see the white men, and as a
story was got up that no sick people nor donkeys were
allowed to enter his territory, | had to remain till
sufficiently recovered to march. Speke left on the
10th of January ; and Baraka, having bought the dis-
ouise of a native—a bark-cloth and spear—consulted
magicians to find out whether this march would be
prosperous ; he started on the 29th with several com-
panions, and letters for the ships supposed to be
Petherick’s. These turned out to be a perfect myth—
no such boats were there; the nearest point that any
lay at was Gondokoro, a place known in Europe for
thirty years. But the Nubian soldiers of M. de Bono
had worked their way from Gondokoro by land far
south by means of their guns, and gave origin to the
report we had heard. Feeling anxious about Baraka,
my head man F'rij went repeatedly to the sultan’s
brother, Mnanagee, asking whether anything had been


166 FROM KARAGUE TO LONDON BY WATER.


heard of him. No intelligence had actually been re-
ceived, but Mnanagee had consulted his magic horns,
and they told him that “Baraka was perfectly well,
but his companion Seedee was suffering from a chest
complaint!” M’nanagee was so confident about this
telegraphing on his own part, that he said, “If it does
not turn out true, Il give you that goat.” Months
afterwards, on our reaching Kamarasi’s, we were told
that the man had been ailing slightly !

Of Speke I could hear occasionally by letter ; his
men were discontented at getting nothing to eat but
boiled plantain ; but they ultimately found out that
there was nothing else to be procured in the country.
He had crossed a body of water four hundred yards
wide, running to the north. What a pleasure it must
have been to him to come upon the first flowing
waters of the Nile! In a previous letter, dated 12th
February, from the borders of Nyanza, he wrote say-
ing he was to return for me in a boat along the lake.
On mentioning to Rumanika that an Uganda boat was
to arrive in his lake to convey the baggage and my-
self away, he replied, “It was all practicable except
for two miles, at the Kitangule, where the river is
shallow, and the boat must be carried.” I added, that
as the waters we then looked upon mingled with
those in my country (alluding to the Mediterranean),
the day might come when a traveller could go from
Karague to London and wee versa by water! Since
saying this, we have discovered that cataracts are the
only obstacle to this grand tourist route.

The cattle of this country resemble those we saw at
Cape 'Town—all horn, with starme ribs. The sultan
kept 400 of such animals at his residence on the high


THE CATTLE OF KARAGUE. 167


erounds. He had perhaps 10,000 more on the graz-
ing-erounds on the banks of the Kitangule, where
they had better feeding, and looked more sleek.
Some horns were two and three feet long, and eighteen
inches round the base. No use seemed to be made of
them, unless by Seedees and Arabs, who converted
them into powder-horns. At nine every morning
these 400 cows were trotted down the hill to their
orazing-eround, sometimes accompanied by one of the
princes, and they were walked back to be milked
after dark, having been allowed to drink once at a
trough of clay filled by an osier bucket from a well on
the edge of the lake. Every tenth day the lanky
creatures were driven down (at 7 A.M.) two hours
earlier than usual, as they had to go farther, for the
purpose of receiving a drench of brackish water some
distance away. On the hillside by the path shallow
pits are dug in horizontal lines, to allow water to
collect there for cattle or wild animals. They are
wretched milkers, only giving half the quantity of the
plump small-horned breed of Unyanyembe. Two
were set apart by the sultan for our use, as no one
would drink from the same cow that supplied us;
and whether it was that the animals were less cared
for, or that they soon became dry, our supply of milk
latterly became reduced to almost nothing. No doubt
this was attributed to our bewitching the cows by
boilmg the milk! Daily, men carrying five or six
prettily-shaped “chanzees” or jars of yellow wood,
browned from use, slung from a stick on their
shoulders, would pass my hut with milk for the
palace. It was the staff of lfe—the children and
women fattened upon it; and the butter, sometimes


168 PET DOGS OF KARAGUE.


of a good quality, but never rich, was used merely as
a pomade on their bodies, to soften their skin-cover-
ings, and as an external cure for everything. We had
considerable difficulty in procuring any, because we
ate it. However, a handsome present now and then
would induce them to give us some. The sheep
(lambed in the month of November) were a small
species, without wool, generally white, and only half-a-
dozen would be seen in a tract of ten or twenty miles.
Within 200 yards of them we have observed the
white rhinoceros grazing, looking lke a solitary stack
in the middle of a hay-field. We did not take the
trouble to shoot him, because his flesh is worthless,
and shooting interfered with the march. Sometimes
our men fired, which made both them and the animal
run in opposite directions. Every hut had its little flock
of short-haired goats, whose skins were so valued as an
article of dress that the natives could seldom be induced
to sell them. One roan-coloured goat presented to us
was fancied for its colour by the sultan, and exchanged,
as he longed for it to assist in some ceremony.

There were pet dogs about the palace, used in going
after small antelope and tiger-cats. The breed was
like the pariah of India, leggy, with smooth red hair,
but much more domestic, giving a paw, lymg down
quietly by your side, or always ready to walk with
you, having been taught docility by the young
princes. They are said to run after game by scent,
but this we did not observe. This particular breed
is always gelt, the natives believing that they are
thereby rendered more keen in the pursuit of sport.
One, a great favourite, answering to the name of
“ Keeromba”—a wild, beautifully-sounding, musical


CAPTURE OF A NZOWE ANTELOPE. 169


name—became much attached to our camp. To give
an idea of the sport here, Speke bagged three white
rhinoceros in one day, much to the delight of the
native princes, who never will forget the enjoyment it
gave them. They would not eat the flesh; but some
Wezee porters—poor starved-like men, belonging to
the Arab traders at Kufro—carried it away in enor-
mous loads; but when seen by ther Mohammedan
masters, the meat was sent out of camp as being
unlawful, not having been regularly killed. On our
mentioning to the king that we had heard of an
extraordinary animal like a goat living in the lake,
he ordered his people to capture one. Canoes of logs,
two paddles each, and 18 feet long, were collected to
beat the papyrus rushes, driving the animal into the
water, when he was chased (as we were told) and
captured alive, care being taken by outside canoes
that no crocodiles attacked the men while in the
water. A procession of singers walked up the hill,
passing our huts, carrying the live animal neatly
lashed upon a frame of wood to the sultan, who sent
him to us “fresh from the lake.” He (a young male
antelope) was very timid, and lay down with a rope
about his neck for a whole day; but on a dish of
water being presented to him, he dashed his head into
it as if he felt himself once more in his native element.
As he seemed to pine, refusing his natural food—the
tops of the papyrus—he was killed. His coat was of
long, dirty brown, rather soft hair. His horns, from
five to six inches long, were commencing to spire ;
the hoofs were of the true waterboc, immensely long,
and widely separated ; height more than three feet.
This species of antelope is called “nzowe” by the


70 THE SPORT OF KARAGUE.


natives, and lives altogether on the borders of
lakes.

We never heard of elephants while residing here.
There are no forests for them on these heights and
valleys. Hartebeest, and rhinoceros or “faroo,” are
the common animals of the chase. The former, called
“nyameera, in the rutting season become highly com-
bative. Two stags fought in the plain with unflinching
determination, calmly halting to breathe between each
round. ‘The force of every butt as their heads met,
and as they fell on their knees, sounded distinctly,
the energy and impetus of the attack sending their
small bushy tails over their backs. After a battle of
twenty minutes, one became the victor, and chased
the other into and out of a herd of hinds, when I was
obliged to leave the interesting chase. Several ante-
lope were wounded this day, but they were very wild
in the open plain of grass, and it required accurate
shooting at 300 and 400 yards to bag one. Of other
game animals there were several varieties of antelope.
The mountain gazelle bounded very prettily over the
bare hills, and did not seem very wild. Pigs were in
the low grounds, and hippopotami swam in the lake.
But Karague is not a country of sport; and although
the sultan imagines that lions garrison the country,
and mount guard over his father’s remains, we never
saw one, dead or alive. The natives told us that
otter, called “ gdnejeh,” of the ordinary colour, live in
the lake, and that their king (concerning whom they
have some superstition) is as white as an old man’s
beard. The manner in which a Wezee prepares a
skin for wear is very simple, and seems perfectly effi-
cacious. Straw is laid on the ground, the skin is


NESTING SEASON. 7A


pegged out neatly over it till thoroughly dried by the
sun into the state of parchment; it is then doubled
and pressed in every possible direction, and a few
integuments are pulled off. It is hand-rubbed, and
smeared with grease, and then becomes fit for wear.
Great numbers of moles, larger than English, were
caught in our camp. Their fur was black or brown,
and some were white. The natives seemed to make
no use of them. ,

Of game-birds the most numerous are the guinea-
fowl, the “boee” and “qualee” partridges. The
natives shoot at long distances with their arrows, and
must destroy great quantities of game. They also use
springes, for during the march a small boy was met car-
rying on a string some birds he had caught. We said
to him, “Come to camp—you'll be paid for them;” but
he naively rephed, “Catch me going to your camp !
youd put chains upon me, and make me a slave.”
On the 10th of April a nest of guinea-fowl, “ kanga,”
egos were brought me ; this was in the middle of the
rainy season ; but they most probably breed all the
year round. Small red sparrows were also picking
up feathers ; and a nest made of one species of grass,
with two unspotted white little egos, was brought in,
showing that incubation goes on at this season. On
the lake there were varieties of duck, which came in
fights every night about the beginning of December
from the east, flymg over our camp with the sound of
a passing shell. An Hoyptian goose, to us particularly
interesting from its name and connection with the
Nile, was shot by Speke, and sent to the sultan, who
was more delighted with its splendid plumage than


with the English table-knife, fork, and spoon he had


12 THE CROW USED IN DIVINING EVENTS.


that day been presented with. He, no doubt, had
never seen the bird before, although it was shot by
his own lake. We, of course, observed the rhinoceros-
bird, which sits as calmly on the animal’s back as a
man does on the top of a coach ; he is the size of a
“mina” or a blackbird, and has black wings, with a
grey or white rump ; they are partly gregarious, three
beimg seen together; and they must feed upon the
tics which infest the skin of the rhinoceros. Here we
came across a new swallow skimming the grasses of
the hillsides—black or dark-brown wings of a slate
tinge, white belly, black rmg at neck and round the
rump, tail-feathers not forked but slightly convex,
body sparrow-size, and not so fish-shaped as swallows
generally are. The golden-headed and crimson-
backed little finch perched here, as in Unyanyembe, on
the stalks of the Indian corn near dwellings. Another
bird had, as Speke described it, a black coat and plush
waistcoat ; its colours harmonised beautifully with
the tree on which it sat, a thorny species of jasmine,
then (December) in rich pink-and-white bloom. We
had no songsters at Karague, but we had a “ bugler,”
who had one very rich note. There never were more
than from two to four crows (handsome birds, with a
ring of white round the neck) seen together, and the
natives like killing them, as they eat up the red bit-
ter sorghum, and prevent the people from sowing the
white or sweet variety. The crow was used here by
the sultan as supposed to be useful in divining events.
The crops are protected from the barn-door fowl by a
barbarous practice—the toe-nails of the fowl are cut
off to prevent them from scratching the ground. ‘This
is done also in Zanzibar, but here it first attracted


SNAKES, VERMIN, AND FISH. 173


our notice in consequence of the peculiar crippled gait
of the poultry.

A snake was caught amongst the rocks, measuring
six feet five inches; it was of a bluish-black colour.
Mnanagee brought it in a wicker basket to show me.
He said he had had it for three days, and meant to
keep it asa pet. Although one of his men held it
fearlessly by the neck, they were afraid to allow me
to do so, because they called it poisonous; however,
no fangs were visible. It was one of the few snakes
seen in Karague. Rats were in swarms, and were
very troublesome to the traders, stealing their beads
and cowries in considerable quantities, and concealing
them in their holes; unfortunately we had no poison
with us when asked for some by M’nanagee. This
shows that the natives have no means to rid them-
selves of them; some pills of flour and pounded
caustic were made up, but we never heard whether
they were effectual. In the low flat valleys near the
lakes, large grey-legged musquitoes bite through your
socks and trousers, keeping your limbs in constant
motion ; but on the higher ground, where wind blows,
we were never annoyed by any. The bee that pro-
duces the honey of the country resembles our common
hive-bee at home; and although beautifully granulated
honey was brought for sale, we observed no hives.
It certainly is not a productive country in this respect
—the hills are barren of flowers. There are quanti-
ties of fish in the lake; but during my residence no
fisherman was ever seen or heard of. Hxcept one
fish, the makambara, brought me by the sultan as a
curiosity alive in a jar, and a half-pound-weight
macquareh, caught by a Seedee in the Kishakka lake,


174 THE YOUNG PRINCES OF KARAGUE.


we saw no fish, and the natives never eat them. The
macquareh attains a great size, has immense large
scales, no feelers, and a ridge of sharp-pointed fins
along its arched back, and eats very sweetly. These
notes must not be accepted as a list of what the coun-
try contains, but merely a notice of those which struck
me as strange or interesting.

The population of Karague may be divided into
two races: the reigning race or Wahuma; and the
peasantry, who originally owned, and now cultivate,
the soul, called Wanyambo, alluded to in the preceding
chapter.

The king and his brothers, of the former race, have
already been described ; afew remarks on their Mo-
heenda or young princes may be added. This royal
class or caste have slight marks cut below the eyes ;
but they neither extract their teeth nor file them into
any particular shape. Their diet of milk seems to
make the men a tall active race, while the women get
out of all proportion with obesity. The grown-up
sons of the king (according to seniority) were Chun-
dera, Kien}, Kananga, and Kukoko. First, Chundera,
twenty-five years of age, was a smart active young
fellow, about five feet eight inches in height, with a
somewhat effeminate figure and expression of coun-
tenance; he was fair for a negro, and except that
his lips were rather thick, and that his wool was in
reoular pepper-corns, he might be taken, from his
straight features, for a slim Kast Indian sepoy. He
affected the dandy, being more neat about his loin-
skin cover and ornaments than the other brothers.
He lived a gay life, was always ready to lead a war-
party and to preside at a dance, or wherever there


THE YOUNG PRINCES OF KARAGUE. 175


was wine or women. [From the tuft of wool left un-
shaven on the crown of his head to his waist he was
bare, except where decorated round the muscle of the
arm and neck with charmed horns, stripes of otter-
skin, shells, and knobs of wood. The skin covering
the lois, which, with the Karague people, is peculiar
in shape, reached below the knee behind, and was cut
away in front. From below the calf to the ankle was
a mass of iron wire; and when visiting from neigh-
bour to neighbour, he always, like every Karague per-
son, carried in his hand a five-feet-long staff with a
knob at the end. He constantly came to ask after
me, bringing flowers in his hand, as he knew my
fondness for them; and at night he would take Fri,
my head man, into the palace along with his “ zeze”
or guitar, to amuse his sisters with Zanzibar music.
In turn the sisters, brothers, and followers would sing
Karague music, and early in the morning Master Fry
and Chundera would return rather jolly to their huts—
outside the palace enclosures. This shows the kindly

feeling existing between us and the family of the sul-
tan ; and although this young prince had showed me
many attentions, he never once asked for a present.
The second son, Kien}, was by a different mother (the
sister of the king of Unyoro, I believe); he was six
feet high at least, very black, and so ugly and dispro-
portionately long about the head, that we called him
the “camel.” He was a slow, stupid fellow, very
simple, and a bumpkin in comparison with the others.
Like his brothers, he was married, and had one child,
but lived in the palace enclosure. Previous to my
leaving he made bold to beg for my only umbrella,
because his own was past mending! The third son


176 THE WANYAMBO OR KARAGUE PEASANTRY.


of the family was so shy that he only came near me
when told to sit for his portrait ; and the fourth, Ku-
koko, was such a pet, and was so nice-looking, that
the father never went anywhere nor did anything
without taking the young prince along with him. He
was mild and gentlemanly in manner, and would
come to us every day, putting out his left hand when
wishing us good morning, and remaining to chat
quietly for an hour at a time. After we left Karague
we sent him a comfortable blanket as a reward for his
attentions. Although none of these lads had more
covering than a sheet of leather round the loins, it
was so neatly put on, their ornaments were so be-
coming, their persons so bronze-looking, their gait so
polite and distingué, that we quite forgot their naked-
ness ; more particularly when we saw the effect pro-
duced by pulling on a pair of white kid gloves upon
Kukoko’s hands, and seeing him strut away with the
air of a Bond Street swell! Their food was chiefly
a bowl of milk once in the morning; no grain, nor
mutton, nor fish, nor fowl, but a small quantity of
boiled beef or goat at night. They looked after the
cattle belonging to their father, had M’koongoos, or
agents of their own, who went to neighbouring coun-
tries to traffic for them; and so domestic were they
that they never were known to sleep out of their own
country.

The Wanyambo are the ryots, or peasantry. In the
low grounds of Urigi, where there was a great deal of
swamp at the very doors of the people, they are very
black and rather lanky. All grease their bodies to
prevent the skin getting dried in the sun, and smoke
themselves with sweet fuel having a peculiar heavy


THE WANYAMBO OR KARAGUE PEASANTRY. 177


odour. The Wakungu, or district governors, possess
probably one sheet of calico, or a scarlet blanket, in
excess of the skins usually worn by the people. The
men about Urigi seemed a depressed race, and though
superior in position (being cultivators of the soil) to
the Watusi, who tend cattle, they surprised me by
their appearance of misery; this, however, may have
been assumed. They have the sultan’s orders to furnish
all travellers with sufficient provision for themselves
and followers free of charge; and in return for this a
present is generally given of some coils of brass wire.
Some of our Wanyambo porters showed spirit on the
march by refusing to be led by an Unyamuezi. On
this occasion it was alarming to see the fellows using
their spears and arrows at one another; the whole
caravan joined in the fray, which became a party
one, and had to be settled by our men threatening
to shoot them: one cut finger was the only casu-
alty. Again, if a Seedee or two wandered away from
camp amongst the Wanyambo, they were in some
danger, for this tribe were so drunken and excitable
that several instances of their boisterous nature proved
serious to our men when out purchasing provisions.
About the palace, however, they were very civil, con-
stantly advising me as to my health, telling me to
keep my weak limb shut up from the air, to eat
plenty of meat, &c. They never carried arms when
near the palace, neither did our men, which was differ-
ent to our practice in the badly-governed district of
Usui, where no one dare go about unarmed. The only
weapon was a five-feet-long knobstick, generally car-
ried across the shoulder; and in wishing good morn-
ing to a comrade the end of the stick was presented
M


178 THE WOMEN OF KARAGUE.


to be touched. The bows of Karague are the finest I
have seen in any part of the world, 6 feet 2 inches in
height, and of immense power; the arrows are about
the length of the arm, seldom or never poisoned, with
their tips shaped like a spear-head. There is no par-
ticular character in the spear: the handle is from six
to twelve feet long, and the iron part indifferently
made, the people prizing themselves more upon their
bows. Guns are unknown, except amongst the princes.
As has been mentioned, the Wanyambo are fond of
carousing over drink, singing and chanting wild airs
till early morning; but tottering drunkards such as
we see at home are never met with—the people have
more self-respect. The food of those who possessed
cattle was chiefly milk ; others lived upon boiled sweet
potato, the flour of Indian-corn or millets, and various
calavances or beans. Meat they eat when they can
eet it, but fowls and fish are forbidden them, though
the prince MWnanagee told me the Wanyambo would
eat the former “ on the sly.”

The princesses have been well described by Speke,
who had more opportunities of seemg them than I
had. One I saw walking, enormously fat, obliged to
rest every few paces, by sitting down or reclinmg in
a stooping position, one hand grasping a long staff.
When seated, her head was uncovered, the wool
allowed to grow into a mop neatly tied off the face
with a thong of leather, and having a bouquet of bird's
feathers in the centre. The face was a handsome oval,
with fine intelligent eyes, and the flesh of her arms,
bare from the shoulder, hung down like a fashionable
sleeve. They had few employments, their mode of life
forbidding this, and most of them could not move


THE CHILDREN. 179


without the support of a person on either side. In
some respects they reminded me of Hindoo women.
In visiting us, the better class, from modesty or cus-
tom, had a shawl of bark-cloth covering all their per-
sons except one eye, while they wore the ordinary
friezed cow-skin from the waist to the ankle. They
were very fond of pictures, the sultan always indulging
them by sending my sketches for their amusement.
They could make caps of cane stuffed from the outside
with their own wool, like moss in a summer-house.
Their children were very handsome, with large shining
black eyes: the wool was never shaved off their heads
nor cut till after marriage, and no covering was ever
on their loins till the age of puberty, or even later.
Boys and girls would come to look at us, careless or
unconscious of their nudity, and chatting without the
slightest shyness. A wet-nurse is provided for the
infant prince or princess, who is generally suckled
away from home, as was the custom amongst High-
land families in the last century. Their after-diet is
altogether milk : they are whipped into drinking and
fattening themselves with it. No marriage ceremonies
were observed, but on two occasions we saw a couple
of women walk together without any followers, one of
them hidden in bark-clothes ; and we understood that
the veiled one was being conveyed to her betrothed.
The dead of the Wanyambo, as has already been men-
tioned, are deposited in the lake, and princes alone
receive burial on the island. On one occasion we
observed inside a village enclosure two sticks tied to
a stone, and lyme across the pathway ; and this was
done, as we ascertained, to prevent people walking
over the spot, as a woman had died there.


180 THE RESIDENCE OF RUMANIKA.


With respect to the habitations of the. people, sup-
pose that on the face of a bare hill overlooking a lake
we place forty or fifty low dome-looking huts of cane,
covered with grass; divide them into sets of twos and
threes by screens and gates of cane; throw an em-
bankment round the whole, and have a dense hedge
of euphorbia trees on the top of the embankment,
screening the view of the lake and the country
around, and you have the Palace of Rumanika, con-
taining his five wives, sons, four hundred cows and
their calves, &c. Except a hut or two outside this
“bomah,” nothing but a curl of smoke in the valleys
showed that there was any population in the country.
Descend to the valleys, and you find neatly-formed
huts of grass inside the plantain-groves. Their inte-
riors are plastered for five feet with cow-dung and mud;
the ceiling is of cane, blackened by smoke, for there
is no fireplace. ‘The temporary huts made for us by
our Seedees were gable-ended, made of props from the
meelomba or bark-cloth tree, and roofed over with
erass and the decayed leaves of plantains, the whole
made water-tight by India-rubber sheeting being
placed on their roofs—the last a requisite which the
traveller should never forget. The sultan generally
received us in a tidily-kept hut, carpeted with the
silky leaves of the papyrus, and loopholed in several
places for visitors outside to make him their obeisance
by clapping their hands and addressing him. Here,
seated on his warm bedding, we chatted and laughed
with him, paying long and pleasant visits, his majesty
at the same time smoking his large black pipe.
Screens of cane, placed as gates, prevented our inter-
views being interrupted, and permission was required


CRIME, HOW PUNISHED. 181


before any one could visit him or pass those barriers,
where men always stood, like porters at the Govern-
ment offices. ‘The ordinary mode of salutation of an
Unyambo or ryot of Karague, when he reached a
circle of people seated, was to present the end of
his staff to each acquaintance, who touched it, say-
ing, “ Verembe, verembe, verembe kooroongee,” 2. e.,
How do you do, how do you do, how do you do? are
you very well? The same answer would be given,
and the same salutation exchanged, if two met upon
the road. To a superior they also hold out the stick,
bnt it is only acknowledged by a nod from him.
Crime was seldom observed or heard of, but the
people had their distinct punishments, and traders had
the protection of the sultan. A caravan of Moossah’s
was plundered by the Urigi chief, who was at once
arrested and made over as a slave, to be dealt with at
the coast as Moossah chose. The property lost or
destroyed was doubly repaid by the sultan in ivory,
and the chief, in gratitude to Moossah for not making
a prisoner of him, promised a present of ten tusks
every time his caravan should pass through his dis-
trict. I am indebted to Mnanagee, who judges all
cases for his brother the king, for the following list of
offences with their punishments :—An ear is cut off
for adultery; if the case occurs with a slave or a
princess, the offender is tortured, as in the Ukuni case,
and his throat is cut. Simple theft: kept in the
stocks from two to ten months. Striking and assault-
ing with stick: ten goats. Assault with spear, bow
and arrow: property confiscated, half going to the sul-
tan and half to the injured party; if the culprit has no
property, he is put into the stocks. Murder: all pro-


182 ARAB PUNISHMENTS.


perty made over to the relatives of the murdered
person, and the eyes of the murderer gouged, or he
is thrown over the precipice below the palace. If a
husband comes upon a case of adultery, he is per-
mitted to kill the offender on the spot. Unnatural
crimes they regard with horror, but these are said to
be known only amongst the “weeroo” or slaves; so
that the Karague laws are as strict as our own, and,
without statistics, I believe there is far less crime.
The punishments at Muscat and Zanzibar, under Arab
government, were described to me by Fri, and are
barbarous In comparison with the code at Karague.
For theft, the hand is cut off; if the property is re-
covered, the thief at Zanzibar is buried in the sea-
shore up to his neck, to allow the tide to reach him—
a mode of punishment that will remind the reader of
the case of the alleged Wigtown martyrs. Some
silver and clothes were stolen from the sultan of Zan-
zibar, and the thieves being detected were pulled up
to the top of a flagstaff and thrown to the ground.
At Muscat the tongue of the thief is cut off, and
owing to this severe punishment there are few cases
of theft. The Arabs are hard masters, and train their
servants (several of whom were with us) in a system
of rigorous discipline. ‘To enforce despatch, a master
will spit on the ground, and say to his servant, “ If
that dries up before you return with an.answer to
my message, youll get flogged.”

Musical instruments were in greater variety in
Karague than we had previously met with, and the
little plaintive native airs could be picked up and
hummed, they were so sweet and pleasing to the ear.
There was stringed, wind, and drum music. Their most


MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 183


perfect instrument was the “nanga,” of seven or eight
strings; it may be called national. In one of these,
played by an old woman, six of the seven notes were
a perfect scale, the seventh being the only faulty
string. In another, played by a man, three strings
were a full harmonious chord. These facts show that
the people are capable of cultivation. The “ nanga”
was formed of heavy dark wood, the shape of a tray,
22 by 9 inches or 30 by 8, with three open crosses
in the bottom, and laced with one string seven or eight
times over bridges at either end; sometimes a gourd,
as sounding-board, was tied on to the back. Prince
MWnanagee, at my request, sent the best player he
knew. The man boldly entered without introduc-
tion, dressed in the usual Wanyambo costume, and
looked a wild, excited creature. After resting his
spear against the roof of the hut, he took a “nanga”
from under his arm and commenced. As he sat upon
a mat with his head averted from me, never smiling,
he sang something of his having been sent to me, and
of the favourite dog Keeromba. The wild yet gentle
music and words attracted a crowd of admirers, who
sane the dog-song for days afterwards, as we had it
encored several times. Another player was an old
woman, calling herself “ Keeleeanyagga.” As she
played while standing in front of me, all the song she
could produce was “sh,” “sh,” screwing her mouth,
rolling her body, and raising her feet from the ground;
it was a miserable performance, and not repeated.

Of wind instruments we had the fife and horn.
The fife is more common with the Uganda than the
Karague people. It is an 18-inch-long hollowed reed,
about the thickness of a German flute, is held like a


184. RUMANIKA’S BAND OF MUSICIANS.


flageolet, has a slit at the top, and six finger-holes. As
the Waganda walk smartly along the road, with a hght
load on their heads, they often while away the time
with this rude instrument, out of which some of them
bring soft, sweet, flute-like music. The bugle they
have is shaped like a telescope, and is made of several
pieces of gourd fittimg mto each other, and covered
with cow-skin. It is 12 inches long. An expert
performer on this bugle can produce a whole chord,
which is varied by the thumb acting as a key.

Drums are of different shapes, according as they are
beaten by the hand or by a stick. The drum made
for the hand is a 4-feet-long log, hollowed out in the
shape of an inverted dice-box, open at the lower end,
and covered at the top, which is 1 foot across, with
the skin of an ichneumon. It is slung from the left
shoulder, and played by tapping and stopping with
the fingers. ‘The thirty-three drums seen ranged in
line at the ceremony after new-moon were of every
possible shape, except round, which they all tried to
be. They were trunks of trees hollowed out, and
covered over with skin. Two copper kettle-drums had
found their way into the collection. The sultan had
an excellent band, of its kind, composed of 16 men,
who performed several tunes before us. The instru-
ments were 14 bugles and 2 hand-drums. Three
ranks, the drummers in the rear, formed in front of
us, and played, with great spirit and precision, bugle
music in waltz and march time. While “trooping ”
they advanced, swaying their bodies very gracefully to
the music; and as they neared us all halted except
the bandmaster, who, as he played, being an active,
well-made little man, advanced to our feet, kneeling


DISPUTE ABOUT A CHILD. 185


nimbly on alternate knees in time to the music. The
drummers were energetic, smart, mirthful fellows ;
and their music, sounding so sweetly among the hills,
was more pleasant than any performance | had ever
expected to witness in Africa. It was called Unyoro
music, but at Unyoro we heard none of it in conse-
quence of the moroseness of the king. All the time
we were at Karague we saw no dance worth noting;
they did not seem much given to dancing, and the
war-drum was never sounded. Long may this con-
tinue! On such occasions the men take the field and
the women beat the drums. An alarm of cattle hav-
ing been captured was once spread, and the men
rushed about in hot haste, armed each with a single
spear and their faithful bow and arrows; but it
proved false, and the bold Prince Chunderah was
disappointed of a raid.

The only alarms we experienced were caused by the
hyena or other animals stealing from us. ‘Twice an
infuriated mob came shouting into our camp, the voices
of the women being above all others. A woman had
a child, and two men fought for it. Each claimed it ;
the woman wouldn’t give it up; she couldn’t settle the
dispute ; would the white man do it? I was not for
some time made aware of the circumstances ; but my
Needee servant appointed himself arbiter, and, after
looking at both the men and the child, decided
who was the rightful father, after which they all
scampered off in noisy confusion. A second case was
soon after decided in the same way, but with a differ-
ent result, for the man who lost the suit took his
spear and threatened to stab the infant. The African,
however, is more prompt in speech than in action.


186 RELIGION AT KARAGUE.


Of religion, the only approach to it has been men-
tioned in the various superstitions of the king and his
brother, who made idols of horns filled with various
charms. To these they appeal for aid against an
enemy, for the blessing of health, for the discovery of
men’s inward thoughts, for rain, &c. In the event of
a war or a journey, the mysterious horn was consulted
as to the probable success of the expedition. Another
belief is that certain animals are possessed of devils,
but are in the power of soothsayers. We found that
amongst the Wahuma kings it was lawful to cohabit
with a brother’s wife, or with his own sister.

They have no knowledge whatever of reading,
writing, or arithmetic. A printed book to them was
like a picture-book to a child; its leaves were turned
over one by one carefully by the most intelligent, and
immediately shut up by the more ignorant. For twenty
years Arabs have been amongst them, but Mohamme-
danism has taken no hold of the king or his people.
The country presents a wide field for commerce to
pave the way for regenerating an intelligent race.

On reading the ten commandments to my Moham-
medan friend Jumah, who dealt in slaves, ivory, &c.,
often complaining that his slaves were under no con-
trol, he shook hands with me after each command-
ment, saying how true and excellent they were, he
believed in them all. “ But do you practise them ?”
Tasked. “Read ‘Honour thy father and thy mother,
and tell me how can the slaves honour their fathers
and mothers if you tear them away from their fami-
lies?” “Oh, I am a father to them.” “How can
you be a father? Are the affections of a parent not
as strong in Africa as anywhere else?” He felt the


DEPARTURE FROM KARAGUE. 187


force of the argument, asked me to desist from press-
ing the matter, as 1t was not convenient to adopt these
sentiments at present. He would return to Zanzibar,
never again keep slaves, study the Bible, and go to
England. I wished to believe that he said this m
sincerity, for the conversion of one influential man in
such a land would be of importance.

By the end of March 1862 there were some hopes
of my leaving Karague to jom Speke in Uganda.
The king had sent an officer and forty of his men to
convey me up to the kngdom I so long wished to see.
Rumanika had received his presents of a Whitworth
rifle, Tranter’s revolver, Inverness cape, cloths, beads,
japanned box, a compass, pair of binoculars, &c., to
conciliate him ; and he had acted the part of a kind
friend in giving us all the mformation in his power.
An Unyamuezi M’ganga, or priest, named Kiengo, was
to jom my party, but until he had completed his ar-
rangements the march could not take place. The
Waganda who had arrived for me were clamorous to
get away, but they refused to carry the luggage; and
as Rumanika could provide no porters, three-fourths of
it were left behind in his charge. Beimg unable to
walk, I was placed in a wicker stretcher (April 14,
1862), and was trotted off on the heads of four
Waganda. Wishing to shake hands with Rumanika,
I ordered the carriers to convey me into the palace,
but nothing would induce them to leave the path—it
was not their duty. My adieus were therefore sent
through Kukoko, his favourite son; and I left Kar-
ague, its hills, lakes, and groves, feeling intensely
curious about the next kingdom of Uganda, where
I hoped to rejoin my fellow-traveller.


CHAPTER IX.


THE UGANDA MARCH, APRIL 14 TO MAY 27, 1862—MARIBOO
AND HIS UGANDA FOLLOWERS—RICH FOLIAGE—FERRYING
THE RIVER KITANGULE—SUPERSTITION AGAINST SOUNDING
THE RIVER—VICTORIA NYANZA, A BOUNDLESS SEA—FINE
COUNTRY BETWEEN KITANGULE AND KITONGA—FLORA OF
THE DISTRICTI—INCIDENTS OF THE MARCH—LUNCH WITH
UGANDA WOMAN—DISAGREEABLE MARCH—-THE GOVERNOR
POKINNO—SUMMER-HOUSES OF THE UGANDA.


HAvING been detained at Karague for so many months,
I was right glad to have a prospect in the end of
March of getting away to jom my companion. A
party of Waganda, under an officer named Mariboo,
arrived to take me as far as the Kitangule river, four
marches, where large boats were said to be lying to
convey me by the lake to Uganda. This, however,
was not the case; no boats had been sent, and the
journey of twenty-nine marches was performed by land,
much to our disappointment, as Speke had previously
been over it, and we missed the navigation of the
Nyanza. Day by day the Waganda escort deluded
me with the idea that we would come upon boats by
the side of the Nyanza; and Mariboo ordered the


MODE OF CONVEYANCE. 189


march as he liked, halted when it suited him, got tipsy
whenever he could, but in the end compensated for all
by conveying me safe to his king.

Rumanika had a sort of litter made up, on which
the Waganda lads were to carry me; my half-dozen
Seedees could not have done it, as the country after-
wards proved to be precipitous, and full of swamps
and marshy drains. On the morning of the 14th
April, when a start was made from Karague, Mariboo
came into camp with his thirty or forty men, making
a noise and saying they had been starved while wait-
ing for the Unyamuezi doctor and myself during the
last fortnight, and were determined to move to-day
whether I was ready or not. “Bring out the white
man. Where is his bedding? Let him get into the
conveyance.” The property, however, had first to be
despatched. I lost sight of it for two days, but none
of the loads were plundered. On our journey, the
stretcher was changed from the head to the shoulder
of the Waganda, who went at the rate of six miles an
hour, jostling and paiing my limb unmercifully. The
coach and four, as I may term it, was put down every
mile, or less, that the bearers might rest, laugh, joke,
and make a deafening noise with their mumbling
language, beating their tongues to the roofs of their
mouths. ‘They seldom spoke when in motion, only
when one stumbled the others would cry out against
him, recommending ereater care of their charge. Cer-
tainly it was not a safe position to be perched such a
height on an open frame of sticks, with rocky preci-
pices, smal] footing for the men, and very often water
below. One great difficulty was to make them carry
the conveyance so that the country in front could be


190 MARCHING WITH WAGANDA.


seen in travelling; this they, for some reason, refused
to do, and persisted in carrying me head first, instead
of feet. Ifa grove of plantain was by the side of the
path, it could not be resisted ; off all would dash at
the fruit, eat, and carry away as much as they were
able, sometimes politely offermg me a share, or more
frequently remaining so long away, as I lay on the
stretcher, that it became irritating. The best way
was to join as much as possible with them in their
frolics; my men did so, and enjoyed the march ex-
tremely.

At these groves, a single bunch or cluster of as
many as 150 ripe plantains could be got in April, and
their juice drunk from them al fresco. The large
leaves of the tree, green, and soft as satin, were spread
on the ground as a table-cloth; a wisp of grass, well
softened by rubbing, enclosed a quantity of luscious
ripe fruit, and what the men seemed most to enjoy
was to bite and suck the fruit through the grass.
During the march they all carried some small load
on their heads, never more than 20 or 30 lb., rolled in
the form of a web of cloth, neatly bound round, and
having pipes and flutes stuck into it. Hach man had
a spear and shield over his back; the latter served as
an umbrella when rain fell; and thus, with their
bark-cloths kilted up, their dress was secure from rain
or bogey ground. On arrival in camp, the march
costume was changed for a clean suit of bark-cloth as
stiff as silk, or for a set of many-coloured goat-skins,
with scalloped, pierced edges, in which they made
themselves smart, and strutted about like gentlemen.
Those who had been able to find dogs led them with


strings tied to their waists or wrists as they ran along.


MARCHING WITH WAGANDA. 191


Very ridiculous they appeared, for the animals (not
accustomed to it) always refused to be led in this way.
On coming near habitations, the men shouted and
sang, as if carrying some object of triumph. Had I
been a dead lion, they could not have made greater
noise; and on getting near camp, regardless of culti-
vated fields, they would plunge into them with mali-
cious delight, trample them down, slash away branches
or plantain-trees which came in their way, and deposit
the litter mside a grove.

When morning again came, the gay Mariboo, always
scrupulously clean and proud of his dress, would
appear, followed by his drummer-boy and dog, to
announce, by beat of drum, a march or halt. If the
former, the shouts of his men coming to jom him
would be heard in the distance, and Mariboo would
answer and receive replies, till one by one all rushed
up, spear in hand, as if to attack him, shouting alle-
giance, and causing their “captain” to spring and
bound with delight, while I looked on with admira-
tion at the strange and wild spectacle. After several
exhibitions of this sort, it became evident that pre-
sents were expected, and if the march was to be a
success, a little “tipping” was necessary; conse-
quently, the captain was summoned to receive a gift
of beads. His delight, as he handled the beautiful
small beads, knew no bounds; his spear was flashed
up to my face, while his left hand held his shield,
and he finished with a number of nimble antics. His
arms laid aside, he repeated, “ N’yans, n’yans” (thanks,
thanks), perhaps fifty times in succession, with a dia-
gonal motion of both palms at each repetition. This
over, another mode of thanks was adopted, and was


192 WAGANDA ARE SO JOYOUS.


even more agreeable ; he drew his flute from his waist,
played some soft music, making his eyes twinkle with
delight, and swayed his body as if charmed with his
own sweet strains. They certainly are a most joyous
race. On our third march from Karague, the ground
was so steep, and there was so much danger of my
falling off the stretcher, that I was obliged to get out,
and be half-carried up the rocky side of the hill, never
dreaming that they would run away with my convey-
ance, which they did on seeing that I was able to put
my foot to the ground. For a couple of hours they
allowed me to wait there, while they, like a parcel of
wicked boys, kept throwing rocks down the precipice,
listening in perfect quiet till they heard the last sound
of the stones reaching the bottom of the ravine, when
all would shout together.

From the capital of Karague to the right bank of
the Kitangule, the distance ved Meegongo was forty
miles over flat-topped bare hills, and across valleys
with swamps. On emerging from these to the river
plain, the flat country became studded with mounds
from six to eight feet high, raised by the ever-working
white ants. Thorny shrubs, cactus, climbing aloes,
with pink flowers, covered them, or the jungle of grass
was varied by circles of brushwood, giving shade to
the rhinoceros ; the older trees were veiled over with
silvery grey moss, which drooped gracefully, like the
pendent branches of the weeping willow. The plain
extended for ten miles, with several “ back-waters”
upon it, covered with the thorny mimosa and papyrus,
through which we had to cut our way. Emerging from
it and going towards the river, we came upon higher
land—a dry grassy plain three miles across, kept short


THE RIVER KITANGULE. 193


by cattle, and just the ground on which to find a flori-
kan. There were. several huts, which gladdened the
eye after a dreary march. ‘The first sight of the river
Kitangule, which had been so often named to us as an
old ivory depdt, and the stream by which wood was
floated down from Ruanda, was rather disappointing.
Standing upon its steep shelving bank of white
eravel, the stream is almost hidden by the papyrus,
which lines its sides in a depth of from twenty to
sixty yards; but when ferrying it, its majestic flow is
seen. The canoes here were of one log of timber hol-
lowed out, fifteen feet long, the breadth of an easy-
chair as you sat in them, and capable of carrying
fifteen Waganda, with their loads, dogs, spears, and
large shields. ‘They were propelled by poles through
a winding channel closely shut in by the papyrus,
and by paddles when in the stream, a man at each
end holding one about five feet long. I had ob-
tained from the Waganda lads several of their neatly
spun coils of rope, which they carry on their heads ;
three or four of these were knotted together and a
stone tied to one end as a sounding-line ; but on the
ferryman noticing what was to be done, he objected,
saying his sultan Rumanika would not permit any
stone to be placed or thrown into the sacred Kitan-
gule. A bribe at last softened him; but Mariboo now
interfered, saying, in his superstition, that he had an
equally sacred charge from his king—namely, that he
was to convey me in safety to him, and he would
allow no pranks to be played with the river, for “ sup-
pose in the middle of it some spirit were disturbed by
a stone, and rose to upset the boat, what would his
king say?” In short, after wasting words and time,
N


194 THE RIVER KITANGULE.


the project was given up, and we commenced the pas-
sage of the river at a reach four hundred yards long,
having paid beforehand twenty strings of beads for
my men, and an extra handful of cowries were given
by the Waganda to the ferrymen. Poling for twenty
yards through a winding channel cleared of the tall —
papyrus, and not broader than our canoe, we reached
the stream, fully eighty yards across, judged to be
five to six fathoms deep, looking as if any man-of-war
could sail up, and flowing majestically at the rate of
about three miles an hour. The strength of the cur-
rent was so great that we had to pole up its right
bank inside the frmge of papyrus for thirty yards,
and then the two ferrymen, with a paddle each, made
the canoe glide across diagonally down to the opposite
channel in the reeds, which they reached with great
precision. Poling for fifty to eighty yards was now
adopted, landing upon mire which nearly sucked us
into its hold; beyond this, the old line of the river
rose abruptly like a railway embankment. At that
level the country extended far away in a pleasant
grassy plain, giving it the appearance of an Indian
parade-ground ; but the footing was treacherous, being
full of ant-holes, and dotted with cactus-trees, white-
ant mounds, with their usual vegetation, thistle-looking
plants, and a scarlet-flowering shrub. In the distance
to the north were rocky hills.

We observed that the waters of the Kitangule
are accumulated from the lakes Karague, Kageera,
Kishakka, Ooyewgomah, and water from Utumbi.
This river is, beyond comparison, the greatest body of
water met with from the south of the Victoria Nyanza
all round its western shore to its most northerly point,


THE RIVER KITANGULE. 195


where the Nile was seen by Speke to make its exit
from the lake. It reminded me, when ferrying it, of
the Hoogly ten miles above Calcutta. very other
stream entering the lake was walked across, none had
to be ferried ; and they were so numerous that nine
and ten might be forded in as many miles; this was
a daily occurrence when marching on the western
shore of the lake. The accumulation of these streams,
and the rivulets (no rivers) known from Arab infor-
mation to be in the eastern or unexplored portion of
the Victoria Nyanza, form a boundless sea of 20,000
square miles, never traversed from one side to the
other. All these arteries throw in an immense mass
of water, and though the greatest of them is the
Kitangule, still it is 160 miles distant by water from
the pomt whence the Nile issues from its parent re-
servoir, the Lake Nyanza, at 21 miles north latitude.
The country between the Kitangule and the Ka-
tonga, a distance of 100 miles, is a parallel series of
orassy spurs tapering down to the lake’s shores on
the east. There are many beautiful spots on the
route—high grounds from which, for a quarter of the
horizon, are seen the waters of the lake, or the coun-
try undulating and park-like, covered with tall waving
grasses, and overlooked by rocks. The curves, sweeps,
and inclines of the hills often blended together in
great beauty—never making the path inconveniently
steep or too long in ascent or descent. All the cul-
tivation was on these slopes, as the plains between
them, sometimes six miles across, were ankle-deep in
water and mud in this month of May; or where the
valley was narrow, water would have accumulated in
a drain four feet deep, across which the Waganda


196 THE VICTORIA NYANZA.


carried me on their necks, or, like a child, in their
arms. On some marches we had to cross ten differ-
ent waters, and, to avoid others, long detours were
made to get upon higher grounds.

The now famous Victoria Nyanza, when seen for
the first time, expanding in all its majesty, excited
our wonder and admiration. Even the listless Wan-
yamuezi came to have a look at its waters, stretching
over ninety degrees of the horizon. The Seedees
were in raptures with it, fancying themselves looking
upon the ocean which surrounds their island home of
Zanzibar, and I made a sketch, dotting it with imagi-
nary steamers and ships riding at anchor in the bay.
On its shores are beautiful bays, made by wooded
tongues of low land (or points such as Boonjacko and
Surree Points, guarding the Katonga river) running
into the lake, with very often a rounded detached
island at their apices. The low islands of Sesseh lie
on the western shore of the lake. A deep fringe of
the papyrus generally hid the view over its waters.
When standing here, the hoarse tromboning of the
hippopotamus, wishing to come out to graze, echoed
from out these rushes. The harbours of the natives
were cleared spaces composed of a spongy mass of
seeds, rotten reeds, sticks, and roots. In front, for
twenty yards, ashort rush with a circular leaf grew,
breaking the small surfing waves on the lake from two
to three hundred yards, showing that it was of no
depth. In the distance, large boats paddled along
from the mainland to the islands of Sesseh. One, of
five planks sewn together, having four cross bars as
seats, was brought to convey me to Uganda; but
after four of us had got into it with some loads, the


THE SHORES OF THE LAKE. Ory,


craft was so cranky that such a voyage would have
been madness, the water streaming in. Her bows
and stern were pointed, standing for a yard over
the water, with broad central plank from stem to
stern, rounded outside, answering for a keel, and well
adapted for gliding through papyrus.

The flora along this tract did not afford much
variety. The most graceful tree on the route was the
wild date-palm, growing in clumps of three and four
upon the bare green hills: its crested plumes waved
in the breeze, giving almost animal life to the silent
scene. Birds’ nests, or clusters of Indian red fruit,
hung in pendants from the branches. We met with
a new acacia, whose thin pods were broad and numer-
ous; on looking at the tree, the crop was so abundant
that the leaves were all but hidden by the fruit. Few
large trees were seen; they probably got killed by the
different varieties of lichens and parasites which
covered them. One acacia with a flat top was netted
over with bushes of them, as if they had been planted
on the tops of the branches. The north-east sides of
trees were observed to have the most moss upon their
trunks, denoting that it was the dampest wind at that
particular locality and position. On the 14th of May
I was sheltered from the rays of the sun by the boughs
of the coffee-shrub, then with clusters of green berries
bowing down its branches till within reach. Each
yearly growth or produce could be seen by looking
at the number of knots in the branches. No care or
pruning was observed, and the roots near the trunk
grew very much above the soil. On the grounds fac-
ing the lake, 20 or 30 miles south of the equator,
quantities must be grown, as some houses there were


198 FRUITS AND FOOD.


found full of sacks containing very large berries of it.

The sacks were remarkably stout and well made—
somewhat similar to Calcutta rice-bags. ‘Two fruits,

new to us, were seen growing—one, the colour and
size of the Indian loquat, with several stones, but grow-
ing on a lofty tree with sombre foliage and densely-close
branches. The other was an underground scarlet fruit,

crowing in sets of five and six clustered together like
bananas, and of the same size. After being peeled,
the pulp, with numerous black seeds, tasted refresh-
ing as a lime, and was much enjoyed by the Waganda,
who carried them strung as necklaces. The stalk of
this plant (an amomum) grows four feet high from a
creeping knotted root, like that of many grasses; and
the searlet fruit does not show above ground till ripe,
when it forces up the soil ike a mole.

Food was abundant, plantain particularly so, and
might be had by the king’s guests for the mere pulling ;
but if fowls, goats, or animal food was required, the na-
tives charged almost London prices, preferring cowries,
which we had none of, to beads. In the houses differ-
ent grains were slung, in plantain-leaf coverings, from
the posts which support the roofing. The staple food
of the people is green plantain, a particular variety,
boiled, when the peel comes off freely, and eaten like
mashed potato. A piece of meat boiled with them
made both very savoury, but plantain alone is not
satisfying to a European. ‘The various uses made of
this tree surprised us. A chip from the bark was so
watery that the hands could be well washed with it,
but it was said to crack the skin: thread, wrappers,
and stripes like ribbons were taken from the trunks,
and the leaves were made into screen-fences, Xe.


WINE-MAKING. 199


The wine I have before mentioned ; two quarts of
it could be drunk without any injurious effect. Every
large hut seemed to have a trunk of a tree scooped
out like a canoe, leaving a narrow opening. Several of
these are collected in the grove when sufficient fruit
has ripened, and the plantain juice is put in them to
ferment, with some grain, and heaped over with leaves.
The scene at opening these, after three days of fer-
mentation, was quite a festive one. The immense
gourds of the village were brought to be filled ; cups
were made from the leaves to taste the new beverage,
and all was merry as at a carnival. A species of wine
was made by the Waganda boys, very simple in its
mode of manufacture, and excellent to drink. A small
cavity was made in the ground, plantain leaves were
placed flatly into it, so as to make a basin for liquid.
Fruit, mixed with leaves, was pressed with the hands,
some water added, and the leaves ultimately thrown
away, leaving the “togweh” in the basin ready for
drinking.

In travelling through this country our Seedees never
received any pay as in the southern provinces, for the
kine of Uganda gave orders to his people to provide
and cook for us. This was not always done ; it more
frequently happened that as soon as our approach was
seen the natives fled, leaving almost all their goods
and chattels at our mercy. No persuasion would
bring them back, they are so accustomed to be sur-
rounded and captured by troops of men sent by the
king. Several influential officers in charge of districts
were seen on this route—Simjabee, Kittareh, Kuddoo,
and some of the Wazeewa or Wahia race. All brought
presents of fowls, buttermilk, sugar-cane, and wine.


200 CHIEFS OF DISTRICTS.


Simjabee was a tall, thin, long-faced man, with small
beard, and very much marked on the forehead with
smallpox. His caste was not a particular one, for he
ate honey, boiled beef, goat, sheep, antelope, water-boe,
beans, and grains, and drank boiled milk and wine.
He was a gentle old man, and begged for wires and
large beads, which I did not possess. His present was
several fowls and some buttermilk, which I thought
strange to see in this part of the world. Kaittareh
called, bringing a bunch of the richest plantain I ever
saw, actually dropping juice. Before presenting it he
went through the Uganda custom of smoothing it
over with his hands, and rubbing it on his face. We
became great friends, and he took me over his neatly-
kept premises enclosed trimly with high fences of
plantain leaf. In his hand he held by a cord a red
pariah dog, and a liver-and-white beagle (?) followed at
his heels. This animal was the only one of the kind
I had observed. Kuddoo, a fine intelligent young
fellow, was my companion up to Uganda: it was his
duty to see that the various district officers on our
route provisioned us properly. He was very fond of
looking at pictures, a hunting-knife, or any European-
made article. On my showing him a paper of pins,
and strewing numbers amongst a crowd for them to
take as curiosities, [ was surprised to see all collected
most carefully and returned to me, because their king
did not permit them to keep anything so strange.
They are under extraordinary control these Wagan-
da, and obey their king through fear, making as smart
obedient soldiers as any in existence. Two on our
march quarrelled one day, and fought in the most
manly manner—not with spears, knives, or bows and


MODES OF SALUTING. 201


arrows, as an Unyambo, Seedee or Wanyamuezi would
do. They planted their spears, tucked up their bark
clothes, and wrestled until one knocked the other
down, and held him till he gave mn. Previous to
our leaving the finely-kept grounds of Kittareh (the
man owning the beagle), he brought out a stirrup-
cup of wine and some boiled plantain-squash for the
Waganda lads, who, having finished all, knelt in a
body before the old man to thank him for his polite-
ness. This they did by diagonally swinging their
hands placed together, and repeating the words
“N’yans, N’yans,” or “ M’wambeea, M’wambeea,’ in
a loud chorus—after which, all sprang up, looking
orateful and happy. The upper class are in the habit
of making speeches. On a present being put into
their hands, they hold it, and talk for five minutes
expressing thanks. The Waganda mode of salute on
meeting a friend is peculiar: neither party smiles
until the words “Nyo, Nyi, Nyogeh,” are repeated
alternately by each many times, when one makes bold
to address a sentence, then resumes the “ Nyo” once
or twice, and after these formalities a conversation
may with propriety commence. When the women
wish to show respect to a superior, they kneel before
him like the Wanyamuezi women. All these social
forms are as scrupulously attended to in Africa as the
ceremonies at the most polite court of Europe.

On the march we never knew where we were to halt
for the day. The men did not know themselves ;
they could not tell the probable time of arrival, so
that the dinner-hour was always uncertain; and if
our baggage was tied up by seven in the morning,
we seldom left before eleven: once off, we continued


202 UNCERTAIN LIFE OF THE AFRICAN.


wandering till sunset. They were like a parcel of
hungry hounds, darting into every hut, spear up, and
shouting at places where they thought they could
safely plunder, eating and drinking on the way per-
haps five or six times a-day. Mariboo, although in
charge of me, would be absent for days drinking,
allowing me to get on as I best could; consequently,
on several occasions, my conveyance, bedding, and
writing materials were nowhere to be found. Some
villagers, instead of presenting our party with wine,
would in excuse make an offering of half-a-dozen
cowries to me, and on having it explained to them
that the white man did not exact presents, they
would express great surprise. The Wezee doctor
(Kiengo) of our party had Rumanika’s orders to seize
the officer of the Kisuere district for having com-
mitted two misdemeanours. The man had been to
present me with a gourd of wine, and did so very
hurriedly, slipping away from my sight. Soon after,
chase was given, a party following him up to his
house, but the alarm had preceded him. The cattle
that were to have been taken as forfeited to Rumanika,
and the wives who were to have become the wives of
Kiengo, were both driven to the jungles, but the
plunder that fell to the lot of his pursuers was brought
into our camp. The case was an illustration of the
uncertain life of African men and women. The home
they have lived in since the day of their birth, may in
an instant, by the caprice of another, be wrested from
them, or they may return to find it a ruin. My
Waganda were careful not to plunder too much in
their own country, for fear of the wrath of their king;
but when in Rumanika’s territory, or on the borders


THE SHORES OF THE LAKE. 203


of their own, they never hesitated to seize what they
could. In the same way the Karague race of Wan-
yambo, now that they were of our party in the strange
land of Uganda, were the most expert of thieves,
making travelling painful and annoying from the
cries of the sufferers. On inquiring of an officer
whether such plunder was permitted by the king, he
replied that the order was that the natives should quit
their houses as soon as a guest came into the country,
and take to the hill-tops. Numerous instances of this
were observed, and on my wandering up a hill to
beckon them back, they retired as we approached.
On this occasion I had an instance of the taste of the
Waganda race. The sun was setting (it was the 13th
of May 1862), when one of them, having pointed out
to me the various directions of the countries around
us, quickly turned, and eagerly directed my attention
to the full moon rising out of the Victoria Nyanza,
sending its elitterme rays over the beautiful placid
waters. Here was a lover of the picturesque !

On the slopes looking towards the lake the climate
was delightful, quite English ; only once, in a confined
valley, did the temperature show a great heat—viz.,
974°, falling during the night, with the cold damp air,
to 50°. We had showers, on an average, almost every
third day between 15th April and 19th May, and but
one severe N.E. storm of wind and rain. On the
14th of May, our Seedees predicted that no rain
would fall if Dr Kiengo’s magic horn of an antelope
were placed in the sun; “for,” said they, “is not the
M’ganga out? No rain ever falls when it is in the
open. Sure enough, when rain was threatened, the
horn was taken in to prevent its getting wet. The


204 WAGANDA ORNAMENTS.


contents of these idol horns must be renewed periodi-
cally, as the charm within them is supposed to live
or have power only for a certain period of time.
Some other superstitions were observed on this route :
—By the path a pole was stuck into the ground, with
a large land-shell or some relic on the end of it; or
the same relic was placed on the tallest branch of a
tree. In the same way that we sometimes place a
horse-shoe behind our front door, they hang a small
charm of rush and feathers, or have a magic wand in
the house. The Waganda had anklets of seeds, wood,
&c., which were supposed to keep away snake-bites ;
but few or no snakes were seen. ‘Their other charms
and ornaments consisted of tiaras of the abrus seeds,
tiaras of large snowberries, necklaces of the scarlet
amomum fruit, tusks of the wild boar, horn-tips of
antelope, and a square or kidney-shaped pendant round
the neck, covered with the skin of a serpent.

The industry and wealth of the Wazeewa or Mohia
(a race mentioned in the Karague chapter), amongst
whom our camp was pitched for a few days, was very
marked. Some of them had migrated from the right
to the left bank of the Kitangule, and were now cul-
tivators under the king of Uganda, bringing all the
erains of the country for barter into our camp. They
seemed a very cleanly race, using little or no grease po-
made on their bodies, and never sitting down unless
some grass or leaves were placed between them and the
eround, Many of their bark-cloths were coloured red
crimson, having zigzag marks of black upon them. They
dressed their cow-skins very beautifully, placing them
stretched on a huge upright square frame to be thinned
by scraping with a hatchet; this was observed in Bog-


WAZEEWA WOMEN. 2065


weh also. One chief amongst them came to see me,
leading his fat brindled dog, partly of bull-dog extrac-
tion. He wore a silvery roan-coloured cow-skin down
his back, and slung from the neck—a most handsome
garb, almost lustrous, and of which he seemed very
proud. ‘Their women were comely; and although
they had an objection to allow me to drink out of their
currahs or earthen jars of water, one of them, while
her husband, an officer in the king’s service, was
absent, wished to accompany me on the march; but
even this pleasure had to be declined, and the pretty
Wazeewa had to console herself, as many others did,
without even a lock of my straight hair, which was
the wonder of them all. These people paid great at-
tention to their plantain orchards. The bunches some-
times contained 200 large fruit, bending the stems,
which had to be supported by a forked stick or ropes.
On the fruit being ripe the tree is cut down, to permit
the growth of the young shoot, which comes from the
parent root. All the groves are of bare-poled single
trees, Which makes the fruit much finer than if the trees
were allowed to grow in clusters ; and should the leaf-
stalk droop too much from the trunk, the natives ban-
dage it up to prevent rain from beating into the heart
of the tree. They use large circular trays, four feet
across, made of osiers, and covered with cow-dung, for
drying their grain in the sun. An article of diet not
seen before was locusts; a number of them were
brought in by a woman to be roasted as food. They
were one inch long, had two pairs of wings, and an-
tennze 14 inches long. White ants also, when young
and freshly fledged, were caught in a framework placed
over their mound of earth, to be eaten by the people.


206 A WOMAN MADE PRISONER.


In concluding these remarks upon the country lying
between the two rivers Kitangule and Katonga, which
is occupied by Wanyambo, Wanyoro, Wazeewa, and
Waganda, it may be mentioned that “Khass Uganda,”
or Uganda proper, has yet to be reached when the
Katonga river is crossed ; and as the dwellings, domes-
tic and wild animals, &c., had nothing about them
peculiar, we shall not stop to describe them, but cross
the arm of the lake at the mouth of the above river.

Letters from Speke announced that the king of
Uganda, as well as himself, were impatient for my ar-
rival, and that I was expected to come by water. The
king, he said, now dressed in Hnglish clothes, and our
men were regularly supported by him. Uganda, how-
ever, was not a land of milk and honey. Grain could
not be had to make bread, and I was, if possible, to
lay in stores of flour and pease among the Wazeewa
people.

By sunrise of the 20th May 1862, I had packed and
was ready to cross the equator at Katonga Bay. See-
ing a new face seated apart from, but within sight of,
Mariboo’s little wife, for the sake of speaking to the
downeast-looking creature I advanced and asked her
the way out of camp; she suckled an infant, was very
pretty, with deep black round eyes, and she smilinely
gave the information. She was so interesting that on
getting into camp for the day I inquired her history.
She had been captured by my Waganda the previous
day, and was now their prisoner, for our party was
strong, and her relatives, had they come to claim her,
would also have been made slaves. She had not been
brought into camp: we never again saw her, and my
Seedees told me she must have been sold, as the Wa-


CROSS THE BAY OF KATONGA. 207


ganda would never give her up for nothing, or they
might have killed her.

On the 20th of May, as I sat on a height admiring
the beautiful Katonga Bay, one mile across, and look-
ing at the sweep of richly-wooded land on its other
side, with hills in the background, the king of Ugan-
da’s order arrived that I was to proceed to his capital
by land, and the pleasure I had long anticipated of
being conveyed by water was doomed to disappoint-
ment. My heart sank within me. I descended, how-
ever, to the edge of the bay, where our men were
amusing themselves, and where five or six canoes were
ready for the party. The Waganda and our Seedees
got into them to splash and duck each other. The
fowls belonging to the ferryman were seized and killed
previous to crossing over, because, if the hippopotamus
heard them crow, the canoes would be upset! Hours
of larking were spent, and at last fourteen of us, with
ten loads, sat in my canoe of four paddles, and we
emerged from the winding channel of tall rushes into
the bay ; here we were joined by two other canoes, all
well laden. Racing commenced, the paddlers facing
to the front, scooping the water with all their might
as they sat on the sides of the canoe, and, for a mar-
vel, not splashing us, for three-quarters of a mile over
rippled water. Here, for the first time, | met with a
plant whose leaves looked very beautiful in the water,
growing by those of the lily of the Nile—namely, the
Trapa natans, the roots of which the Waganda eat.
There was no shore to land at; a floating mass of
tangled grasses prevented the further progress of the
canoe, and we had to jump out into the water. One
leg went down four feet to hard sand, while the other


208 AN AFRICAN LUNCHEON.


had to be pulled out of the grasses. A mile of this
disagreeable wading, with a mid-day sun on the equa-
tor, was dreadfully fatiguing. On getting out of
the swamp, we found the country flat and grassy, with
cleared cultivated spots and huts. Here, in the shade
of some plantain, while resting till the loads arrived,
I saw Mariboo’s wife enter the houses, quite alone,
bringing out a large bundle, which she placed on the
eround, and she was immediately surrounded by her
servant-girl and two Waganda. I also made one of
the party. The bundle contained boiled plantain,
sweet potato, and a species of solanum—the dinner of
the people whose house she had entered! All seemed
to enjoy it so much, eating it in such a refined way,
with a leaf in their fingers to prevent them getting
burnt, that the little woman, without any Hindoo cere-
mony, enticed me to jom them, and I never made a
better luncheon. Everything was cooked in the most
savoury way, and I learned that African cooking is
as cleanly and quite as wholesome as our own. It
seemed strange that we should be so calm and un-
concerned, when the tall spears of the inhabitants
watching our movements were seen in the distance ;
but Mrs Mariboo must have known that the natives
dared not attack any party belonging to the king.
The journey from Katonga Bay to the capital of
Uganda—named Kibuga—was without exception the
most disagreeable I ever made. Climbing over hills is
bad enough for a lame person, but when a broad miry
bog runs between each range, and there is no means of
getting through it but by sinking into mud and water at
every step, disgust is superadded. Most of the valleys
were a quarter of a mile wide; others were square,


ROADS AND BRIDGES IN UGANDA. 209


and four miles from hill to hill—a dense mass of
sombre foliage concealing their swamps, musquitoes,
and low grounds. Ravines, dells, and gullies, formed
by the waters from the hill-sides, were veiled with
impenetrable thickets ; above these the inhabitants
dwelt, surrounded by groves of the plantain at con-
siderable distances from each other. Occasional red
clay ant-heaps, boulders, and a few trees dotted the
middle height of the hills, and the sky-line was a
vegetation of waving grass, from three to six feet
high. The general elevation of these hills above their
valleys is four hundred feet. On their flat tops the
air was fresh and delightful. Whichever way you
looked, from your feet to the horizon was a sea of
these flat-topped ridges and conical hills.

The Waganda make first-rate pioneers; one is struck
with the direct cuts they make across the hills: perhaps
their duty of conveying messages, or bringing in cattle
and slaves to their king, conduces to this quickness of
movement. When carrying me, if a hill, however
steep, was to be crossed, they went directly over it, or
if a bog was to be forded, it was all one to them—
they would dash right into it. We had never seen a
road in Africa till coming into Uganda; here they
were so broad that a carriage might have driven along
them, but they were too steep for any wheeled convey-
ance. No metal was used on them, but the grasses
had been trodden down by the constant driving to
and fro of cattle and slave-hunting parties. Attempts
at bridges had been made, but we found them in a
state of dreadful disrepair. Originally, in the late
king Soona’s time, piles with a forked end had been
driven into the bog, and logs of wild date-palm, &c.,

0


210 THE ENSETE OF BRUCE.


were laid parallel with the run of the valley upon
the piles, forming a passage about twelve feet broad.
These had sunk and rotted, and walking over them
with bare feet was annoying and painful. The trees
and deep green foliage in the moist dells were densely
thick and lofty, some with straight unbranched stems,
towering higher than any ordinary palm. Ferns,
mosses, creepers, climbers, &c., hid or covered their
trunks and branches, making shade for the wild buf-
falo and elephant, who, unconscious of a stage erected
overhead to watch them, would come to escape the
heat of the day.

An extraordinary-looking tree, of the plantain
family, was seen growing wild outside a cultivation.
I brought home its seeds, and they have been pro-
nounced to be the Hnsete of Bruce, first discovered by
him in Abyssinia. From its similarity to the plantain
I had almost passed it unnoticed, but was attracted by
its marvellous stoutness of stem and disproportionate-
ly low appearance, its shape being as if one big drum
were placed over another, with gigantic single leaves
erowing from their sides. The natives wore necklaces
made of its seeds, which were called M’seegwah by our
Seedees. At 3°N. they were again met with, growing
upon broken rocky heights, but they were seen nowhere
else. The leaves were much eaten by the goats.

The stretcher which carried me part of the way
from Karague had been discarded, as the Waganda
saw my only ailment was lameness and stiff knee-joint.
Through such a rough country walking was very tire-
some and a severe exertion, and it was made more so by
the pace these excitable Waganda travel at. But they
were very civil in assisting me through difficulties, a


INCIDENTS DURING THE MARCH. 2 lee


sergeant and two privates (if we may call them so)
being in constant attendance, leading the way or at
my heels. They were Mariboo’s chief men, fine fel-
lows, very polite in lending a hand or even bringing
water to wash off the pair of black boots of mud I
had got in coming through the bogs. The marches
varied from 9 to 11 miles daily, occupying from 74
AM. till noon, or later, according to circumstances.
If it was a populous country, and our long line
passed through a grove having dwellings inside it,
more time was taken. Hach hut was entered and
ransacked ; cautiously a Seedee or Waganda, musket
or spear all ready, would go to the door and call,
“Ho, ho!” and, gaining admission, come out with
what he had picked up—tobacco, or a good bark-cloth.
Every house passed was in this way plundered, while
the inhabitants watched us in the distance. Travelling
was most disagreeable, and sometimes our men suffered
for their rashness. The light-hearted gallant little
Mariboo came for the aid of two guns one day, because
one of his men had been wounded on entering a hut.
My Seedees were up in an instant, ready to leave the
baggage and myself to take care of each other, but no
more than the number asked for went, and they re-
turned without a combat. At another camp we were
told to have our guns ready in the morning, as the
natives were up in arms; a boy amongst them had
been, the previous night, captured, and ransomed for
two goats and four bark-cloths. Not understanding
that Mariboo was the entire cause of such injustice,
I ordered the guns of the Seedees to be filled with
shot-sized pebbles instead of bullets; but we did not
require to fire them. Even my men became as bad


212 MARCHING THROUGH BOGS.


as the Waganda at this trade, their guns making them
daring; but it never came to my knowledge till it
was too late. For instance, seeing one of Mariboo’s
boys lead two timid villagers to the grass hut occupied
by my Seedees, I watched the result. A conversation
ensued, the men afterwards passed me with two naked
little girls with strings and tassels to their waists,
looking dreadfully frightened. They had been stolen
by my men, were the daughters of one of the two
villagers, and had no doubt been recovered by paying
bribes to Mariboo, his boy, and their captors.

The streams and bogs crossed may be alluded to.
All those going towards the Lake Victoria Nyanza
were fordable, of white muddy water, rarely brown or
mossy, having their bottoms and edges of black mud,
the accumulations of decayed vegetable matter. Those
which ran north and away from the lake, within two
marches of the Uganda capital, had a hard firm footing
of sand, with dry edges, and little or no mud. The
difference was very marked, and pleasant to observe.
The passage of these Uganda bogs is most trying.
Imagine a flat valley, a mile across, looking like an
osier-bed, but covered with the gigantic papyrus and
reeds, &c.; cut a narrow winding passage through it,
leaving the roots in the water, and walk through this
barefooted. The tears almost came into my eyes, the
suffering from the sharp roots was so severe. Being
carried was almost impossible, for even the natives,
with the soles of their feet hard as leather, bearing
their loads, dogs, spears, and shields on their heads,
had enough to do to keep their footing. In my lame
state, my feet, after having been covered with mud,
came out of these bogs red and inflamed, too large to


THE RIVERS MWERANGO AND MOOGGA. DAG)


wear shoes with comfort; or where the valleys were
free from the tall rushes, the chill of walking in such
mire with a burning sun overhead was quite stupify-
ing; but, strange to say, none of us suffered in health.

The Mwerango, twenty miles west of the Uganda
capital, was the first large body of water we found
flowing towards Egypt. ‘The centre part of the bridge
over it had long since fallen into disrepair, and as the
river was too deep for wading, we had to swim across
about twenty yards of its width, which was from 300
to 400 yards. You could not look up or down the
stream, as the reeds hid everything ; neither could it
be crossed anywhere but at this spot, or at other open-
ings made in the bed of papyrus. In one hour our
baggage was all across, and every one was freshened
bya bathe. This stream and a sister river, the Moogga
Myanza, join and form the Kuffoo, which flows to
Unyoro, joining the Nile to the north of Kamarasi’s
residence. Regarding the rise of these two rivers there
were various opinions among the Waganda. ‘The
Mwerango, they said, had its rise from rocks one day’s
journey to the 8.S.W. of Namagoma. The other was
honoured with a poetical tradition. It was named
“ Moogga,” after one of the wives of the late king
Soona. She, on becoming pregnant, was sent, for
medical advice, to the S.E. of Namagoma. Accom-
panying the birth of the child there was a flow of
water, which has run ever since, and was christened
“ Moogga,” after the queen! This river, or rather bed
of rushes, was 500 yards across, and breast-deep. As
we waded across it, on either side, within reach, the
papyrus grew arching beautifully overhead. Its waters
were clear, and sounded sweetly as they trickled


214 POKINO, THE GOVERNOR.


through the rushes to our left, contrasting pleasantly
with the bogs we had previously been crossing. When
asked at Namagoma how long it would take to reach
the source of the Mwerango, my friend Mariboo replied
figuratively by saying, “A pot of plantain would not
be boiled by the time you returned from its source,”
meaning that it would take a very short time.

As my caravan daily shortened its distance from
the residence of the king, messengers came to inquire
for me, where [ was to sleep each night, and to hurry
on, because the king had heard I was beautiful, and
he could not eat till he had seen me! These parties
were sometimes commanded by boys of thirteen years
of age—smart little fellows, who travelled very quickly
over the country, never getting fatigued. If they met
our caravan on the march, complimentary taps and
rolls were sounded by their drummers, and returned
by ours. It was not considered etiquette for any of
their number to mingle with our baggage-party while
moving along; because, if anything should be missed,
they might be made answerable for it.

Pokino, the governor of a large territory, was one
day announced while I was dressing. His name had
been constantly quoted as an authority by Mariboo,
and I had a strong desire to see him. On coming out
of my hut, he sat surrounded by twenty Waganda in
considerable state, and I could not help saying aloud,
“Hallo! is this Pokino?” At once all grinned at
the mention of the name; no one moved from their
seated positions, and my iron chair was placed outside
the red cow-skin, on which he alone sat,—a deter-
mined, sly-looking functionary, with a bad expression
of mouth, and just the man to have an order obeyed.


THE HABITATIONS OF THE WAGANDA. 215


His dress was the ordinary one of the country, robing
him in graceful folds of bark-cloth, salmon-coloured,
which harmonised well with his dark complexion.
Round his bare head he wore a wreath of creepers
(Coccinna Indica), which made me inquire whether
his head ached. A laugh from him, and suppressed
titter from his men at my ignorance, immediately
followed, and he wished to see my pictures and luci-
fer-matches ; of the former he preferred the buffalo’s
head, and one representing some slaves in chains ;
these amused him more than any of the others, and
he soon took his departure, walking away slowly with
considerable style, as if proud of his tall stout manly
figure.

The dwellings on this route were superior to any
we had met with in Africa—loftier, better constructed,
and more cleanly. Having command of immensely
tall reeds, and beautiful grasses for thatching, with, in
most places, tall spars, they could readily make them-
selves comfortable dwellings; besides which, they are a
very neat-handed race. A M’ganda has a double roof of
reeds to his house, like the two “flies” in an Indian tent.
The outer “fly” has a steeper slope than the under,
and is covered to the ground with a thick thatch of
long broad-bladed grass, a species of wild sugar-cane.
This roofing appears when new white and clean from
the inside, and is placed with perfect regularity, and
supported by more poles than are generally requisite,
as there are sacks of grain, dried flesh or fish, &c., to
be slung from them. The interior is partitioned off
into front and rear compartments, by means of high
screens of the plantain leaf. The better class of
houses have a raised bedstead in the dark interior,


216 A MAUSOLEUM.


which has but one door as an outlet for smoke,
goats, and inhabitants. They also have their summer-
houses, generally in a shady spot, where men meet to
chat, smoke, and drink. It was amusing to see such
comfort in these “barzahs,’ which only required a
table, and to be seated round, to look like a remark-
ably neat summer-house at home. Two huts on a
height appeared devoted to the remains of the dead.
On getting over the fence surrounding them, a lawn
having straight walks covered with gravel soil led up
to the doors, where a screen of bark-cloth shut out the
view of the interior. Conquering a feeling of delicacy,
I entered one of the huts. I found a fixed bedstead of
cane, curtained as if to shade its bed of grass from the
musquito, spears, charms, sticks with strange crooks,
tree-creepers, miniature idol-huts of grass, &c. These
were laid in order in the interior; but no one was
there, and we were told it was a mausoleum. ‘These,
or similar places less pretentious, might be seen on the
bare hill-sides; the latter merely square enclosures
or fences of tall reeds, which my Waganda orderlies
called “ Looaleh,” or sacred ground. Occasionally one
of their men, to amuse us, went through a strange un-
natural antic. Placing both elbows at his sides, with
the hands pointing upwards, like a position in the
dumb-bell exercise, he commenced glimmering with
his eyes, writhing the muscles of his shoulders and
back, never drawing breath, and gradually sinking to
the ground till he apparently lay dead, as if he had
worked himself into a trance, or sleep of death.
Within a radius of thirty miles from the palace
nothing is allowed to be plundered, as a number of
government annuitants reside there. It was a great


NEWS ABOUT UGANDA. oy


pleasure to get amongst them to see order once more.
Sheep, goats, and cattle were safe grazing at the road-
side—not one of my escort dared touch them. It must
have been very trying to them, for provision was
scarce, and could not be purchased. We passed some
small lakes, and the residence of the present king
when he was a youth—all was now a wilderness, but
pointed to with as great reverence as we should regard
a sacred or historical spot. When within one march
of the capital, Mariboo refused to convey me nearer
“till an order came, because all travellers remained
there a fortnight and more—it was the custom of the
country!” However, the detention was only for one
day, and on the morning of the 26th of May a dashing
party of Seedees came with their usual joyful demon-
strations, bearing a letter and a fore-quarter of goat
from my friend Speke! Cheering thought, to have
him once more so near! We now heard a great deal of
news. First, “there was no food, only boiled plantain,
in Uganda, and this could only be had by risking their
lives!’ My arrival would be celebrated by a great
deal of bloodshed. Captain Speke was a favourite
with the king, because he was not, like the Arabs,
particular about having the cattle or goats killed ac-
cording to Mohammedan rites.” This last bit of news
led me to ask Frij whether all Mohammedans ate
fish. His reply was, “They do not eat every fish—
only those that have the finger and thumb mark of God
making them lawful.” They continued: “ Baraka,
who had been sent to the north with letters for the
boats from Egypt, had been seen in Unyoro all safe,
but its king would not allow him to come to join us


vid Uganda. The ships were still at Ugani. The


218 THE AMAZON SIMILAR TO UGANDA.


Nile went to Misr (Egypt). The men and women
killed daily by a blow on the back of the head are cut
in pieces by knives made from the common reed ; the
pieces are then put into a cloth, and thrown to the
birds ; Masoongo, the head executioner, reserving for
himself all their hearts! Speke had saved the lives
of four or five people. Jf a man is seen being led
away with his hands tied in front, he is marked for
execution—if they are tied behind, he is under sen-
tence of a fine.”

We shall by-and-by see whether this gossip, brought
me by the Seedees, had any truth in it. And it may
not be uninteresting to mention here, that at a private
audience given me by his Holiness the Pope in 1864,
when I submitted to him a map of our route, explain-
ing the general configuration of the country upon the
equator, he remarked with animation, that my de-
scription tallied with what he had observed in the
country of the Amazon, where he had passed many
years of his life as a missionary,—a fact I had not
known before. ‘The Amazon is in the same parallel of
latitude as Uganda.


CHAPTER X.


UGANDA, MAY 27 TO JULY 7, 1862—-MEETING WITH CAPTAIN
SPEKE— AUDIENCE WITH THE KING OF UGANDA— THE
QUEEN'S DRAWING-ROOM—THE DETECTIVE SYSTEM—THE
EXECUTIONERS—STICK DRILL—INGENIOUS WORKMEN IN
UGANDA—A STORM.


THe day of my arrival at the Uganda capital, the
27th of May 1862, was one not only of intense joy,
but deep thankfulness. I felt that my prayers for
our safety had been heard. Speke and I had been
separated for upwards of four months, and on being
led by some of his men to the small hut he occupied,
we were so happy to be together again, and had so
much to say, that when the pages of the king burst
in with the royal mandate that his Highness must see
me “to-morrow,” we were indignant at the intrusion.
The morrow, however, came, and with it the same sharp,
intelligent boys, to say that my stool might be brought
to sit upon in the presence of the king. Accordingly,
the present of a gun and some ammunition having been
graciously received by him, at three o’clock, dressed in
my best suit—z. e., white trousers, blue flannel coat,
shepherd’s-plaid shirt, a helmet, and a red turban—I


220 MY FIRST INTERVIEW WITH MTESSA.


sallied forth with Speke and some Seedees to make
the call. It may be mentioned, as a curious custom
of the court at Uganda, that when I told Speke that I
meant to wear knickerbockers at the levee, he warned
me that I should not be considered “dressed” if any
portion of my bare leg was left exposed. ‘This cos-
tume, because my stockings were not long enough,
had therefore to be abandoned for white trousers. In
proceeding to the palace we had to make one short
descent, cross a bog, with grass thrown over it to keep
the feet from being soiled, and rise on a broad road to
the top of a hill, on which several hundred houses
were built, each surrounded with a screen of tall
reeds. ‘The outer gate, having iron bells behind it,
was slid aside, and we entered under a cord strung
with charms. Here was a wide oblong space, screened
all round; one steep-roofed house, beautifully thatched,
was the only dwelling visible. Inside its wide thresh-
old sat a single figure; and on the open space in
front a mob of bare-headed, well-dressed Africans sat,
forming a crescent, and facing “His Majesty M’tessa.”
Our approach was abruptly stopped, and we were
directed to halt. Some minutes elapsed, the court
broke up, and the mass of people ran quickly through
a wicket that had been opened. We followed, but
the doorkeeper closed the gate, and ten minutes
elapsed ere we were admitted. We next entered a
similar place, but smaller, and stood in the sun, un-
comfortable enough, till permitted to be seated on
our stools, with our hats off and umbrellas up.
M’tessa sat upon a bench of grass, with a dog behind
him. His kamaraviona (commander-in-chief) was the
only man allowed to sit at his feet; a sister and


MY FIRST INTERVIEW WITH M’TESSA. 221


several women were on his left, also seated on the
eround under the shade of the lofty cane-and-grass
building. His quick eye detected that part of my
hand had been cut of. “How did this happen?”
He no doubt fancied that some offence had been com-
mitted by me, as it was the custom of his court to
maim people by cutting off fingers, feet, or ears for
even slight offences. He spoke in whispers to his pages,
when Mariboo, the officer who had charge of me from
Karague, informed him that I had received the wound
in my hand in action; he also told him of the difh-
culties he had in bringing me to his majesty. The
people listened with the most perfect decorum, only
once interrupted by a sudden arrest. Maulah, the
chief “ detective,” observing some breach of etiquette
—probably a man speaking above his breath—sud-
denly seized the offender, and dragged him away.
The look of anguish of the miserable creature thus
apprehended was most painful. No one ventured to
show sympathy; and Maulah soon returned alone,
looking pleased and satisfied.

Conversation is never interrupted by these scenes ;
music from drums and other instruments drown any
noise made by a poor prisoner, or it 1s continued to
please the ears of those attending the levee. The
mode of testifying allegiance was curious; the mob
suddenly stood up en masse, with their long sticks
balanced in the air, and charged towards the threshold
several times, with shouts of praise for their king,
who made no acknowledgment. The court broke up,
after an hour, by the king walking away on tiptoe,
with the most ludicrous swagger, through a screen
leading into another enclosure. The doors were


222 MTESSA, THE KING OF UGANDA.


opened and shut by men, who watched every move-
ment of the king, for fear they should be discovered
off the alert, and punished according to his caprice.
A short time afterwards, a third scene was prepared
for us. On entering the courtyard, M’tessa leant in
a studied, affected attitude against the portico; about
two hundred women sat on the ground on one side,
and we were told to bring our chairs to within twenty
yards of him, facing the women. No men except our
Seedee interpreters were present. The remarks of the
ereat potentate, who regarded us with a kindly sur-
prised air, were confined to his favourite women, and
seemed to be concerning our appearance. After a
time, the thought seemed to strike him that we all
ought to remove to some more shaded place. This
was the only sensible thing he had done. Making us
draw our stools close to the iron chair on which he
sat, the conversation turned upon sport, our expedi-
tion, &c. A woman ran to fetch the oun he had that
day been presented with; two others held spears
beautifully polished. He signalled that I was to
show my head uncovered to the ladies; a titter fol-
lowed, and all of us laughed heartily. Another signal,
and I was told to place my hat on; this made us all
feel less restraint; and the women were not afraid to
return our smiles at the ridiculous formality of the
scene. As the sun was approaching the horizon, this
“ drawing-room” was ended by M’tessa walking away,
leaving us to reflect on the strange events of the day.
He was a tall, well-built young fellow, sprightly in
manner, very vain, his woolly hair dressed with the
oreatest care; small head, remarkably prominent
clever-looking clear eyes, good teeth, and long


WOMEN SENT TO EXECUTION. 223


nails to his hands and feet; the instep of the latter
was, as in most of the Waganda, highly arched,
indicating a well-moulded sinewy leg. His bark-
cloth “toga” had not a speck upon it, and was neatly
knotted over the right shoulder, concealing his whole
body. His ornaments of beads were made with great
taste in the choice of colours ; the most minute beads
of white, blue, and brown were made into rings and
rosettes, which he wore round his neck and arms.
Each finger had upon it a ring of brass; on the third
finger of the left hand he wore a gold ring, given him
by Speke ; with these he played while sitting at his
levees, occasionally receiving a golden-coloured gourd-
cup of wine from a maid of honour sitting by his
side ; after each sip, a napkin of bark-cloth was used
by him to wipe his mouth. ‘The only unseemly vul-
garity he was guilty of while on his throne was to use
his napkin to rub away the perspiration from his per-
son. On leaving the court, and getting outside the
last gate of the palace, a woman’s screams made us
look back ; a cord was tied round her wrist, and a
man dragged her, almost naked, down the hill to
be executed; she screamed “ N’yawoh! n’yawoh !”
(Mother! mother!) in the most bitter anguish, A
second, similarly tied, followed slowly, but not utter-
ing a sound. A shudder of horror crept over me.
Had we been the cause of this calamity? and could
the young prince with whom we had conversed so
pleasantly have had the heart to order the poor
women to be put to death ?

The road to our hut was crowded by files of men
dressed as “ Neptunes,” in tattered leaves of plantain,
their limbs coloured with ashes and vermilion, and


224. KINGS BROTHERS IN CHAINS.


girdles of long-haired goatskin (from Usoga) hanging
from their backs and waists. Daily these wild-looking
creatures shouted and rushed with all their might
along the roads, spears and shields being held high in
the air; they were M’tessa’s men preparing and drill-
ing for a slave-hunting campaign. ‘The day after my
first visit to the king, he came to return the call
without giving us any warning. We heard a noisy
crowd passing outside our enclosure, and immediately,
through the fence, came the young king in a tre-
mendous hurry. He was not the puppet of yesterday,
but dressed, like a negro sailor, in an open coat of
bed-curtain chintz, loose white trousers or “ pyjamas,”
having a broad stripe of scarlet; his feet and head
were naked. He was shown into an iron chair, and
seeing some books he turned over their pages as a
monkey would; asked to see the picture of Rumanika,
and said he would lke to know when his own portrait
was to be done. His brothers, a mob of little raga-
muffins, several in handcuffs, sat behind him chat-
tering very familiarly, and tearing all the while at
sugar-cane. I was told to show them my hair by
taking off my hat. We were asked if we did not
admire the leather wideawake made by one of the
brothers ?—and the vulture, the dove, and the horn-bill
his highness had just shot? ‘This scene over, the king
rose, ordered Speke to follow him, and, led by the
mob of brothers, all rushed madly away. On follow-
ing them, the chained lads, escorted by two servants,
were very much in the rear, and hobbled along, poor
little fellows, in perfect good-humour, looking as
strong, healthy, and contented as any of the others.
It was said that the king, before coming to the throne,


INTERVIEW WITH THE MOTHER OF THE KING. 225


always went about in irons, as his small brothers now
do. Where could they have got this custom? Wish-
ing to know what had become of Speke, I went in
search of him, and found on the way a flight of pages
—there is no other name for it, as they always go at
full speed, their robes flying, when serving the king.
They were going with torches to hght his highness
home; but they knew not what route he had taken.
It afterwards appeared that he had entered a house to
dine upon boiled beef and wine, a share of which he
offered to Speke; then, taking a suit of clothes out
of the tin box he had got from us, and which was
carried to this picnic, he cast aside his torn and dirty
suit for another, and went home by torchlight and
drums.

My introduction to the king’s mother took place
on the Ist of June. Captam Speke and myself
went with five or six Seedees carrying pads of grass
(stools not being permitted), with our gourds of
pombé, our sucking-reeds, and umbrellas. The-dow-
ager lady had been informed of our intention, but
took her time as to seeing us. Walking over one hill
to the top of another, in three-quarters of an hour we
were at her royal highness’s gate. On getting as far
as the second courtyard, we were told to wait, with
the other visitors, in the drum or ante-house. Here
for an hour we were left to smoke, drink, and doze.
A musical instrument in the place was new to me—a
harmonicon of twelve blocks of wood, which, on being
struck, gave out notes as glasses do when played.
They rested upon the trunks of plantain, and were
isolated from each other by thin reeds. We took our
hats off on approaching the old lady, who laughed

P


236 CONDESCENSION OF HER MAJESTY.


most heartily, and welcomed us with great cordiality,
telling us to sit in front of and near her. She seemed
to me like a Tartar woman, being fair-skinned, stout,
and short. Her head was shaved, and had a cord tied
round it. Conversation was kept up briskly for an
hour or so, during which she fondled in her lap a
plaything the size and shape of a hedgehog, studded
with cowries and beads. She sipped at wine, looked
at herself in a small mirror, smoked, and, like any
housewife at home, gave orders to her domestics.
Quantities of plantain neatly tied up and arranged
in line, several basketfuls of boiled beef also tied
round with leaves, were laid out as a present for
Mariboo and myself. Each basket of beef was tasted
by one of her officers tearing a bit away with his
teeth, and we took our leave, very much pleased with
her good-humour and homeliness. Many other calls
were made upon her by invitation; but although we
sat waiting the dowager for hours amongst steaming
natives, she did not always give us an interview, saying
she was too busy or too tired. Her brother, Katoon-
zee, an officer of high rank, and with a most distingué
Uganda air, pointing his toes and showing off his
high instep as he walked, was treated with as much
ceremony as ourselves, generally being obliged to sit so
far distant from her that he had to bawl out to make
himself heard. However, the dowager would allow
him to whisper jokes into her ear, and be familiar
enough when few were present. Any wine intended
for us her majesty always tasted before it was pre-
sented. This was a condescension on her part not
shown to every one.

The people of Uganda require to have the permis-


SPEKES INFLUENCE AT COURT. 2


sion of an officer before the barber can use his razor.
The women seen about the queen’s residence had no
hair, neither had she; all were shaved, and only a
few in M’'tessa’s court were allowed to dress their
hair in the same aristocratic fashion as the king.
One of these women, in the bloom of youth, we one
day saw led to execution. She was the fourth female
victim that had passed that day. Her back was
covered with scars, and blood appeared on her neck.
She wept bitterly. Notwithstanding this circum-
stance, when we went and had an interview with the
king, we found him as gay and cheerful as ever. His
detective Maulah lived next hut to ours, and the shrieks
of poor people, night and day, were quite heartrend-
ing. Not only were their cries heard, but each lash
of the stick was distinct; and being in such close
proximity to the place of torture was a severe trial.
When Maulah captures women, they are asked, “ Will
you live with so and so?” if they object, the rod is
applied, and consent in this way is forced upon
them. He and other chief officers were very jealous
of Speke’s influence with the king, for they knew he
could at times obtain an interview, while they had to
wait for days. On seeing us return from the palace,
Maulah would inquire, “Have you seen the king?”
and when we wished for an interview, and asked how
it could be brought about, he would coarsely reply,
“Are you kings, that you always expect to be re-
ceived?” Certainly our influence had a most bene-
ficial effect. Not only did Speke save the lives of
many, but men about court got him to intercede
with the king on several occasions. The executioner
Konzah had a favourite son, who was under sentence.


228 THE KINGS LOVE FOR SPORT.


The boy, through Speke’s intercession, was pardoned,
and it was thought he would never again be punished;
but on Bombay asking this high functionary “how
the son was ; had anything more been said of it?” the
father rephed, “My boy was killed yesterday for
another offence.” A child-page whom we took an
interest in, and whom Speke had dressed up very
gaily, named Loogohie (or cloth), got into a dreadful
scrape one day for coughing while the king was at
dinner. It was thought his little ears would have
been cut off, and he laughed very much when he found
he had escaped, but he did not expect to live long, as
he was always getting into hot water. On my asking
what the king had killed when out shooting, Loogohie’s
reply was that, “As his highness could not get any
game to shoot at, he shot down many people.”

The king had become so fond of the gun, that, like
a young sportsman, he seemed to dream of it. In the
early morning his gun or the rattle of the diminutive
drums which always accompanied his movements was
heard. Interviews were difficult; his whole time was
occupied. He had received so many presents from
us, he had made so many promises to open the road,
and his pages had stolen for him so much of our
ammunition, that he at last was ashamed of himself,
and suddenly permitted us to leave. For several days
neither of us could visit him, being unwell, but Bom-
bay, by showing some pictures to his servants, conveyed
such accounts of us that communication was some-
times obtained. In a book he had received from
Rumanika, ‘Kafr Laws, his highness wished all
the birds he had shot to be painted in imitation of
our sketch-books. His pages pestered us, and became


NO COINAGE IN THE COUNTRY. 229


bold and insolent, walking mto our hut, taking up
anything they saw to examine it, or coming with the
kino’s orders that our very beds, chairs, guns, shoes,
&c., were wanted by the king, and saying there must
be no delay about sending them. The union -jack
which we had got from Admiral Keppel was also de-
manded. All these indignities, added to the brutal
treatment of the women, made us feel that Uganda
was not the “garden of pleasure” we had heard it
called, and that the conduct of the king was a worse
form of plundering than we had experienced in the
Ugogo and southern territories. Here, by robbing us
of our ammunition, they had placed us in a defence-
less position; and though we did not want their
offered hundreds of women and hundreds of cattle, it
induced our Seedees to become mutinous, saying, “ Al-
though you don’t take them, we will, for as yet we
have received nothing but broken bones for the 2000
dollars’ worth of property given to M’tessa.” They
refused to march with us until they obtained sufficient
ball-cartridge. ‘This occurred just previous to our de-
parture, up to which time our men had been gathering
a precarious existence from what could be plundered
from the gardens.

No beads were allowed to be taken here by the na-
tives, although privately they would always pur-
chase sufficient provision for ourselves and men.
Cowries were a more current coin, one hundred of
these shells making one string = a bunch of a hundred
plantain=the skin of a goat; and a single large gourd-
ful of wine cost a sheet of bark-cloth. We fortunately
received goats now and then from the king, and sweet
potatoes from one of the gardeners in exchange for


230 THE PUBLIC EXECUTIONERS.


beads. There was no flour nor milk used in the coun-
try, the natives living entirely upon plantain boiled,
or made into wine, which they called “m’wengé.”
There was very little drunkenness visible. Cattle
were rarely seen: the hills all round were such a mass
of tall reeds and grasses that they could not penetrate
them ; even a dog would have had difficulty in hunt-
ing through these thickets. Pleasant walks were cut
through them, and kept from being grown over by
the constant transit of slave parties. Katoonzee re-
turned from one of these during my stay at Uganda.
He had captured 130 women, chiefly old, and only fit
for weeding the fields. Some few, fitted for wives,
stood apart, to be given away to men thought deserv-
ing, or whose services were to be rewarded. Hach
woman of this class was worth three cows. An in-
stance occurred of the king having given a single
slave to one of his officers for some service performed,
and the man being bold enough to ask for another,
was cut to pieces with the usual reed knife. His
limbs were carried away openly, while the trunk was
wrapped in a cloth. ‘There were several executioners,
men of rank, who were the privy councillors of the
king. These men had numbers of followers, dis-
tinguished by wearing their mark of office—a short
turban of cord—and sometimes carrying a peculiarly-
shaped bludgeon. Konzah has been mentioned ; an-
other, named Oozoongoo, was always carried to court
in a litter, being an invalid. On meeting him, he
would stop to speak, and in expression had nothing
repulsive ; but when seen with a wreath of black
fringe encircling his head, hiding his eyes, and hang-


ing down to near his mouth, his appearance was com-


STICK PARADE. 231


pletely changed, and he reminded one of a black
Highland bull looking fiercely through his forelock.
Both these executioners were really polite men,
always frank when met at the palace—much more so
than the kamaraviona (commander-in-chief), who was
a proud, haughty young fellow. One day I had the
curiosity to follow a poor woman who was led by a
boy to be killed. She carried a small hoe, balanced
upon her head. No one told me she was under sen-
tence, but the cord on the wrist was sufficient ; and
after travelling for half a mile, I followed her down to
the executioner’s gardens. Waiting outside for some
time, not a sound was heard, nor a person seen. A
lazy, yellow-beaked vulture, the cannibal of Uganda,
sat perched on the stump of a broken tree; others
hovered high overhead, looking on the scene below.
This circumstantial evidence was enough for me, and
I returned.

One of the sights at the capital of Uganda was to
watch the crowds of men on the highroad leading to
the palace ; all were under officers, perhaps a hundred
in one party. If wood is carried into the palace up
the hill, it must be done as neatly as a regiment per-
forms a manceuvre on parade, and with the same
precision. After the logs are carried a certain distance,
the men charge up hill, with walking-sticks at the
“slope,” to the sound of the drum, shouting and chorus-
sing. On reaching their officer, they drop on their
knees to salute, by saying repeatedly in one voice the
word “n’yans” (thanks). Then they go back, charg-
ing down hill, stooping simultaneously to pick up the
wood, till, step by step—it taking several hours—the
neatly-cut logs are regularly stacked in the palace


232 YOUNG GIRLS PRESENTED TO THE KING.


yards. Hach officer of a district would seem to have
a different mode of drill. The Wazeewah, with long
sticks, were remarkably well disciplined, shouting and
marching all in regular time, every club going through
the same movement, the most attractive part of the
drill being when all crouched simultaneously, and then
advanced in open ranks, swinging their bodies to the
roll of their drums.

At every new moon M’tessa went through an exami-
nation of his idol horns; but I should not suppose
him to be much of an augur: he was too light-headed
and fond of field-sports, of boating, swimming, and
music, to give much attention to making rain, &c.
He left all these things to the Witchwezee race who
were about him, and seldom denied himself to visitors
at the time of new moon. On the very day that four
of his women were going to execution, at an audience
given to ourselves and in our presence, some maidens
were offered for his harem. He had detained us in
an outer court for a long time, and probably brought
us in to enjoy our surprise at the poor naked offerings.
Each held by the upper corners an open napkin in
front of her, and all were smeared with grease and
decorated with girdles and necklaces of beads. After
being reviewed without a smile, they were told to face
to the right, and march to the “zenana.” As was
customary, the king then sat on the knees of the
matron-like woman who had presented the maidens,
and, having ordered all away but ourselves, the inter-
preters, and some young lads, a conversation began
about men and women in general. It is, however,
worthy of remark, that M’tessa never behaved in-
decently by word or deed while women were present ;


THE DRESS OF THE WAGANDA. 233


his language was uniformly correct. On his com-
plaining of sickness, medicine was brought him by a
page, one of our men having first to taste it. In all
probability the page was made to swallow the pull
instead of the king! He and all his people were less
suspicious of us than of any traders; our presents
were received without the usual form of preparation ;
whereas, when Dr Kiengo, the native of Unyamuezi,
gave his offering of five giraffe tails, a mould of Kittara
copper, &c., all were dipped into plantain wine or
“m’wengé,” which had to be drunk by the Doctor to
show there was no impurity connected with the pre-
sents. A pill, having great virtues, was licked all
over for the same reason by Kiengo.

The ingenuity of the Waganda in imitating our
chairs, mode of walking, dress, gun-covers, &c., was
very striking. Having seen so many of our pictures,
they at last took to drawing figures of men in black
upon their bark-cloths.

At light work they are highly ingenious. Their
spears, knives, drums, shields, ornaments, houses, &c.,
are made with great taste and exactness. Their bark-
cloths are cut from several varieties of ficus, beaten
upon a log with a mill-headed wooden hammer, and
sewn beautifully together into large shawls, ranging
in uniform tint from salmon-colour or maize to a brick
red. These are very becoming on an African skin,
and when worn by our Seedees as a turban, the har-
mony of colour was pleasing. Our men in Uganda
could not be distinguished at a distance from the
natives ; for their Zanzibar clothes bemg worn out,
they dressed like them in bark-cloths, or the skins of
cattle and antelope prepared by leaving on the hair.


234 THE FOOD AND CLIMATE OF UGANDA.


The skins of small antelope, made white and soft as
kid, are put together so well that the sewing with
banana or aloe fibre is scarcely observed. They have
not attained the art of the brazier. The habits of the
people are so simple, that the fresh green leaf of the
banana serves them as a plate. Wine they drink out
of a corner of their cow-skin coverings ; shoes, hats,
and gloves they have not yet obtained; and a strip
from a reed is their knife, as we have often seen when
the palace guards were at their excellent meal of good
boiled beef, mashed plantain, and wine. ‘Their dinner
was a strange good-humoured scramble, the strongest
keeping meat from the weakest by snatching it away
or tossing it about. They are excellent cooks, cutting
butcher-meat up into very neat joints, wrapping them
with fresh plantain leaves, and boiling all in a large
earthen pot full of plantain, to which, by this process,
a rich flavour is added. Our Seedees missed many
a good dinner by not partaking of this fare, on
account of their profession as Mussulmans. They
could not eat plantain that had been boiled with
unlawful meat.

Lightning was said to be very much dreaded at
Uganda, but no cases of death occurred from it during
our stay. One of the king’s houses was burnt down,
the accident causing a great commotion, because on
the occurrence of such a calamity it is every one’s
duty to render aid. We did not call that day (the
30th June), because an interview would have been
impossible. The storm had commenced by rain at
1 p.m.; during a lull we had thunder, lightning, and
hail; by 5 p.m. all had cleared away, and .82 inch
of rain had fallen. During June, misty showers fell


THE CLIMATE OF UGANDA. 235


almost every day, but not enough to measure in a
rain-gauge. The valleys were veiled every morning
by a dense fog, and very often we had no sun the
whole day. ‘The heaviest shower noted was in the
following month of July (4th), when 1.04 inches were
measured.


CHAP Mie CE


UGANDA TO UNYORO CAPITAL, 7TH JULY TILL 9TH SEPTEMBER
1862——FIRST STAGE, CAMPS UNITED, UGANDA TO KAREE—THE
CATTLE AND SPORT OF THE COUNTRY—ONE OF THE SEEDEES
KILLED BY THE NATIVES—BUDJA, THE CHIEF NATIVE OFFI-
CER——-MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS—CAPTAIN SPEKE PROCEEDS
TO THE LAKE NYANZA—-ANTELOPE-SHOOTING——-DIFFICULTIES
IN THE WAY OF THE AUTHOR'S ADVANCE—SPEKE RETURNS,
AND THE CAMPS ARE UNITED — ELEPHANT-HUNT IN UN-
YORO.


ALTHOUGH the distance from Uganda to Unyoro by
a direct route was reported not much above eighty
miles, we were not confident of the fact. The marches
given by the natives can seldom be depended upon.
A. Mganda without a load will march the whole
day, stopping at every hut where he can get any-
thing to eat or drink. A laden Seedee thinks six
miles, or even less, a day’s work. How, therefore,
could we anticipate that Unyoro was so near to us as
eighty miles? ‘The journey may be divided into three
sections: the first, from Uganda to Karee, when
Speke and I travelled together; the second, when
Speke tried the water route and I the land; the third,


WE MARCH TOWARDS UNYORO. 23.


when we joined our forces and marched into Unyoro
headquarters.


I. Ucanpa To KAREE, FOUR MARCHES; CAMPS
UNITED.

The country at first was hilly. As we proceeded
north, it gradually assumed the appearance of parks
and grazing grounds, dotted with trees and clumps of
bushes, favourable for stalking. Water was abundant
in the sandy-bottomed streams and miry swamps.
With this change of outline, we had no longer the
gigantic reed of Uganda; it was replaced by a waving
grass three feet high. ‘The trees were small, the same
as those species met with 5° south of the equator.
Scarcely one-tenth part of the route was under culti-
vation. Plantain groves were more abundant than
fields of sessamum and Indian corn; and in the houses
we occupied, bundles of seeroko and jooggo (a pulse
and bean) were found. It was a disagreeable march
in one respect ; for as soon as our caravan halted at a
orove, the cultivators fled, and when we entered their
houses we found the fire burning, with earthen pots,
grain, and vegetables, and their beds and bark-cloth
bedding undisturbed. All the etceteras about their
snug little domiciles lay at the mercy of our men.
Knives, shields, shells, beads, skins, pipes, tobacco, &c.,
hung from the roof, or were stuck into the rafters ;
and, on our leaving, it was not a rare occurrence to
find that our men had ruthlessly burnt some of the
supports of the hut to make themselves a fire to
cook their food. This they would do most wantonly,
although they had the best of the country, paying no-
thing for the plundered goats and other property per-


238 THE CATTLE OF THE COUNTRY.


mitted to be taken by M'tessa. The dwellings were
not different from those already described, but each
had over its doorway a diamond-shaped charm of rush,
hung horizontally, and generally stuck with feathers.
The cattle seen in the low grazing country were
almost “prize” animals. They were made hornless
when young—not by sawing off the horns of grown-
up animals, as still barbarously practised in Scotland,
but by searing with a hot iron. They were most
docile, handsome creatures. The general colour was
orey, their faces and inside the ears black ; they had
little or no hump, and were larger in bulk than an
Ayrshire cow. The cowherds were the lanky Wa-
huma, called here Waheema, who might be seen
tending herds of several hundreds at a time. These
people were never afraid to come out and look at
our caravan, even when it passed their ring fences
in a secluded tract of country several miles away
from any cultivation. The Waganda, on the con-
trary, on meeting us, would fly off the road, leaving
whatever they might be carrying to be plundered by
our followers. This difference in the two races is ac-
counted for by the Wahuma never being made slaves,
although their women are very much prized for their
beauty as wives. M’tessa had given orders that we
and our escort were to receive sixty cattle and ten
loads of butter. Half-a-dozen cattle were first brought
as an offermg. ‘Those made over to our Waganda dis-
appeared the first night, and as ours, having been tied
up, were all safe, we were called magicians. When
the number was completed, our share was marked by
squaring their tails, so as to distinguish them from
those taken by the Waganda. During the night they


TRAPS FOR LIONS. 239


were placed within a fence made to surround the only
door of a hut occupied by a M’nyamuezee, Manua,
who constituted himself their guardian. On receiving
an order to slaughter one, our table-knives were called
into requisition because the common country knife
had no guard to it, and was not considered lawful.
The Seedees, though knowing nothing of the Moham-
medan religion, the majority not bemg circumcised,
were much more particular on those occasions, and
offered more opinions than a “moulvie,” or Mussul-
man priest, would. “The animal must le facing a
proper direction ;” “a certain man must officiate,” &e.

The tracks of elephants and buffalo were numerous,
but none of the animals were seen; neither did we
shoot any lions, but we heard them at night. It was
not a roar, neither was it the sound a lion makes in a
menagerie; at the time I considered it to be no more
alarming, even to a novice, than if one were to blow
through a cow’s horn. Two zebra were shot by Speke,
and eaten by the Waganda escort, and the skins, being
the property of royalty, were simply left in a hut, the
proprietor of which was bound to have them conveyed
to the palace. allah, hartebeest, and other antelope
were seen or shot, and might have been hunted on
horseback at certain seasons. The nyjezza, whose
horns curved over the brow, was new to us. None of
these animals were ever seen in herds; a dozen to-
gether would be considered a large number. As it was
also a great cattle country, the natives tried to trap
the lion by means of a number of logs raised high on
end. When the animal came under them for the bait
of a live goat, all the logs, guided by piles on either
side, fell in a mass, crushing him, somewhat after the


240 INGENIOUS FOOT-TRAP.


fashion of the triangle of sticks and stones adopted in
the Himalayas to kill tigers, leopards, or bears. Never
having seen the contrivance in this form, my curiosity
was raised to enter; luckily some Seedees called out
in time to tell me of my danger. Three of our cows
were less fortunate ; one was killed, becoming food for
our Waganda escort, because the Seedees would not
touch it, and two were dragged from under the logs
much bruised. The natives were eager sportsmen,
netting the smallest or largest antelope, which they ate
or conveyed alive to their king. Nets were made of
beautiful soft and strong fibre, from the aloe generally.

A most simple, ingenious foot-trap for wild buffalo
we observed here for the first time. It was set gener-
ally at salt-licks, where these animals were known to
scratch the ground, and consisted of two small circles
of wood, placed immediately one over the other; be-
tween them a quantity of stout acacia thorns pointed
to a common centre; all were lashed strongly toge-
ther, and the trap, when completed, was several inches
larger than a buffalo’s foot. This was fitted over a
hole made in the ground, and a noose (attached to a
block of wood) laid over it, and concealed with earth.
On the buffalo putting his foot upon it, the trap fastens,
and the more he struggles the tighter the noose be-
comes. The former king of Uganda was said to have
kept a large menagerie of animals caught in this way.

Birds were not numerous; the cannibal vulture of
Uganda, now that we had left the capital, was a rare
bird. Guinea-fowl and florikan were the only game-
birds observed, the grass being too tall to discover
partridge, &c. An owl of very handsome plumage,
weighing six pounds, was shot. A graceful bird on


FIRE IN CAMP. 241


the wing—a new goatsucker—with a single feather of
each wing twice his own length, and since named
Cosmetorms Speku, skimmed amongst the plantain
trees at night. These long feathers probably sweep
up flies as they float behind him.

Fish were not to be had on this route, although
eruives or basket-traps, the shape of an Heyptian
water-jar, and made of flags or papyrus, were con-
stantly found in the houses of the people. The way
of placing them was as follows :—Two long parallel
ditches, six feet apart, were cut in aswamp; here and
there their waters were made to communicate. At
these points the baskets were laid on their sides, and
the fish driven into them, whence there was no escape.

While detained at Karee receiving a portion of the
cattle ordered to be given us by the king, we had
several exhibitions of the temper of the people. As
was customary, we took possession of their houses, and
dwelt in them for eight days. This so exasperated
them, that, on our Seedees going to fetch water, or
leaving camp, they were threatened; a spear was
thrown, and one of our men, named Karee, was killed.
No redress could be obtained till the king had been
communicated with. His reply was, “ Allow it to
pass over for the present, and when the villagers have
returned to their houses I will send a party to seize
them all.” The night previous to our leaving, two
huts occupied by Seedees were set on fire—the natives
throwing in a bunch of burning straw at the doorway.
Keress through the flames was impossible ; but, having
secured their guns, they cut their way through the
side of the hut, losing a bayonet and their bark-cloths.
Precautions were taken against any further alarm;

Q


242 THE ARMS OF THE WAGANDA.


and, on leaving in the morning, after they had fired
the hut, our Waganda escort took a delight in burn-
ing down all the houses they had occupied. The
spear that had been thrown at our men was brought
in as a trophy; its handle was 7 feet long, having a
blade of 16 inches. This is the size of the common
Waganda spear; and one wonders that they ever
throw it, as you can always see it coming, and get out
of its way. With guns unloaded, no ordinary Seedee
would have a chance with a Meanda, his move-
ments through the tall grass are so rapid. Our men
got to know this after the death of poor Karee, who
had been the spokesman of the camp. He was a
tailor by trade, and had made several suits, after
English and Arab patterns, for the king, who never
paid him his bill—namely, four cows. His body was
buried by moonlight, in a grave dug with bayonets,—
the men remarking that they never saw such a march
as ours was, we did not even carry a hoe. The truth
was, they had lost or thrown away all our pioneer
implements. The men were very crestfallen on the
night of this death, the younger Seedees being afraid
to carry the body, and the older remarking, “Suffr
maqueesha,” “Oh, the march is now done for.”

The villagers had a dread of keeping anything left
behind by our men. An old bit of calico was brought
us by a woman, accompanied by two servant-girls
carrying m’wengé and plantain for us. She sympa-
thised in our loss of Karee, and, having accepted a
present of beads, thanked us in the most gentle way
by moving her hands and slowly repeating in a soft
low tone the word “n’yans,” thanks. Her attendants
then fell upon their knees, and bashfully, with down-


NATIVE TOBACCO. 243


cast eyes, went through the same form of acknowledg-
ment. Another instance of the honesty of the people
may be mentioned. Manua, the cowherd, wished to
return to the last camp for a cloth he had forgotten.
On telling him that it would be brought to him, he
hesitated, but the wild strains of a tambira were
heard approaching the camp, and the rag was pro-
duced by the party, along with a gourd of wine for
the Mazoongoo. In this case the instrument was
played as a token of truce, to show that the arrivals
were friendly. On the other hand, the natives often be-
trayed fear. If afew huts were passed by us while out
shooting, first the children, then the women, and after-
wards the men, armed, would fly from their houses,
and conceal themselves in the plantain groves. This
order was invariably observed—the children were the
first care of the parents. Once, on calling to some
men running away, a single man came up and sat by
us; others became equally bold, and did so also, till a
mob gathered round us, and the women returned to
their several vocations in and out of the houses. To
test their hospitality, | asked for as much tobacco as
would fill my pipe. A handful was given me with
the greatest readiness. It was like the coarsest-
orained black tea in appearance and consistence ; and,
after obtaining information about the game to be pro-
cured in the country, we parted excellent friends—so
much so that the day following they paid me a visit
at my hut, and brought me some more tobacco, for
which they received a present of beads.

Budja, the chief officer or M’koongoo, whom the
king had sent in charge to deliver us over to the king
of Unyoro, was a very handsome, intelligent man,


244 BUDJA, A KING'S OFFICER.


clean in his dress, and never sitting down unless a
carpet of cowskin was laid for him by one of his
attendant boys. Like all his race, he was impetuous ;
if sent for, he would come leisurely with the haughty
airs of M’tessa, sit for a moment, pretend to listen to
what was said, and before any business about the
march could be negotiated, would rise abruptly, mak-
ing some silly excuse, that the cattle must be looked
after, &c., and then disappear. He travelled with
three wives—tall, fair women—and about twenty
young lads, who anticipated his every wish. One
amongst them always looked after the ladies, whether
on the march or in camp; another had both ears and
fingers cut off for adultery. These men without ears
had a very curious appearance—one old man in par-
ticular, his head looking like a barber’s block, with
black holes bored in it; not a fragment of the external
ear was left. Whether the operation ultimately affected
their hearing we could not ascertain, but apparently
it did not; they had the sharp look of pug dogs.
As Budja and party will accompany me into Unyoro
while Speke goes to look at the exit of the Nile from
the lake, his name will appear often in this chapter.
He was a great authority on the road, being the
mediator between the kings of Uganda and Unyoro.
On asking him what relation a certain man was to the
queen-dowager of Uganda, he replied by placing his
left hand on his own right shoulder, thereby signifying
that they were full brother and sister. I had never
before seen any race that adopted this mode of ex-
pression, and it would imply that they, lke ourselves,
think the right hand of more importance than the left.
Budja, however, could use either hand equally well.


MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. 245


On his arm he carried a reed-whistle three inches long,
but it seemed to be more for ornament than use.

In Uganda were both wind and stringed musical
instruments, and the natives excelled in whatever they
attempted. Night and day, in the palace precincts,
the sound of drums was heard from the hill-sides.
Every officer who commanded fifty men was allowed
a kettle-drum. These were neatly made of wood, and
when carried were slung on the back by shoulder-
straps ; the short drumsticks were stuck in loops out-
side, and a loose cover protected them from sun and
rain. Hach party of men had its regimental drum-
call. Budja’s was a certain number of taps in quick
time, which we all soon got to distinguish from any
other. But none sounded such a loud tenor “ doogoo,
doogoo, doogoo,” as the king’s small drums when he
was out for the day. They were beaten so as to make
the sounds swell from double piano to forte, and vice
versa. At all levees bands of reed and bugle players
attended, and also danced. The reeds, held lke
flaveolets, were never without decorations of blue,
white, and scarlet beads, with hair at their lower ends,
and they sounded sweet and pleasing. Sometimes an
enormous kettle-drum, slung over a stout Waganda’s
neck and shoulder, was allowed to join the wind in-
struments. It was profusely decorated with shells,
beads, brass bells, bouquets of long goat’s hair, &e.,
and beaten by single taps, the drummer throwing back
his head and body, and giving a deep long “ Bah !”
after each tap. The harmonicon has been mentioned,
also the stringed “nanga” or tambira, their most
elegant instrument, looking, while laid in the lap to be
played, like a harp in miniature. The queen generally


246 OUR CAMPS DIVIDE.


had a blind musician performing on the harp, and the
king was most expert at all these instruments, sitting
for hours playing or listening to others. There was
not much singing among the Waganda, though a
ereat deal of instrumental music. During the march
they sang in a quivering voice, slurring the notes and
words in an odd manner, only heard in Uganda. They
could all whistle through their fingers, and snapped
them curiously when wanting to speak with emphasis.

On parting with M’tessa, he gave rather indefinite
orders to Budja, who was in charge of our march, to
take us to the exit of the Nile from Victoria Nyanza,
nearly east of his residence. This route was not ad-
hered to by Budja, and for four days, in the most
obstinate manner, he led us more north than east.
Having got so far out of the line, it became a question
whether it was really of importance to visit this point.
Speke did not see any great advantage in it, and many
would have been of the same opinion, because we had
seen the lake daily from above our quarters at Uganda,
and knew, from all accounts, that after making a few
more miles we should come upon an immense river,
with which we were now running parallel. However,
in order to avoid any reproach or charge of indifference
at home, we resolved—Budja being overruled—to see
the river issue from the lake, and thus leave nothing
undone. Speke asked me whether I was able to make
a flying march of it along with him, while the baggage
might be sent on towards Unyoro. At that time I
was positively unable to walk twenty miles a-day, espe-
cially miles of Uganda marching, through bogs and
over rough ground. I therefore yielded reluctantly
to the necessity of our parting; and I am anxious to


OUR CAMPS DIVIDE. 247


be explicit on this point, as some have hastily inferred
that my companion did not wish me to share in the
oratification of seeing the river. Nothing could be
more contrary to fact. My state of health alone pre-
vented me from accompanying Speke to set at rest
for geographers the latitude of the interesting locality,
as to which we were perfectly satisfied from native
report.


II. CAMPS SEPARATED, FROM JULY 19 TILL AUGUST
19,

On the 19th July Speke left with a hght equipment
for what he afterwards named the “ Ripon Falls,”
where the Victoria Nyanza discharges itself to form
the main waters of the White Nile. He intended to
have jomed me at the headquarters of Unyoro by pro-
ceeding there by boat, but was repulsed im the attempt.
Budja, the majority of the Seedees, the baggage, and
myself, struck away in the opposite direction towards
the capital of Unyoro. The chief incidents of the
first few days’ marching have been embodied in the
previous part of this chapter. But I will now, to vary
the narrative, give the events as they occurred daily
during Speke’s absence.

22d July—Marched N.N.W. through nothing but
meadows of tall grass from 7.30 till 10 a.m, seven
miles—from cultivation to cultivation. Rain during
the night. The district is in charge of the queen of
Uganda’s brother. During the march a large black
animal, looking back at us, glancing in the side way
that an elephant does, ran fearlessly past some huts
occupied by Wahuma in charge of cattle. No one
turned out to give chase or showed much alarm; on


248 CORPORAL PUNISHMENT IN CAMP.


this account I fancied that elephants are not uncom-
mon in these parts. Manua, who has charge of our
cattle, came crying, and bleeding from a jagged cut on
the back of his head. <A Seedee, twice his size, had
struck him with a bludgeon for refusing to give up his
hut. The offender, who generally was well-behaved,
expressed great penitence. The truth of the story
could not be arrived at; and after threatening the
Seedee with confinement in irons (which we hadn’t),
all seemed satisfied except Manua, who could not
brook the insult of having been taunted for being
“only an Unyamuezi.” Blubbermg most bitterly, he
said, “It is not the wound that pains me, but here,
here,” violently beating his heart. Poor little fellow!
he felt his honour at stake, and swore he would take
the other’s life; but nothing further occurred.

We were to receive the remainder of our present
of cows from M’tessa at this ground, which is on the
borders of Uganda. Some cows are brought, but
Budja pronounces them no better than goat. A  par-
ticular favourite of mine, Ooreymengo, the goat-boy,
reported having seen a herd of Waganda villagers
sweep away all our goats. I ordered an armed party
of men to proceed in pursuit. Half an hour after-
wards our goats were discovered grazing close by
camp ; no one had stolen them—the boy had invented
the story because he could not find them! He was
sentenced to receive twenty lashes, having lost three
goats for us some time before. On his hearing my
order, he exclaimed, “I don’t want to be flogged ;” but
Mabruk tied him to a tree and gave it him well with
a long switch. On asking the latter, whose duty it
also was to keep count of the cattle, how many cows


WAGANDA MODE OF COOKING. 249


were now left, he took a half-inch rope which he wore
on his head as a turban, and told me to count the
knots upon it; “Chumsa-thillatheen ”—35—all right.

23d— Halt. Budja, on seeing the baggage packed
for a march, says that if I go without receiving the
complement of cattle, his king will lall him for not
obeying orders. One of the women of camp being
unwell, this is also brought forward as an excuse for
halting. The district officer pays me a pleasant visit,
and afterwards sends a gourd full of m’wengé. Went
shooting from 9 till 12, wading up to the knees
through bogs after elephant or buffalo (Bogo): plenty
of their spoor, and several large game-traps were seen
—also fish-cruives set ; but nothing was bagged. We
had a cow killed to-day. Although all its “joints ”
were at my disposal, the Seedees cut them so small,
and into such cross-grained-looking pieces, that when
served up they were very uninviting ; there was no
carving them, because the meat was cut up while
warm. The Waganda, on the contrary, cut as neat
jomts as we do at home, the Seedees calling their cook-
ing “ Kissoongoo,” or “& l Anglais,” meaning that solid
joints are always cut. When boiled they are surrounded
by plantain leaf; a layer of peeled plantain is put in
a bundle at the top, and all placed in an open earthen
pot, which is covered with leaves as a lid. I took to
this cookery, and found it answered admirably.

24th, AM—Halt. Cattle not yet arrived. Chief
officer presents another gourd of wine. Thunder,
lightning, and heavy rain about noon. Leopard and
lion must be common about here, as one of the former
was seen by our men while fetching water, and there
are three lion-traps (of logs) within a short distance.


250 DIFFICULTIES IN MARCHING.


The dogs kept by the Waganda rarely run loose after
their masters; they are tied to the elbow, hand, or
toe (when seated) with a cord, which cannot be bitten
through, as a stick is generally attached. If they
have to run through grass, however long, even with a
basket of chickens swinging at their backs, the poor
dog is dragged after them in the most ludicrous way.
The breed would be shot down in England, but here
they value them very much, castrating them as at
Karague. Our goatherd was offered 250 cowries for
a playful dog he had picked up, but refused every
offer under 300!

Some cattle arrived by 3 P.M. and a march was
ordered ; but Budja said, “There are no habitations ;
nothing ahead but jungle full of lion! We will march
early to-morrow.” A meeting took place to discover
who had stolen some property at our last ground ;
until this is settled, I am told, we do not move from
here. My men quarrel with Budja about the unfair
distribution of the cattle; we were given not only all
the bad ones, but were short of our number.

25th.—By daylight I had everything ready-packed
for a march, to avoid disputes about the cattle. Budja
came saying we could not march till evening: the
cows must be looked after. “We must go now,” said
I. An hour passes, then I am told we cannot move,
as the men have just commenced cooking. <A second
hour, and Budja’s drum will sound the advance. It
now looks cloudy, and a M’ganda comes to say, “ After
the shower we will move off.” Not being able to stand
this any longer, I walked off hastily to Budja’s little
camp, got a guide, and we all marched together for
five miles; they refused to go farther, camping in a


SPORTING COUNTRY—UNYORO. 251


grove, fenced round to protect it from wild animals.
By noon I was shooting in a swampy meadow of tall
grass, and succeeded in bagging a beautiful red buck,
the “n’soono” or leucotis, which we christened after-
wards the “noble buck.” Plodding through the deep
water, full of a network of grasses, was uncomfortable ;
the wounded game was lost, and no other species could
be seen. The proprietor of the house I put up in
came timidly to get out his large game-nets, in order
to save them from being injured by my men. About
his house were the spoils of eland and “phongo” or
bush-boc ; so that this is a sporting country.

26th.—Marched nine miles, getting into Unyoro
territory immediately after leaving camp. Nothing
marked the boundary between Uganda and Unyoro.
The country rolled in waves, had many pretty glades,
and was covered with tall grass and trees. At the
fourth mile an arch of boughs was thrown across the
path, seemingly the work of the previous day. My
Waganda did not pass under it for some unknown
reason, probably because they suspected treachery on
the part of their bitter enemies, the people of Unyoro;
but nearly all the Seedees and myself did, as we took
it for the Unyamuezi sign that dwellings and water
were not far distant.

At yesterday’s camp a native fell upon his knees to
Budja, and presented him with the lid of a tin canister,
and a rag of cloth which my men had purposely
thrown away. This was the third instance of their
returning things through fear of their king M’tessa.
Being now in the kingdom of Unyoro, it was con-
sidered necessary to halt here, and send some men in
advance, to obtain permission to proceed further.


252 WE ARE CONSIDERED CANNIBALS.


Two Seedees quarrelled, and fought with sticks for
the heart of the cow just killed. I tried to separate
them, but made matters worse, as the whole camp
took up the quarrel. My side won; and the two
were placed in different huts, but unfortunately not
sufficiently apart to prevent their abusing each other.
The result was, that they challenged each other to
fight it out alone in the forest with sticks; and I
saw the silly creatures march away with a bludgeon
each to have their round out. No one followed, and
no damage was done.

27th.—Halt. Budja and five of my men have
gone on a march to ask permission to advance. The
rule will be very different to what we experienced in
Uganda. If the people desert their houses, there will
be no one to take payment for anything; but should
they remain, everything, even plantain or sweet potato,
must be purchased, and nothing plundered. The day
was a weary long one of expectation; but by three
o'clock in the afternoon the taps of Budja’s drum in
the distance were recognised, and we went to meet
him returning from Unyoro.

All the villagers except one man had run away at
the sight of the Waganda; but this person told them
“to return for orders to-morrow, as the district officer
was absent; they must not advance, otherwise there
would be a fight. When they reach the king’s, the
white man, as he is a cannibal, will have an albino to
eat, and the Waganda the back-bones of an old cow !”
It seemed odd that they should consider us cannibals;
but my valet Uledi told me that in his native
country of Uhiao the people there imagined that “all
foreigners eat human flesh; and that cloth was dyed


THE NATIVES OF UNYORO. 253


scarlet with human blood.” It seemed to be a favour-
ite joke against the Waganda, “the bones of a cow ”—
they are so constantly plundering the people of Unyoro
of their cattle that 1t is not to be wondered at that this
taunt should meet them.

28th.—Halted by order; probably for several days.
On requesting a certain number of my men to proceed
and find out whether we could advance, they refused
through fear, and lecturing them was the only remedy.
Appealing to Mabruk, who had some months pre-
viously been sent to Kamarasi as an envoy, whether
he would go, he replied that, although the king had
called us names, such as “cannibals” and “butter-
eaters,” &c., he would willingly obey orders; there-
fore he and some Waganda went, returning in the
afternoon. They had seen a M’koongoo, or district
officer, who said we must remain where we were till
orders arrived from headquarters. He particularly in-
quired, “ What could have made the other white man
vo by water while I proceeded by land? for it looked
as if he was approaching the country by a forbidden
route.” This made me anxious about Speke, of whom
I could hear nothing. The natives were laughing and
shouting during the night, and in the morning three of
them, with spears covered up, came to call, begging
for some beef; but my Waganda were very angry
with them for appearmg armed in camp, though they
seemed poor harmless creatures. The Wanyoro I have
seen are all dull, stupid-looking men, with heavy fore-
heads and eyebrows, without the gentlemanly appear-
ance or smartness of the Waganda.

New moon was seen to-night. Seedees uttered
their prayers as they looked at it.


254 MODE OF PURCHASING PROVISIONS.


29th July—Halt. Coarse, rainy morning and after-
noon. This month, when no rain is falling at 5° south
lat., we have had several heavy showers; rain seems
to fall here every month in the year, which accounts
for the continuity of crop. A dozen armed Wanyoro,
with capped spears, pay us a visit, their chief bringing
me two bunches of plantain as a present. They get
some beef and beads, and say that Speke will never
be allowed to proceed by the water-route he is trying.
He will have to return and approach by the reeular
beaten track on which I had travelled. On my
appealing for aid to Budja, he says it is impossible to
communicate this information to Speke; he will find
it out himself, and there is no fear of him.

My valet, whom I considered honest, I found help-
ing a brother Seedee to some m’wengé. On repri-
manding through an interpreter, he begged pardon
for the offence, while lolling on his bed with a quid of
tobacco in his mouth. These Seedees are not to be
trusted unless the most rigorous discipline is enforced.

Two of my men start with their guns, carrying
beef and cowries with which to purchase plantain or
potato from the villagers. ‘They meet a party of
Waganda there, who say to them, “ You fools! what
do you mean by paying for food, when you can get
it like us for nothing?” The custom was for the
Waganda to go to the Wanyoro and make a polite
request for provisions, which were generally given
free.

An infectious disease has broken out amongst the
cattle. One of them has the roof of its mouth so
affected that it cannot eat. Its tongue has become
discoloured, and there is an appearance of irritation


THREE SPECIES OF VULTURE.—LIZARDS. 255


between the hoofs. This does not prevent the men
from wishing to eat 1t before it should become worse.

30th— Halt. Rain during the night. We are
haunted by three different coloured vultures. The
first is the ragged-looking, wedge-headed vulture of
Uganda notoriety, the “m’sega,” easily caught in a
trap by a bent bough and two nooses. His plumage
is a dull sepia colour. The whole neck is red and
bare, with a ruff of white feathers circling the root
of the neck. The second, probably the female, is a
much bolder bird, larger, and of a dun colour, with
a bare, dark grey, or black neck, called “m’foongoo ”
by the Seedees. The third was a very shy bird,
quite as large as, and plumper than the last, and
much handsomer than either. His plumage was jet-
black, with the rump, thigh feathers, and rear half of
the wings snowy white.

The hut I am in is full of small lizards about six
inches long. In fighting, two chased each other round
and round, with intervals, in a small circle, keeping
their tails everted, for fear of beg bitten off. The
largest got hold of the other’s foot, held it most
viciously, while the other, struggling, made its escape.
They live by stalking up to flies, and suddenly
pouncing on them. At night they have the power,
like fhes, of sleepig while on the ceiling of the hut.
After rain, when small red centipedes were on the
eround, I have seen these little animals make a rush
at the insect, shake it as a dog would a rat, leave it
there, and run back to the hut. On examining the
insect, which remained motionless, its head was found
to have been eaten off.

31st—RHalt. I was roused out of a fast sleep by


256 A HYENA STEALS A GOAT.


shouts and screams from my men in the hut. My
first thought was to look whether a fire had broken
out; and finding this was not the case, I inquired
whether Wanyoro had attacked us. The bleating of a
goat disclosed the fact that a hyena had carried away
the fattest of our flock. Torches were lit and search
made, but nothing was recovered till morning, when
the paunch and one kidney of the poor animal were
the only traces found. He must have been a bold
hyena to have broken through so strong a fence close
to where we all slept, and in size he must have been
a monster, for his spoor was as large as my hand.
The Seedees complain that all the plantain and sweet
potato about the place have been eaten up—“ they are
starving ;” although every third day a cow is killed
for them !

Not far from this hut there are three caverns dug,
looking like the hold of a ship, in which the natives
secrete their grain, &c., from their plundering neigh-
bours, the Waganda, but at present they are empty.
The Unyoro M’koongoo sends a message, bidding us
not to be impatient for the king’s reply, as it will
certainly arrive to-day or to-morrow; but I am more
anxious about Speke, who should have joined us by
this time, and nothing has been heard of him.

A storm of thunder, hghtning, and rain, blew in
ousts from the south, then veered round to N.W.,
dashing like waterspouts upon the ground. It began
at 4, with an interval at sunset, and lasted till 8 P.M.
About two inches of rain fell.

lst August—Halt. <A bait of a cow’s head was
placed last night for the hyena that had stolen the
goat, but no shot was obtained, as it rained. In the


I


WAGANDA GIRLS. 254


morning, however, it appeared, from the tracks of the
animal, that he must have been dancing about it on
his hind legs like a bear. Our cattle, though in a
perfectly open fold, the hyena never attacks, as the
cows would kick him out of the place.

My men, without permission, went to Budja, re-
questing him to get vegetables in exchange for the
beef of a blind, lame old cow, that was killed to-day.
He sent some of his boy-pages with them to the vil-
lagers, with an order that two loads of potatoes for
each mess should be made over to them without pay-
ment. This was done.

I sketched the two Wahuma girls belonging to my
camp. The prettiest, “Sikujua,’ is young but very
black, and her history is curious. When at Uganda,
Speke’s men had to forage, seizing what food they
could lay hands on. One man got his head broken,
but he succeeded in making a prisoner of this little girl,
and took her home with him as his mode of redress.
No one ever came to claim her, and she remained his
property. She had the pretty oval face and large
ears of the Wahuma; and no doubt, as those with a
dark skin thrive best at Zanzibar, she is considered
there a great beauty. The other sketch was of a
younger girl given to Speke by the queen of Uganda,
and now the property of Bombay. She had a yellow
skin, fine eyes, and a rather droll face and figure.

2d and 3d—Halt. A man who had gone from
Unyoro to Kawalogeh for salt, brings intelligence that
Speke had gone far up the river. This afterwards
proved to be quite true. No tidings from him or the
king of Unyoro. Slight shower about noon. Leg
stiff again. One of Budja’s men, who had been to sell

R


258 ATTACHMENTS OF SEEDEES.


women near Karee, confirmed what we yesterday
heard about Speke’s movements. This man had ob-
tained ten cows in exchange for two women kidnapped
on our march. At Uganda capital they would have
fetched only five cows. We have a few of the African
tribe, called Mukooa,in camp. They are marked on
the forehead with a stamp resembling a horse-shoe,
called “real” or dollar, and three horizontal cuts are
made with a knife on each temple.

Being out of smoking tobacco, I sent a man with
half a brisket of beef to purchase some from the vil-
lagers. In exchange he brought back four packets,
each the size of an egg. Others were bought for ten
cowrles each, or its equivalent, a single necklace of
common. beads.

Seedees have strong attachments. Separated from
their parents m childhood by slavery, they are cast
upon the world, and become devoted to some one—it
may be their first master—whom they look upon as
their protector and adviser for years, or even for life.
Instances of this often occurred. On my directing
that a party of five should proceed ahead for orders,
one man stepped forward and volunteered ; his pupil,
child, or “m/’toto,” at once made another, as he would
not see his patron risk his life, or be put to mconveni-
ence, without sharing the danger himself. A story
told me by Fri also illustrates this attachment: Some
years ago he was proceeding to sea from Zanzibar,
when four boys were placed under his charge by their
relatives, to learn their duty. A storm struck the
vessel while a boy of his was aloft in imminent danger.
Frij went up the rigging, tied the lad to a rope, and
lowered him down all safe, but the difficulty now was


JEWISH NOTIONS. 259


with himself. The mast had that day been greased,
and while lowering himself by a rope it gave way, and
he fell upon the spare anchor, and from thence, much
cut, overboard. Two of his boys threw themselves
after him. Fri had gone down, but they succeeded
in tying him to a life-buoy, to which all three clung
till picked up exhausted. He added, that for their
devotion the captain gave them 15 and 11 dollars re-
spectively.

One of our men became possessed of a devil, as was
believed, for several hours. He was seized with fits so
violent as to require being held down. In this insen-
sible state he was asked where Speke was? Would
this march end successfully? To which he replied,
that “Our journey would be prosperous, but there
would be delays.” All Seedees believe most firmly
that devils have this power, and that there are a
oreat variety of them, some English, some Abyssinian,
others Mombas, &c.—in fact, every country or district
has its devil, some more difficult to get rid off than
others, the English being about the worst. Is this
African idea a remnant of tradition? It has some
resemblance to the Jewish notions mentioned in
Scripture.

The moon shone bright and inviting to-night,
though we had a shower during the day, and the men
till 11 o’clock made a playground of the space in
front of my hut, singing, mimicking, and acting with
considerable grace and great humour. The operatic
song of the Unyamuezi, from the gesticulations and
perambulations of the performer, who invented words
as he proceeded, was highly amusing. They were
chiefly in compliment to myself—that God had sent


260) INCIDENTS IN A STANDING CAMP.


them the white man, or “ Mazoongoo,” who gave them
beef to eat, and did not, like Dr Kiengo, make use of
divination by the horns of antelopes and the entrails
of fowls to procure food.

4th—Halt. Started a second set of men ahead for
information. ‘The reply we received from them was,
that Kamarasi was a great king, and that it took
many days before a question could be referred to him.
Such is the way that travelling is delayed in this
country! However, I sent a message to say that two
days hence we meant to march to the north, even
without permission. Heavy rain, thunder, and light-
ning in the afternoon. Guinea-fowl crying all round
camp. I went shooting them with ball from the trees
in the forest, and succeeded in getting one. The grass
at present is too tall to see beyond twenty yards; and
no antelopes have been seen. Water is a mile away
from our huts, m a puddle surrounded by rushes, in
the low part of a glade running to the north.

6th—Halt. Sent a party ahead to inquire why
we are detained. A portion of them return, saying
they had met a number of armed Wanyoro, who asked
why we were parading up and down the road every
day—we'll get a thrashing one of these days! By
noon of the 7th, the remainder of the men returned
without further news. Their commander, Mabruk,
had seen a lion in a trap last night. The Waganda
threw their spears into the dead animal ;- while the
brave Mabruk discharged his gun at it, to show its
effect upon the Wanyoro, who immediately dropped
their spears, and ran, never having heard the report
of a gun before.

8th.—Halt. By noon a king’s messenger arrived,


ORDERED TO LEAVE THE UNYORO TERRITORY. 261


with followers having their spears capped with leather
and tufts of hair. He informed us that the king did
not wish to see the white men because they had in-
sulted him by approaching his country by two different
routes ; they had also come vid Uganda, the king of
which is an upstart. If they choose to return a year
hence, with a recommendation from Rumanika, he
will see them with pleasure. No remonstrance would
be listened to; we might march back as soon as we
hiked. This was startling, but I still had hopes.
9th— Halt. A meeting, which lasted three hours,
was held to-day to discuss the subject of our visit,
and whether we could advance. ‘There were present
Wanyoro, Wanyamuezi, Waganda, Karagues, Wung-
wana (Seedees), and myself. Every possible argument
failed ; entreaties and presents were of no avail; and
my most valuable possession, a double-barrelled rifle
by Blisset, presented to me by a kind old friend,
Blanshard (formerly governor of Vancouver Island),
—even this was refused as a bribe to the king. He
had sent his messenger merely to see the strength of
our party, and to ascertain, if possible, whether we
were in the habit of stealing cattle and men, and ulti-
mately to desire that we should retire to the Uganda
frontier, where, after eight days, we should have a
reply. This appearing to have considerable reason in
it, and all supplies having run short, I reluctantly
gave my consent to retire next day, but only to the
Uganda frontier, where I should wait for my com-
panion. ‘To show the wicked spirit of the men, and
their utter want of sympathy at this critical time, a
few commenced wantonly cutting down some sorghum
which was growing close to my hut, saying they were


262 A FIGHT—-AN OFFICER IN THE STOCKS.


hungry. The only notice I took of it was to prevent
the further waste of the crop. The same men had
often exhibited symptoms of mutiny, and not many
days elapsed ere they finally deserted.

10th.—March back nine miles to Uganda frontier,
agreeably to Kamarasi’s orders, though much against
my inclination. ‘Two Seedees were speared by Wag-
anda villagers while taking possession of houses. We
in return took four prisoners, chased and kept at bay
others ; and, to prevent a sudden alarm, cut down all
the plantain-trees growing within thirty yards of our
huts; but except seeing numbers hovering around
us, we had no further annoyance. The wounds were
slight, but made much of by the Seedees, who said
that one of the women prisoners was necessary as a
nurse. ‘This was a mere ruse to be allowed to keep the
woman, whom I had made over to Budja, and I would
not hear of it.

11th—Halt. Fever and ague all night. Fifteen
armed villagers came to pay their respects, but they
had no sooner entered Budja’s camp than he demanded
what right they had to come there carrying spears.
A row, in which my men joimed, at once took place,
and all were disarmed. I saw here the male prisoner
of yesterday, a district officer, in the stocks. Perfect
torture the creature seemed to be in; he sat upon the
ground, with two long sticks, forked at both ends,
between his feet and hands. The neck and waist
were tied tightly to a post, so that all night long he
could not lie down, nor have the use of either hands
or feet. However, in the afternoon Budja released
him, on promise that the men who committed the
assaults should be surrendered, otherwise his wife,


SEND IN SEARCH OF SPEKE. 263


now our prisoner, would never be given up. What
a mode of coercion! But ever since Budja has had
charge of affairs he has shown very great tact, doing
his duty most conscientiously. His defences, in com-
parison with the slovenly ones put up here by the
Seedees, really seem erected with the eye of a general.
He is very proud of his position, will not associate
with his own or my men, neither will he eat meat
that has been killed by Mohammedans. All his cattle,
I may remark, are killed by a blow on the back of
the head.

12th— Halt. Sent eight Seedees and eight Wag-
anda to inform Speke of my compulsory retreat.
They did not know where he was, but had orders not
to return without having seen him. They all re-
turned at sunset, giving us a surprise. An officer
had told them their errand was useless, for Speke had
gone to Kidi, far, far away. Budja was infuriated
with his men for being such poltroons as to return ;
besides, what would his king say if Speke had pro-
ceeded to Kidi, where he had no permission to go?
He (Budja) had been imprisoned three times by
M’tessa, and thought if a fourth offence were com-
mitted he certainly would not escape.

After sunset, cries came from Budja’s camp, about
200 yards distant. I found that the cries were those
of one of his good-looking wives, beaten on mere
suspicion for having been outside the house after
the sun had set. Such severity to guard the honour
of the wives is not unlikely to have a quite opposite
effect ; and, so far as my observation went, the hus-
bands had no great cause to complain. Adultery is
severely punished ; mutilation is not uncommon; and


264 CAMP GOSSIP.


the Wakoongoo, or officers in charge of from fifty to
several hundred men, have power to order these pun-
ishments, and even to put the offenders to death.
13th—Halt. Twelve men are sent in search of
Speke. A Seedee had fever from bathing after noon,
which is thought by them an unhealthy time. Out
shooting after “noble buck,” with a dozen villagers as
guides. ‘The animals were very wild; and the bogs,
with a broiling sun overhead, were disagreeable.
14th—Halt. Fever and ague all night. Frij and
all Seedees believe that the Jews, or Yahoodee, living
in Calcutta, seize people, and tie them up by the heels
till blood falls from them into a dish, when they are
released, but rarely survive. The blood so obtained is
prepared, and sold as a most valuable chest-complaint
medicine called Moomeean. Frij had, while mm Cal-
cutta, once been seized, but escaped while the Jew
went up a ladder. Also one of his comrades he had
seen tied up by the heels, gave evidence to the police,
and had the Yahoodee put in prison for eighteen
months. These silly stories helped to pass the time.
The cowherd Manua knows his duty thoroughly,
for the day he herds the cattle he brmgs them home
full and sleek-looking, being acquainted with the
orasses the animals like best—those that are green
and succulent, in deep shade. The other herd, not
knowing a cow from a horse, drives in the cattle from
their grazing as lean in appearance as when they
went out. |
We lost three cows some days ago; and Mabruk,
who keeps count of them, now stands every night,
with his rope in his hand, at the door of the cowfold,
passing a knot as each cow goes inside; in this way


COULD NOT COMMUNICATE WITH SPEKE. 26d


he counts easier than by the usual enumeration, and
the animals walk in to enjoy the volumes of smoke
rising from the fire in the centre of their fold.

15th— Halt. Feel anxious for news; by noon it
came. Speke could not be found; he had gone up
the river. The chief Wahuma officer would not give
an audience to my Mussulmans, in case the sight of
them would make his cows run dry; and men who
sat upon chairs before kings—meaning the “white
men ”—would not be received in Unyoro.

Shot two guinea-fowl with one bullet, and also two
“n’soono,’ or noble bucks, accidentally with one ball.
The second one could not be found, although he went
away dangling his broken leg, followed by dogs. I
stood in admiration of the villager who, with his
spear-head, skinned and cut up the animal into saddle,
brisket, leg, and other joints, layig them on the pure
leaves of plantain as quietly and cleverly, and with
far less mess, than is to be seen at the abattoirs of
Paris.

16th.— Halt. The time has arrived for Kamarasi’s
reply, and none has come. My men all press me to
retire. ‘There is not one in the camp who wishes to
go the north or Egyptian route; and I long most
anxiously for Speke. Here we are, not more than
seven days, it is said, from the place where boats lie
to take us down the Nile; yet nothing will move
those around me to push on. It is most tantalising.
I asked Budja to join me in forcing the road, but he
could not be induced to leave his country. “ Let me
then communicate with Captain Speke, wherever he
as.” It was impossible, as his men had no permission
to visit Qogoongoo, on the other side of M’tessa’s,


266 KING OF UNYORO PREVENTS OUR ADVANCE.


where my companion was; but if I retired for two
marches, and halted there, he would ask leave from
his king. In the afternoon he anticipated my wish to
send ten men into Unyoro to demand a reply from
Kamarasi. To dispel the anxiety we both felt we
went out shooting— Budja having dressed himself
very smartly in cow and antelope skins.

At night I assembled all the men to explain our
difficulties, and to intimate to them that our rations
of butcher-meat must be curtailed, otherwise there
would be disgrace and starvation for us. They agreed
to my proposals.

17th— Halt. Having now been twenty-two days
without a message from the king, as a last resource
I sent a dozen men ahead, carrying some wires as a
bribe, to ask why we had received no definite reply.
In the mean time | went shooting some distance off,
and had a shot at a leucotis buck standing knee-deep
in water—the tall grasses almost concealing him. This
animal is always to be found in ground of that nature,
though he has not the hoofs of a waterboc. Rain
commencing, we returned shortly before the sun had
set, twenty-five villagers having accompanied us, and
been entertained by my burning some powder in the
bare palm of my hand. ‘They told me it was no use
sending men so often to Kamarasi, as he had deter-
mined on not seeing us.

18th.—Halt. My men all return from the Unyoro
frontier, bringing back the presents of wire I had
sent. The district officer said, “How can I receive
these gifts if the king, my master, refuses to see the
white man?” and he added, that if I stayed ten years
where I was the road would not be open to me. So,


OUR CAMPS UNITED ONCE MORE. 26y.


after a dismal day, I determined—having been at-
tempting this route since the 26th ult.—not to stay a
moment longer, but to make search for Speke, whom
we had heard nothing of for thirty days, and to try
the route to Unyoro vid Karague.

19th.—Marched eight miles south, crossing a bog
five hundred yards wide, and knee-deep, and camping
on the second crest of land beyond it. No sooner
settled down than Bombay and three Seedees arrive
with a note from Speke, who had that morning reached
the ground we passed! I at once walked joyfully
over to his camp. He had gone out shooting. His
servants were got up like M’tessa’s pages—heads all
shaved, except cockade-like tufts left to grow above
each ear, giving them a knowing look. In the absence
of their master they gave me a cordial greeting. I
waited in the camp till Speke arrived, and I need not
attempt to describe our joy at meeting once more.


III. Our CAMPS UNITED.

Kach of us had met with a reverse. But Speke had
accomplished his object, and seen the first cataract of
the Nile at the point where it flows from the Victoria
Nyanza. He had been attended by only a dozen
Seedees under Bombay, himself a host, and a few
Waganda. Our further plans could not now be de-
cided upon without a conference with Budja. It was
proposed, if everything else failed, to induce M’tessa,
by enormous bribes, to give a thousand men, and with
this force try the Kilimanjaro route to the east coast.

20¢h.—Return to my yesterday’s ground along with
Speke. Having discussed whether we could again
send messengers into Unyoro, the plan was considered


268 PROSPECT OF ADVANCING.


impracticable, as the natives had threatened us. Be-
sides, we did not know what impression had been pro-
duced by the fight on the Nile with Speke’s men,
where several of the natives were killed. Probably
their king was enraged at this disaster. In our difh-
culty we are saved by the arrival of Kamarasi’s facto-
tum, who brings us an invitation from his king. The
relief and delight experienced at the moment were
inexpressible—everything had happened for the best.
We had evidently been on trial, closely watched, and,
most probably, the fact of our having been so submis-
sive obtained for us the royal favour. The king had
ordered that our Waganda escort should quit us as
soon as we entered the Unyoro territory. They re-
fused to obey, thinking the order was insulting to
them ; but I considered it a very wise policy, as they
are such a wild plundering race, and apt to quarrel.

On the march I struck a zebra with a bullet, which
made him, curiously enough, rear twice in the air. A
second ball did not take effect, but he separated from
other three, and went away limping through the long
orasses, which hid him from our view.

21st—Halt. Something stops the way. We can-
not move as we should, but in Africa no one ever can.
Budja distrusts the Wanyoro, and does not want to
give us up to them. The Seedees get up a complaint,
refusing to march because they have not enough of
powder ; they observe the Waganda leaving their
heavy baggage here, and suspect treachery on the part
of Kamarasi, who is said to be enraged at having his
men killed on the Nile by Speke’s party. AIL this
was a mere pretence, and they were distinctly told
that they might go back to Karague if they chose,


WE MARCH NORTH—SHOOT A BUCK. 269


but their guns must be surrendered. Their cool reply
was that they would talk it over in the morning,
treating the matter as if time were of no value.

22d.—Hurrah! we march again some miles nearer
England, and encamp on the northern boundary of
Uganda. Seventeen of the mutineer Seedees delivered
up their guns, their names were noted, ammunition
was served out, and they had the guns returned—a
very simple expedient, accomplished without any fur-
ther misunderstanding.

Went shooting naswamp. My first shot was at
a leucotis buck, but he bounded away untouched.
Again we came upon him lying immersed in water,
all but his noble head. On being alarmed he stood
for a shot, which penetrated both shoulder-blades, and
lodged under the off-skin. Budja was in such ecstasy
that he jumped through the water up to him, with all
his lads followmg. <A Seedee got well butted before
he could cut the buck’s throat ; but after the Waganda
had talked and laughed over the powers of my rifle,
eight of them raised the animal with the greatest
care out of the water, preventing his beautiful skin
from being soiled, and placed him upon a bed of clean
grass, where he was left to be cut up @ la Waganda.
Budja’s eyes glistened when told that he might have
the skin; there was no end to his “nyans, nyans,”
thanks, &. We heard elephants screeching and trum-
peting near some acacias to the far north, but my
Waganda dreaded going within sight of them, and
stole away home. We could not find them, but dur-
ing the night heard their musical ery as they browsed
in the moonlight.

Between the 23d August and 2d September we only


270 MARCHING IN UNYORO.


made four marches, but fortunately they were all in
the right direction. The country waved in gentle
long swells of land: covered with tall grass and thin
forest, with a few low conical hills. The clearances
for cultivation, generally fenced against wild animals,
were few; and in the low grounds sweet potato, ooley-
zee, and a few plantain were grown. The houses
were of grass, perfect domes, but dirty, ill-made, and
without door-screens or frames to their single en-
trances. The people, as we marched past, appeared
inanimate and unconcerned ; they stood listlessly gaz-
ing at us, so different from the reception given to
a regiment passing through an English town, when
every handkerchief waves a welcome. The natives
deliberately carried away everything out of their
houses and allowed us to take possession, but at the
same time showed sullenness at our intrusion. Our
Waganda did not mind this. Wherever they go they
know how to enjoy themselves, living always like a
party of jolly brigands, by plunder. Numbers of
natives came out to see the Wazoongoo, and never
having seen boxes before, they believed that the white
men were carried in our japanned tin cases !

The Wanyoro would seem to be penurious. The
cowries which circulated amongst them were generally
covered with earth, as if they had been hoarded up,
and kept concealed under ground. This coin had
reached them through Karague; and Kidjweega, an
officer not more than thirty-five years of age, recol-
lected the time when ten cowries bought a cow, and
thirty secured a woman. ‘Times have changed. It
now takes half a load to purchase a cow. Here, at
the division between the commerce coming up the


BROTHERHOOD AMONGST THE WANYORO. 271


Nile and that of the east coast of Africa, beads were
little used, and cloth and coinage were unknown.
But Kamarasi had received, four years previously
(reckoning five months to the year), some beads from
the traders on the Nile, and it is to be hoped that, the
road having once been opened, trade and civilisation
may advance. The natives manufactured ornaments
of ivory for the wrists and ankles. ‘These, and rings,
were split at one part, not formed in entire unbroken
circles, probably for the reason that they could be
slipped on more easily by being divided. The price
of their smallest rmeg was twenty-five cowrie-shells,
which I considered expensive. They had also spear-
blades, two spans long and two inches at their greatest
breadth. The Waganda purchased several of them
at five hundred cowries each, and one cow would
buy ten, or bark-cloth would be taken in exchange.
While here a good deal of business was done, the
natives purchasing meat from our men; but if any
butter had been used in cooking it, they would reject
it as food. Men and women wore anklets made of
hair covered with twisted brass, iron, or copper wire.
Manua made brotherhood with the officer Kidj-
weega, aS he had done with Bombay at Ukuni, but
after a different fashion, A Wanyoro made a slight
incision to the right above Manua’s navel. His blood
was tasted by Kidjweega, who had the same done to
him by a Seedee, and Manua partook of his blood.
These brotherhoods are synonymous with our masonic
institutions, and do a great deal of good, as from that
time forward friendship is sworn; and I must say
that until the last moment these two men remained
excellent friends. The work of civilisation may be


Die MORNING DEWS—-MESSAGE FROM M’TESSA.


promoted by this means, as the natives have no objec-
tion to make brotherhood with Europeans.

We had not much rain during the last week of
August. After a shower one morning, upon the space
cleared in front of our hut appeared hundreds of
white maggots with black heads, curling themselves
into an arc, jumping and throwing themselves over
the ground as if set upon springs. The morning dews,
as we marched in Indian file through grasses higher
than and thick as a field of wheat, made everything
uncomfortably damp. The Wanyoro, fearful of get-
ting wet, or having their rags of skins and bark-cloths
injured, carried in front of them an immense broom
made of plantain-leaves to brush the dew off the grass,
which they considered injurious to health, causing the
itch. At first we could not understand why unclad
natives should carry about these besoms, and the
sight of so many of them by the side of the path
perplexed us.

M’tessa had sent a large party to inquire how
we were getting on. Imagining this was all they
wanted, we thought they might disperse; but their
leader produced four little pieces of wood, saying with
emphasis, one was for a double-barrelled gun that
would last the kg his lifetime; a second was for
oun-wads ; a third for strengthening medicine; and a
fourth for anything the “ Bana” (meaning Speke) liked
to send. We returned our kindest regards to their
king, and told them that all they asked, and even
more, would be sent from Ugani should an opportunity
ever offer.

A touching incident occurred here. A woman of
the village recognised amongst our Seedees her brother,


STRANGE RECOGNITION. 273


whom she had not seen or heard of since they were
children at their home in Uhiao, fifteen hundred miles
distant to the south-east. Both had been captured as
slaves in infancy. On seeing her brother the poor
woman burst into tears, but did not, through timidity,
make herself known the first day, merely leaving a
message that he should be asked whether his name
was not so-and-so when he was young. The follow-
ing day her owner came for the brother (called by us
Barootee, or Powder), and led him away. Several
Seedees went to witness the scene, and I felt much
inclined to be equally intrusive. ‘They reported that
the girl, who was very like her brother, fell at his
feet, got into hysterics, but could not communicate
with him, as she had forgotten her native language,
and Barootee did not know that of Unyoro. This
was the only interview they had. She would will-
ingly have followed him, and she sent him all she
could to show her affection—namely, an immense
dish of porridge and three fowls boiled into soup!
Her husband or owner accompanied us on the march
for several days; but Barootee said he had no present
to give his sister, and she therefore was left behind.
On the 31st August, a party of Waganda came
with an important message from the king that we
were to return at once to him, even if we had got
within a march of Kamarasi. He had something very
particular to say to us, and would allow us to proceed
by whatever route we chose. Budja said the order
could not be disobeyed, it was imperative ; but after
four hours’ consultation, neither side would yield,
except the Seedees, who said, “We go to Uganda
whether our masters like it or not.” On being told
S


274. ELEPHANT- HUNTING.


they were welcome to leave, but they must not take
their guns, as they were Speke’s property, they got
up abruptly, saying, “The guns are ours, and we
march to-morrow with Budja to M’tessa.” They in-
solently beat the drum at night for a morning’s march.
Kamarasi seems to have had information of this, for
nearly two hundred men, all armed, were collected
and gathered round our hut next day to resist, if
necessary, any attempt made by the Waganda to take
us forcibly away. However, they were not required,
as by six o'clock of the morning of the 1st September
twenty-eight Seedees deserted with Budja, who took
with him the rain-gauge as a present for his king.
Thus we were well rid of all the disaffected of our
camp, and left simply with Bombay and our best
Seedee servants.

2d to 9th September.—The great events of this
week were elephant-shooting and our arrival in sight
of Kamarasi’s residence.

Let us note the former. A number of Wanyoro led
the way out of camp to a forest covered with tall
orasses like wild oats, and with ordinary-sized shady
trees. Mounds of earth, the formation of white ants,
were here and there visible. After a time the boughs
bore marks as if lightning had struck them, they were
broken so wantonly; the grasses underneath were
trodden as if they had been passed over by a roller.
All the spoors were fresh, so that every moment we
expected to see the herd, and not a little excitement
prevailed. A low whistle from a sharp-eared Wanyoro
made us all exchange glances. He had heard the
cracking of branches, and soon, sure enough, about
three hundred yards distant, in the open grass, were


ELEPHANT - HUNTING. 275


the blue backs of about forty elephants. I had never
seen such a sight, and Speke wished me to have the
first shot; but another herd appeared in an opposite
direction, and I preferred going alone, with a single
follower carrying a spare gun. Here, whichever way
we looked, for three-fourths of the horizon, elephants
were seen, all grazing quietly, perfect “lords of the
forest,” and so unconcerned that I walked boldly up-
right through the grass to a tree within fifty yards of
twenty of them. It was a beautiful sight ; all were
mothers with their young; none so large as the Indian
breed, but short, stumpy, handy-looking animals, with
small, long, and uniform tusks. The most game point
and the most striking about them was the peculiar
back-set of their enormous ears. While waiting to get
a close shot by their coming nearer me, I looked round
for my man with the second rifle. Master Seedee was
nowhere! so putting up my Lancaster rifle, and aiming
behind the shoulder of an old female with long
tusks, I fired: she merely mingled with her comrades,
who stood around in stupidalarm. In an absent fit of
gazing, I forgot to reload till they were approaching
me. Ithen changed my position to another tree, with-
in thirty yards of a full-sized animal, whose shoulder-
blade wrinkles I could trace distinctly, and brought
her down on her hind-quarters with a small bullet.
Up she got, rushed in amongst some others, who, with
tails erect, commenced screeching and trumpeting,
dreadfully alarmed, not knowing what was taking place.
At last, some head wiser than the others took the lead,
and off they all scuttled into thicker cover. I ran
after them, but the jungle got so dense that there was
some fear I should lose my way, as no one was within


276 ELEPHANT -HUNTING.


hail. Returning to more open cover, a female elephant
was coming diagonally towards me, and she passed so
close that I saw her wink her eye; but the bullet be-
hind the shoulder, though delivered at eleven paces,
only frightened her into a bowling amble with her tail
half cocked. A low whistle now announced Speke
close by. He had been trying their heads as well as
shoulders, and had no better luck than myself. The
Wanyoro guides joined us, as all the elephants had left,
and kept saying to us in compliment, “ Weewaleh,
muzoongoo m’seeja”—You white men are men. The
same compliments on our bravery awaited us on our
arrival in camp, where we were looked upon as won-
derful sportsmen for having gone so near elephants.
During the night we heard their wild music, first to
the west, then to the north, gradually dying away in
the distance. The herd had very wisely marched,
taking their wounded along with them.


CHAPTER XIL


THE CAPITAL OR PALACE OF UNYORO, SEPTEMBER 9 TO NOVEM-
BER 9, 1862, LATITUDE 1° 37' NORTH, LONGITUDE 32° 19’ EAST
—TOPOGRAPHY OF THE COUNTRY—ITS CLIMATE, SOIL, AND
ANIMALS—KING KAMARASI AND HIS WIVES—CLASS OF MEN-
DICANTS—ARMS USED BY THE WANYORO—THEIR FOOD AND
DRINK—A BLACKSMITH’S SHOP— AMUSEMENTS OF THE NA-
TIVES—THE EXPEDITION EMBARK ON THE NILE.


THE country, for a few marches before reaching the
residence of King Kamarasi of Unyoro, was gently
undulating and evergreen, with tall grass and trees.
On the light and higher grounds the grasses grew six
feet high, with large panicles which adhered to one’s
dress. Where the richer soil had been washed down
to the low grounds the vegetation was shorter but
more luxuriant. Nothing could be more desolate than
our encampment at the capital of Unyoro. I can
only compare it to a bare and dreary common—not a
tree nor a garden to relieve the eye or afford shade
from the equatorial sun. The vast plain was covered
with tall grass, through which at this season we could
not walk without wading, so that we were completely
hemmed in by water. The northern half of the horizon


278 THE RIVER KUFFO—FERTILITY OF THE SOIL.


presented a few small detached hills, the most interest-
ing being in Kidi. They sloped away to the north
from a high bluff point at their southern extremity.
Our huts were within a few yards of a sluggish
stream, the Kutto, from Uganda. Its depth, its mud-
coloured water, and the tall rushes with which it was
fringed on each side, prevented us from seeing the
crocodiles with which it is said to swarm. In the
third week of October its waters had swollen im-
mensely, and bore along with them islands of the
papyrus which it had torn away in its course, and on
which I often wished myself embarked, as they were
on their way to Heypt. Several times, when a gleam
of sunshine broke upon the hills of Kidi, we could see
from a height near camp the river Nile, looking like a
mirage, but we were prohibited from going nearer it.
While fishing upon the Kuffo I was rather surprised
to find that its bottom was pebbly, while its banks
were formed of retentive clay, about ten feet in depth,
through which no water seemed to percolate. The
soil upon the pathways, after it had been thoroughly
washed with rain, became of pure white sand, without
oravel, and formed a pleasant walk. It was a loam,
with from 40 to 70 per cent of clay, and, if closely
drained, would make excellent land for growing wheat.
Of the surrounding countries we obtained a good
deal of geographical knowledge; for the people here
were not afraid, like those about M’tessa of Uganda,
to state what they knew. We had fully expected to
receive letters from Egypt, but saw only some beads
quite new to us, which must have been brought from
thither. Until Bombay should return with a letter
from a party of Egyptian ivory-traders to the north,


THE NILE AND LUTA-NZIGE LAKE. 279


we did not feel that the two hemispheres had been
thoroughly united by our efforts. Our first move was
to make the junction with these traders at Faloro.
We were told that the water route was impracticable,
and we afterwards found this to be the case, owing to
the cataracts on the river between Chopeh and Mad.
Were it not for these, our informants told us we
might proceed the whole way by water. This intelli-
gence, together with our own observations of the level
nature of the country, enabled Speke to map the bend
of the Nile, which we were not able to visit, it being
entirely off our direct route, and within the province
of a rebel chief.

One of the king’s officers had travelled to the Masai
country, to the east of Kamarasi’s, and he said we
might do the same, if his king gave us a particular
horn filled with charms to be carried at the head of
our party. This, with 600 iron hoes, giving two to
each chief of a district, would enable us to get through
the unexplored country without molestation.

This man also spoke a good deal about the Lweet-
an-zigeh (the Litita-nzigé of Speke), an immense body
of water some marches away to the south-west, and
extending back towards Karague. He thought we
should take twenty days to reach it; but a M’eanda
would go the distance in half that time. This is the
lake whose position we expect the enterprising Sam
Baker to ascertain, as we gave him a map of its general
direction, and he would also be enabled to verify the
latitude and altitude of that portion of owr journey
over which he might pass. When last heard of, he had
manfully gone back on our track and reached Kama-
rasis. God grant that he may be spared to return.


280 THE CLIMATE OF UNYORO.


Far to the north-west of our position, at Unyoro,
are people named Ooreea-Wantu—translated eaters of
men, cannibals—the Walega, perhaps. We saw some
of them, but were told they had drunk or tasted the
blood of Kamarasi in the same way that Kidjweega
and Manua had made brotherhood.

We had a considerable quantity of rain during our
stay here. The showers were very partial, appearing
to fall from six or seven different points of the heavens
at the same moment, while the small river by our
camp had been rising for three days, though we had
no rain. There were no regular prevalent winds at
this season; three violent storms, all from different
directions, the north, south-west, and south, were
noted.

An observation of the weather, from sunset of the
7th November to 8 p.m. of the 8th, is here given :—


Sunset.—A bank of clouds collected in the south-west.

Night.—Still and fair.

7 AM.—Perfect calm ; the grasses arching with the weight of dew.

9 am.—A breath of air. Last night’s clouds rising. Clear horizon
from north to east.

Noon.—Heavens fleeced over with cloud. Gentle breeze.

3 P.M.—Breeze increased to freshness. Temperature, 82° in the shade.

Sunset.—Wind dying away. Heavy clouds over the south horizon.

8 pM—Still and calm. Sky half covered with watery clouds.


Every morning and every day seemed alike, only
varied by occasional falls of rain. The mornings were
dull, with fogs hanging low, the paths wet, and the
tall grasses dripping with dew. A fire was very com-
fortable at night, particularly when the rain trickled
through the roofs of our small grass huts. We suffered
no inconvenience from the heat, being always shel-
tered.


DOGS AND CATTLE. Zou


We had no sport while here. The king was such a
morose autocrat he would not allow us to go beyond
our dwellings; but this was no great loss, the country
being mostly covered with water. It had been said
of this country that the fences of the huts were made
of elephants’ tusks; but we found that the natives
rarely killed the elephant, and when they did, used
only the rudest uncertain methods. No pitfalls were
seen, merely a heavy wedge of iron suspended from
a tree. <A leopard-kitten was one day brought us; he
had been caught in the rushes, and Speke desired to
buy him and make a pet of him, but his owner would
take nothing for him in case he should happen to
die; if, however, he survived, a present would be
acceptable. The little animal seemed to pine away for
want of its natural food, and died in a few days, when
it was given back to be eaten by its original owner.

The king had a large coarse breed of dogs, foxhound
colour, although he never seemed to employ them for
any purpose. He wished us to give him a medicine
to prevent disease amongst cattle ; but our own soon
became affected, and we knew of no remedy. The
complaint attacked grown-up animals of all ages; they
became thin, with a staring coat, refused food, some-
times frothed at the mouth; and as certain as they
were attacked, although showing no signs of actual
distress, their death was inevitable. The natives
always ate the carcass, but the meat looked fly-blown
and discoloured. Calves appear to suffer from a weak-
ness in the limbs. Our cowherd came, with a five-
days-old calf following him, to our door, asking for a
thread to tie round each of its hocks. On being asked
what charm this had, the reply was, “Don’t you see


282 FISHING ON THE KUFFO.


that he cannot put his hoofs flatly on the ground ;
that he is walking upon his toes? This thread will
give him strength!” The calf actually did become
strong. We found that some meat would not keep
beyond a single day; this was not attributed to the
heat, but to the man who had performed the opera-
tion of killing the cow. “He must be a dirty
fellow, sleeping cuddled up with his hands between
his knees.” “If Baraka had been there to kill the
animal, the meat would have kept for four days.”
Goats were never healthy; the soil stuck between
their hoofs, making them foot-sore, dejected, and
unable to graze with any apparent satisfaction.

We were unsuccessful in fishing with the hook.
The natives had a better system ; they set creels, into
which they drove the fish in numbers. At the Ripon
Falls, while Speke was there, the Waganda plied to
considerable purpose a barbless hook, baited with
roasted plantain cut in dice. On trying the fishing
in the Kuffo, first with entrails, and afterwards with
worms from the mud on the banks of the river, none
would take properly, and the stream was too muddy
for the fly. our loads of dried fish, as black as tar,
were sent us by the king. Our men did not recognise
them, but called them “mamba,” the name for croco-
dile, because they had large teeth, and were supposed,
from the rounded form of two of their fins, to suckle
their young. Manua, on being asked to have some,
replied that he had never tasted fish, and did not see
why he should begin then; our men also had some
objection to them; and when the women of the
country were shown them, they ran away. In fact,
some of these very species were purchased at the


RATS AS FOOD——LIZARDS. 283


Ripon Falls, but the women refused to cook them.
I tasted both a bit of the tail and shoulder; the former
had been dried to a stick, and the latter was tough
and tasteless. All had been caught in the Nile, and
were eaten by the male population alone.

On my asking some of our Seedees, four in succes-
sion, if they had eaten rats, all pleaded guilty, saying,
“We have eaten every living thing except hippopo-
tamus, dogs, snakes, and cats. Rats were better food
than beef, tasting sweetly, like tender chickens, and
frogs were also very excellent! But now that they
had become Mussulmans, they had given up living
upon these animals.” None had ever eaten human
flesh, but they stated that when a person in their
country of Uhiao dies from having been bewitched,
the wizard eats part of the body to complete his in-
cantation. In our huts the number of rats and lizards
living on friendly terms together was immense. Every
house had two or three traps, but these did not keep
them down, or prevent their annoying fowls, in con-
sequence of which the latter could not hatch on the
eround, and were suspended, like flower-pots, from the
ceiling in a tray made from the leaf of the plantain.
Lizards fed upon cockroaches and other insects, and
much enjoyed picking the bone of a fowl. There
were two species ; the largest was dark, covered with
bright spots, with a white fish-like belly; the other
and more handsome one had a bright stripe down
either side, from the arch of the eye to the tail. Rats
fed like rabbits on grass, or flour when they could get
it. Whenever we camped near swamps the musquitoes
were in myriads, working their way even through
bed-curtains of net.


284 THE KING OF UNYORO.


Nine days elapsed before the suspicions of the king
would permit of our seeing him. Our servants had
many interviews before his highness would grant us
an audience. But it was at last brought about by
informing him that, as he seemed to prefer black to
white men, we would shave our heads and beards,
blacken our faces, and present ourselves! His mes-
sengers at once brought a reply, that we must not do
so, for the king was preparing a house and throne
where the reception would shortly take place.

His excuses were, that he had heard many bad
reports of us through Waganda, who said we required
several men and women for our daily food; that we
drank up rivers and ate up mountains; that he did
not know exactly what to believe; but we must have
patience, and we should be gratified. He had some
Wanyamuezi guests whom he made swear, by stepping
over their arms (bows and spears), that we did not do
these things. They became answerable for us, con-
senting, as a punishment, to be circumcised if we
should commit a fault. Although the king, from sus-
picion and timidity, took these precautions, he would
daily inquire for our health, sending provisions occa-
sionally; and on being asked what he would do if the
Waganda carried out their intention of rescuing us
from him, he replied, seizing a stick and holding it
hke a spear, that he would not allow them to touch a
hair of the white men’s heads. If they came, he would
put us in boats, and send us away to our own country.
He was lost in admiration of our hardihood in coming
to such a far-away land. We must be devils; we
must fight his rebel brother, and also fight the Kidi
—a race of people who constantly annoyed him.


THE KING OF UNYORO. 285


His highness’s residence, for the last seven years,
had been where we now saw him, in a naturally strong
position, on the point of low flat land between the
Nile and the Kuffo. About three hundred huts of
grass stood here, covering an area of two square miles.
One dwelling was conspicuous amongst the rest, from
its size, and in it his highness resided, with his cattle
and followers around him. ‘This station had been
chosen in preference to his proper residence, three
marches south, as a greater security against the attacks
of his rebel brother Reonga, hvimg upon an island
down the Nile.

In appearance the king was fair for an African, of
slender figure, nearly six feet high, and about forty
years of age. His features were good, with soft gentle
eyes ; 1n sitting he would often rest his head upon his
hand, with his elbow on his knee, and having long
arms, this position did not seem constrained. As was
the custom of the natives of his country, all the lower
incisors and eye-teeth had been extracted in his youth,
and the dentist to his father received the handsome
sum of one hundred cows for the operation. The
teeth are probably taken out by the head of a spear
or small knife, as no more refined weapon, such
as a dentist's key or pinchers, was observed in the
country. His forehead was disfigured by black
patches where it had been burned or cauterised for
headache or other ailments; on his nose he had a
similar mark, which he wished us to take off because
it disfigured him. We never saw him wear any calico
or silks; a bark-cloth covering, tied round his body
tightly from above the waist to his heels, was his only
raiment. It was the usual salmon colour, but had


286 THE KING OF UNYORO.


small pieces of black bark-cloth, sewn very neatly with
a looping stitch, dotting it all over. His head was
periodically shaved, scissors being unknown; and
small tufts of wool, the size of black pepper-corns,
were the only protection. <A single necklace of beads,
worn very long, was his most conspicuous ornament.
By his side a spear rested against the wall; its blade
was neatly capped over with leather, laced like a shoe
with two long strips from the skin of a leopard.

Our presents of beads, boxes, guns, cloth, &c., were
received by Kamarasi very coolly, with no sign of
pleasure, only an occasional remark. He sat, as
Bombay said, “like a cow,” showing neither astonish-
ment nor delight. A pair of spectacles put on by
Bombay created a titter amongst the men, but he re-
mained perfectly solemn. Nothing was examined by
him, or handled with that eagerness which all other
Africans were in the habit of showmg; all was
affected indifference. None of these things were new
to him; he had seen all, except the double-barrelled
rifle, and the watch which he saw Speke take out of
his pocket. This watch, a valuable chronometer, was
yielded to him at our second interview; and whenever
he received it, he told us that we had better leave—
it was going to ram! Though he now followed us to
the canoe in which we embarked to cross to our huts,
and stood on the shore, spear in hand, till we had
landed on the opposite side, he neither bade us adieu
nor smiled; and even the natives accompanying him
squatted or stood unconcerned. However, we paid
him every honour, standing up in the canoe, with the
union-jack floating high over our heads.

At the other interviews it was constant begging ;


THE KING OF UNYORO. IST


he must have table-knives, musquito-curtains, our
pots and pans, our medicines, finger-rings, &c., and
most of them had to be rendered up. Once, when we
had got into our boat after an audience, he followed
and ordered us out into one with water in it, because
he required the best canoe for himself. All was done
so roughly, and with such a total want of grace and
hospitality, that, at the moment, I felt inclined to
throw myself into the river and swim across it, but
the effect would have been lost upon such a cold-
blooded mortal.

On his sending to announce that he would pay us
a visit, Speke prepared his hut as nicely as our means
admitted, by ornamenting it with antelope-horns,
blankets from our beds, the union-jack, &. A
japanned tin case was covered for his highness’s
throne, and a donkey-rug placed for his feet. Salutes
were arranged to announce his arrival, and all our
men had donned their best to pay him every honour.
But our preparations were not seen to advantage, for
a wooden stool and some leopard-skins were placed
for his majesty to sit upon, hiding our decorations.
On being asked to change his seat for the one we had
prepared, he eyed it suspiciously, and in a coarse
voice asked what it was—what was underneath? and
on being shown that it was no more than a box such
as he had previously received in a present, he sat
himself down upon it. The conversation turned upon
trade. “ Did he desire traffic by opening the road to
the north?” With his usual chilling stiff manner,
though seeing the advantage to himself, he replied
that all the ivory of his country now goes to Zan-
zibar, because he is constantly at war with the tribes


288 THE KING OF UNYORO.


to the north: two days he is at peace, and five days
at war (curiously enough indicating the division of
time into weeks). Changing the subject, he com-
menced to scold a swarm of boys who were naturally
peering in at the door. He ordered all but a few
listeners to withdraw, and now commenced begging
everything he saw in the hut. Pointing to his cheek,
head, and back, he said that all his children after a
certain age die; we must give him a cure for this.
A quantity of medicine was tied up in a veil, and he
left abruptly, saying to his men, “ Hrokh togendeh ”
—Let us go. Although we accompanied him to
his canoe, he took no notice of us, and was paddled
across by some naked boys. No influential persons
were around him, and when one of the scullers fell
overboard the canoe was not stopped. ‘The creature
swam ashore, and commenced to scrub himself with-
out any ceremony before his highness the king of
Unyoro.

With all his apparent rudeness, Kamarasi was not
unkindly. Though his neighbour, M’tessa, ordered his
subjects to be butchered, no such savage custom pre-
vailed in Unyoro; men were admonished, and told
how fortunate they were under the king’s lenient rule.
Murderers, however, were flogged or speared, and
their bodies thrown into the river Kuffo. Scarcely a
day passed that we did not receive a little flour, some
drink (very coarse and bad), sweet potato, or other
remembrance; but the great present was made soon
after our arrival, when we each had ten cows and five
fowls sent us, with an explanation that the king
thought it necessary to send us separate presents, as
we had approached him by different routes. Before


ARRIVAL OF VISITORS FROM UGANDA. 289


leaving, we solicited, and were presented with, a few
more cattle, and a tusk was offered to each of our
head-servants. In return for his presents, Kamarasi
received English and foreign goods to the value, in
Eneland, of £150 sterling; this included a double
oun and rifle, a chronometer, &c. Besides these, he
obtained a considerable quantity of property left
behind at Karague; so that it 1s confidently hoped
he will treat all future white men with due hospi-
tality.

Kamarasi was constantly visited by men of far
countries coming to trade with him for cattle, slaves,
and ivory. By his permission, the Waganda who had
accompanied Speke to the Ripon Falls arrived with a
message for us from their king. When they appeared,
in their beautifully clean dresses, our hearts quite
warmed towards them as old friends. Their orders,
they said, were to accompany us through fire and
water as far as we wished, only they were not to
vo to England! Kamarasi would not hear of this,
telling them, until he heard farther from M’tessa, he
would not risk their lives amongst the wild people of
Kidi and Madi; so they had to return to their king
with a messenger from us in the form of a tin-lid,
which was supposed to convey our kind remembran-
ces. We gave them some salt, which they licked like
sugar. Unfortunately they would not eat our beef,
as it had not been killed by one of themselves, and
had been boiled in our pots ; however, they got some
porridge, some m’wengé, and a cow. Before leay-
ing, after having knelt to “nyanzig” (return thanks)
at our door, they expressed themselves devoted to us ;
“their lips had been sweetened and their hearts

T


290 THE WAGANI EATING RAW MEAT.


warmed in our society.” The skins on which they
had been seated in our hut were smartly bundled
up by boy-pages, their court-dresses exchanged for
marching costume, and away the merry creatures
went back to their king. I learned with regret that
my good friend Budja had died from the fatigues
of marching back and forward between Uganda and
Unyoro. The report was that the “black art” had
accomplished his end. A thorough soldier the poor
fellow was, with good tact and spirit.

People from Gani to the north often paid Kamarasi
visits : they and the Kidi were similar in one respect
—neither, in their own country, wore any covering
around the loins, and their language was a perfectly
new one to our men, as well as to the great majority
of the people of Unyoro. They used to come with
strange presents : for instance, a small tusk, the skin
of a tippet monkey, a string of handsome beads pro-
cured from Heyptian traders, and the tail of a giraffe,
formed one present received by the king while we
were there. They returned to their homes with a
few cattle in exchange. The Wagani had conveyed
and brought back Bombay from the camp of Nubians,
and for this service they received a cow. After it had
been skinned, the muscle that les on either side of
the back-bone was neatly taken off in a long ribbon,
the meat scraped off, and eaten before us without
being cooked. A portion of the entrails was also
eaten raw at the same time. It seemed quite a bonne
bouche to them after their journey ; and on the fol-
lowing morning, when they were seen wearing the fat
of the animal twisted in a coil round their bare necks,
they looked fresh and well after their dinner of the


THE WIVES OF THE KING. 291


previous day. This custom of eating a little raw
meat from an animal immediately after it has been
killed is not an uncommon one, but I do not think
they are fond of it after the meat has been allowed
to become cold; they then have it cooked.

The language of Unyoro, as spoken by its natives,
although it differs but slightly from that spoken in
Karague, was not understood by our Seedees until
they had been some weeks in the country. It had
not the mumbling sounds of the Uganda dialect,
where their d, g, k, &c, and most consonants, are
doubled in pronunciation. The dialect of the Chopi,
Kidi, and Gani was perfectly unintelligible to our
Seedees. They said it sounded in their ears like
English; but there was no resemblance, every word
uttered being guttural, and not thrown smoothly out
from the lips, but kept in the mouth by closing the
throat with the root of the tongue. Many of the
names of our Seedees, such as M’kate, Uledi, and
Sirboko, all coast words, were heard in Unyoro applied
to men of the country. We also found this in
Uganda; and Kamarasi is the name of an Indian
Bunnea, or corn-dealer, living at Pangani on the east
coast of Africa. These names are diffused over the
country by means of the slave-trade.

The wives of the king lived upon milk, and were of
enormous proportions—drinking the milk of from five
to fifteen cows daily. They were slovenly and list-
less, not able even to make butter, or assist in any
household work, and never appearing at any audience
given us. In the fields, while at work, the women
wore a neat kilt of bark-cloth to the knees, and had
nothing on the head or above the waist. One came


292 A CLASS OF MENDICANTS.


to our hut while it rained, saying she feared being
seen if coming at any other time, and wanted medi-
cine. They are of an average height, and appear
healthy, though their husbands complain that their
offspring do not survive many years. An officer made
asad complaint to us, saying that if his wife had a
child to a servant it always lived, but any she had to
himself died. An extraordinary little old man, not
more than three feet in height (correctly drawn in
Speke’s ‘Journal’), paid us a visit. He was perfectly
sensible, though very restless while sitting for his por-
trait, constantly moving his head or holding up his
fingers close to his one eye. In contrast to this
dwarf, the king had a man who looked a giant in
strength, though scarcely six feet in height. He was
employed in conveying messages to us, and could go
through all the motions of a warlike attack, wielding
his spear with grace and agility, struggling with his
enemy, planting his foot triumphantly on the dead
body, snorting, and finishing off by wiping his spear-
head upon the grass to free it from his supposed an-
tagonist’s blood.

A class of mendicants or gentle beggars called “ Band-
wa,” allied to the Wichwezee, seem spread all over these
kingdoms. They adorn themselves with more beads,
bells, brass, and curiosities than any other race, and
generally carry an ornamented tree-creeper in their
hands. Many of their women look handsome and
captivating when dressed up in variously - coloured
skins, and wearing a small turban of bark-cloth. One
man amongst them wore, from the crown of his head
down his back, the skin of a tippet-monkey, to which
he had attached the horns of an antelope. They wan-


THE ARMS AND HUTS OF THE WANYORO. 293


der from house to house singing ; and are occasionally
rather importunate beggars, refusing to leave without
some present. <A set of them lived near us at Un-
yoro, and seemed to have cattle of their own, so that
they do not entirely depend upon begging for subsist-
ence. The natives all respect them very much, never
refusing them food when they call, and treating them
as religious devotees. Any one may joi their num-
ber by attending to certain forms; and the family of
a Bandwa does not necessarily follow the same occu-
pation. I knew one of them the captain of a band of
soldiers. This whole country was once occupied by
people of this class, called Wichwezee, who, according
to tradition, suddenly disappeared underground !

The arms used by the Wanyoro were the poorest
we had anywhere seen. Bows and arrows are un-
known, although their neighbours at Karague make
them their chief weapon. ‘The spear is small and
weak, with a thin six-feet-long handle of ordinary
wood. Excellent spear - heads are hawked for sale
in the southern borders, but the Waganda, a richer
people, buy them up. A party of soldiers, wretched
representatives, dashed into our camp one day to
rescue us from the Waganda. They wore each a
handkerchief of bark-cloth tied round the head, high
in front like a Highland bonnet, and dirty rags of the
same material covered their loins. Bead ornaments
round the neck were worn by such as possessed means
to obtain them. Others wore flattened pellets, larger
than garden-peas, made of polished iron or ivory,
and strung round the ankles.

The huts or hovels of the country were wretched ;
but there was this excuse for the people, that no wood


294. THE PRODUCTS OF UNYORO.


erew in that out-of-the-world corner—and most of
the habitations seen by us were temporary. Their
floors were never swept, but bedded with grass, which,
when it became soiled, was left there to rot like a
dunghill, and;fresh grass laid over it: vermin of every
description swarmed.

The cultivation is carried on chiefly by women,
who cut up the stiff soil with an iron hoe, and plant
the various crops. We missed the shady plantain-
eroves of that garden of African neatness—Ueganda.
No fruit of any description is grown near the palace.
Coffee is brought from Uddoo. The vegetables are
pumpkin, sweet potato, and the grains sorghum, sessa-
mum, ooleyzee, and the other ordinary varieties. ‘The
bread and porridge made from these grains are
miserable ; and butter being scarce, and no plantain
to moisten the flour, we had very poor fare. ‘The
cowries were the chief coin of the country; two hun-
dred of them bought a small bag of flour ; and in sell-
ing the meat of a sick cow to enable us to buy fowls
(for thirteen cowries each), we obtained ten foondo,
or one thousand cowries. The natives were sometimes
induced to sell butter by our making up necklaces
with alternate-coloured beads. A string of these five
times round the neck purchased three-quarters of a
pound of butter, which was brought neatly tied in the
broad fresh green leaves of the sorghum. We had
fallen upon the man who procured this treat for us in
a simple manner. Seeing him pass, his body glisten-
ing with grease, we accosted him, and gave him the
commission which he executed so well. Our men
killed a cow as food for themselves and us every third
or fourth day. ‘The natives, on hearing that meat


A BLACKSMITHS SHOP. 295


was for sale in our camp, would bring their flour, to-
bacco, or sweet potato to barter. In this way sufh-
cient variety was generally to be had, and both parties
were accommodated. We could obtain milk daily
from our own cows, though they were but poor
milkers.

The intoxicating drink sent us pretty often by the
kine was called m’wengé, and made from the millet
murwa. Kamarasi’s officer, on presenting a jar of it,
would say, he “had brought it with the king’s compli-
ments,” and that “we should find it as pure as water,”
but it tasted like the dregs of a beer-cask, and I won-
der how his highness could get tipsy upon such coarse
spirit. The person who brought the jar always went
through the form of tasting it, and the vessel was
never required to be returned, as was the case in
Uganda. Near the king’s residence a market for
this “grog,” and for meat, fowls, firewood, &c., was
held almost daily, our servants calling the place a
bazaar ; but we were never allowed to cross over the
Kuffo river to inspect it.

A visit to the blacksmith’s shop in any country al-
ways repays one, and there the gossip is usually heard.
In Africa it seems to be the same, and idlers always
lounged about the Unyoro blacksmith’s. The “ shop”
was a ten-feet-high awning made of the stalks of
sorghum. One lad sat on the ground and blew a
double-handled and double-nosed bellows, the air from
which passed through a detached earthen tube upon
the live charcoal. Two men squatted naked all but a
leathern waist-cover, hammering, talking, and smoking
all at the same time. Their anvil was a flat boulder,
and the hammers bolts of iron, the shape of large


296 AMUSEMENTS AND SUPERSTITIONS.


chisels. The only other instruments were bent sticks
as pincers, and a wooden handle like that used at
home for a firmg-iron. One man had three iron hoes
in various states of preparation ; the other was making
needles. When the bellows-boy forgot his duty star-
ing at me, and allowed the fire to get too brisk, the
smith gave him a lecture, and some water from a
brush of straw damped the flame.

One of the commodities which, being rare, we much
enjoyed, was salt, brought from Kivro, a place to the
north-west upon the Lake Lweet-an-zigeh, and which
was perfectly pure in colour and taste. The natives
there are said to extract it from the soil by boiling
and evaporation.

The amusements of the people are few, but our See-
dees remarked that the dancing of Unyoro was supe-
rior to what they were accustomed to see at Zanzibar.
We had the opportunity of seeing a few of their
dances, at which the men wore all the beads and shells
they seemed to possess, and, forming a circle, sang
and clapped their hands while going through some
eraceful figures. The nights were often enlivened
by soft-sounding duets coming from the harmonicon
and drum played across the river.

Superstition is prevalent, from the king to his lowest
subject. Some straws out of the thatch of a house occu-
pied by an enemy of Kamarasi’s were to be brought us,
that, bewitched by our supernatural powers, they might
bring calamity upon their owner, who lived miles
away. When our rain-gauge was missed, at the hour
for observing it, the theft was communicated to the
king, who sent a one-eyed man with a cow’s horn in
his hand to detect the thief. The horn was capped


VARIOUS SUPERSTITIONS. 297


over with a rag of bark, and had an iron bell tinkling
from its top. This instrument was shaken roughly in
the face of each of our Seedees as they sat down ; all
seemed to change colour at the suspicion, and the old
man proceeded to the spot where the gauge had been
taken from. He found it lying a short way off. A
hyena had removed it, as his tracks were visible. This
did not shake the faith of our men, but only the more
strongly confirmed their belief in the “black art.”
Manua wore wood tied round his ankle, which he had
received from some of his Waganda cronies, who told
him it was a charm against snake-bites. Upon Bombay
ridiculing him, he sharply replied, “ Why do you take
medicine from the Bana or Sahib? my charm answers
the same purpose.” At cross roads we several times
came upon a dead frog or fowl; and in such places,
if the party is wealthy enough, a goat is laid. The
animals are split open, with some plucked grass beside
them, and are placed there for the purpose of curing
any sick member of a family. Wonderful stories were
related of a dog having a single horn, and of the
horn being long preserved by one of the king’s officers,
and used, when war broke out, to be stepped over by
the troops as a good omen previous to going into
action. One superstitious belief struck us as very
remarkable—that Kamarasi, if he chose, could divide
the waters of the lake! It seemed a long-enduring
and far-spread tradition from the time of Moses.

No funeral was ever seen by us in Africa, and hu-
man bones were remarkably rare. The dead are buried
somewhere near the house or under the cattle-fold.
The body is wrapped in bark-cloth or the skin of a
cow. ‘The king’s corpse is dried with heat, and the


298 OUR SOLITARY SITUATION.


lower jaw-bone ornamented, buried, and a tomb-house
built over it. The hands and hair of kings’ officers
are preserved in a similar manner. The umbilical
cord of male children is buried inside the doorway,
and those of females outside, as was the custom also
at Zanzibar. We had not much sickness while at
Unyoro, but there were some cases of tertian fever and
dysentery. Amongst the inhabitants there were no
remarkable diseases ; the only complaint of the men
was that their progeny did not always live; they
could not have the number of children they wanted—
a fact which can only be explained by the poverty of
their diet and the abuses of polygamy.

Our situation was little better than that of a
prisoner in a solitary cell. We certainly had our
“morning post” after breakfast—the king’s messenger
—but there was seldom any news, and the day hung
heavily. No one was allowed to visit us but these
postmen coming to ask how we had passed the
night. Natives from interesting countries all round
would visit the king, but we could not see them!
Dances and parties went on, and we could not attend
them. Rain was felt as a relief, as it employed one
in reading the gauge every morning. The insects at
night were interesting, particularly a species of glow-
worm half an inch long, seen amongst the roots of the
erasses. If placed upon the hand or sleeve, it travel-
led quickly, throwing out a constantly twinkling light
at shorter intervals than the firefly, which also was
numerous. We slept im separate huts. Mine was
occupied by my two servants, who, though only
screened from me, talked incessantly to themselves
or to me, and sometimes got up to eat in the middle


PREPARATIONS FOR LEAVING UNYORO. 299


of the night. The head-servant was an intelligent
Seedee, named Uledi. On asking his opinion as to
copal, which is used as varnish, he said it was not the
production of an insect, although an insect is always
seen inside; but is a formation from the roots of
decayed trees, called “nango,” plentiful in Utumbee.

The march to the north from the capital of Unyoro
was effected, as before mentioned, by sending Bombay
and Mabruk in charge of some northern men, with a
letter to find out whether Petherick was upon the Nile
with boats for us. Kamarasi would not hear of our ac-
companying them: besides which, he said that, when
we did leave, he meant to keep five men of each of the
three races we should pass through, as hostages, till he
heard of our safe arrival! After many days of sus-
pense, on the 1st of November, when working at some
lunars, a gun was fired in the direction of the king’s
house, then another was heard. In the distance a man,
it was reported, was seen with trousers on. It was
Bombay; and his dress was hailed by us as a sub-
stantial proof that he had come in contact with
civilisation, For a moment there was a feeling of
disappointment, as if we had nothing further to do.
Our expedition seemed over, and we tried to scan or
predict the far-distant future. What would be our
next duty? What our destiny ?

In gratitude to Kamarasi, we sent him everything
we could possibly give away, asking whether he had
any objections to our leaving. He replied that a
couple of our Zanzibar Seedees, with their guns, must
be left with him, as he required them to deceive his
enemies into believing that we were still his guests.
Many other excuses about the unsafe state of the road


300 WE PADDLE DOWN THE KUFFO.


were laid before us, but Speke’s swaviter in modo, no
less than his fortiter im re, won the day. A parting
souvenir of two spears was sent him by the king, and
on the 9th November we glided down the river Kuffo.

The banks of the river were lined with crowds
shouting and waving adieus as we shot down the
stream. Amongst them was a woman conspicuously
dressed, and recognised by our men as a maid of hon-
our, who generally sat at the feet of the king. She
was the only female of rank we had seen, and she
seemed plain and flat-featured. Her dress of yellow
bark-cloth was striped with black, and her hair was
dressed in a ridge-like form, after the fashion of the
Uganda court. We enjoyed excessively the boating
down stream, going at the rate of four miles an hour,
and driving fish before us. The Kuffo was so broad
that two “gigs” might race abreast of each other.
The sides seldom admitted of landing, beg margined
with rushes and reeds, hiding completely the country
behind them. Delightful to us was the prospect of
the water route !


CHAPTER XIIL


JOURNEY FROM UNYORO CAPITAL TO AN EGYPTIAN CAMP,
NOVEMBER 9 TO DECEMBER 3, 1862——-FLOATING ISLANDS
ON THE NILE— RIVER SCENES AND CANOE CHASE — THE
PEOPLE CIVIL AND HOSPITABLE—DWELLINGS AND ORCHARDS
OF THE NATIVES—WATERFALLS AT KARUMA—FISHING AND
HIPPOPOTAMUS TRAP—— FERRY THE NILE, AND CROSS AN
UNINHABITED FOREST—JOIN AN ENCAMPMENT OF TURKS.


My first sail on the rvver Nile—the White Nile—was
made upon this journey, but my companion, Captain
Speke, had sailed on it at Urondogani. We entered
it on this occasion in a log canoe, a few miles below
Kamarast’s residence, at the point where the Kuffo joins
it; and we floated upon its sacred waters during a por-
tion of four days, making the rest of the journey to the
Falls of Karuma by land, along the left bank. Though
the mode of transit was not dignified, the water route
was extremely pleasant, from its novelty and interest.
Having emerged from the channel of the smaller
stream, we suddenly found ourselves in a large lake,
to all appearance without an outlet, bemg surrounded
by rushes; and without a pilot it would have been
hard for us to guess which direction to take. After


302 FLOATING ISLANDS IN THE NILE.


proceeding for an hour the scene changed: we were
upon a river a thousand yards wide, and in certain
parts so large that we had a sea horizon. The waters
struggling past myriads of moving and stationary
islands, made the navigation very exciting, particularly
when a strong head-wind blew, and hippopotami reared
their heads in the water. Having passed these, there
was no perceptible current ; but by watching the float-
ing islands rollmg round and round like a tub in the
water, we saw that the stream moved about a mile an
hour. These islands were perfect thickets of growing
ferns, creepers, small trees, &c., hiding one-third of the
stems of the lofty papyrus rush. It occurred to me at
the time, seeing such masses of these islands, some being
twenty yards in length, that the delta of the Nile
could easily be accounted for by an accumulation of
their sediment. During a smart breeze, with all their
vegetation yielding, and lying over to the wind, they
looked like a fleet of felucca-rigged vessels racing, and
continually changing their relative positions. No sight
could have been more striking as the crests of the
waves dashed against them, and the sky looked black
and stormy. It was a beautifully wild picture; the
slender stems of the tall papyrus, with their feathery
tops, now erect, then waving to and fro, or crouching
before the sudden blast, as if prepared for a spring.

By the third day all the islands had disappeared ;
they had melted away into floating fragments, or had
got ashore, and lay over—wrecks—the leaves and
fronds drooping in shapeless disorder.

Where the river was above 500 yards wide, the
colour of the water in the centre was quite muddy
from the freshes ; that of the sides a clear brown. The


RESPECT PAID TO AN OLD CANOE. 303


oreatest depth was eighteen feet, which it preserved,
with a hard bottom, till within a boat’s length of
the side, where it became nine feet deep, with a
bottom of mud. As it narrowed between steep banks
to 200 yards, there was no impediment to landing ;
the waters then became of a uniform dark colour, and
were shallower, flowing with a current of about half a
mile an hour. We landed daily to sleep ashore, and
had to pass through a long channel of water vegeta-
tion, as the sides in most places where the river was
of such immense width were walled in by a depth of
reeds, rushes, and convolvuli. An interesting custom
amongst the boatmen was observed as we paddled
past an old pensioned canoe of huge size which lay
in the rushes. A boatman patted my shoulder, and
then sprinkled water upon the veteran boat. I did
the same, which pleased the natives, who never pass
it without paying this mark of respect.

Many fine scenes were come upon at reaches and
bends of the river. One with a precipitous double-
coned hill called M’kunegurru, on the right bank, was
remarkably pleasing, the river sweeping majestically
round its wooded heights. This hill was reckoned to
be 800 feet above the water, and for a long distance
it served as a prominent landmark. The Kidi side
of the river was undulating, wild, and uninhabited,
covered with handsome trees overspread with a net-
work of flowering creepers, then, in the month of No-
vember, in rich bloom, and presenting every contrast
of colour. It was the hunting-ground of the Wanyoro
and Kidi people.

We had some exciting chases after canoes seen on
the river, the king having given the officials who were


304 CHASING CANOES ON THE NILE.


in charge of us orders to procure food by seizing any
provisions they might find. Immediately any canoe
came in sight, all our energy was applied to the oars.
The “chase” on seeing us would double and race with
all his might, till, finding it hopeless, he would strike
his colours by standing up in his canoe, when a yell
of delight burst from the conquerors, though still seve-
ral hundred yards from the prize. No sooner did we
come in contact than the prize was at once rudely
boarded. Bark-cloths, liquor, beads, and spears were
taken and concealed by our Wanyoro followers, while
the poor owner looked on powerless. The sequel,
however, was delightful: the Seedees, of their own
accord, recovered all the stolen property from the
hands of the Wanyoro, and restored it to the proper
owners, who then laughed with ourselves at the joke.

The largest canoe carried a ton and a half, and was
hollowed out of the trunk of an immense tree—not
made of planks, lke those on the Victoria Nyanza.
Our kit was placed in the centre, or formed a seat for
us at the bow or stern. Some cows we had received
from the king were sent by the land route, and had
to pass through a boisterous people, who twice tried
to plunder them. While a few goats were in charge
of my valet Uledi, four Wachopeh threw their spears
at him. He could not see the men coming on account
of the long grass, but he captured a spear and a stick,
losmg none of his herd, thus showing his tact and
bravery. He carried an unloaded gun, with ten
rounds in his pouch; also a spear, which he broke
by throwing at the enemy. We fortunately caught
another thief driving away our goats to the jungle.
Two of our men brought him into camp with his arms


WARNINGS DURING A MARCH. 305


tied behind, and a rope round his neck. On seeing
him each Seedee took a savage delight in slapping his
face, and then covering his body with a mixture of
mud, ashes, and water. They also tortured him by
binding his body tightly with cords; but during the
night, though the door-screen was fastened, his com-
rades came and released him.

When marching across country, we required aid
from the inhabitants as porters, but they showed great
unwillingness, never agreeing until their women or
cattle were seized. Kidjweega had the king’s orders
to collect a force of forty men as our guard. He had,
however, much dithculty in procuring even half the
number, the natives making excuses that the country
of Kidi was dangerous to pass through. Our route
was thus rendered circuitous, as we had to zigzag
from village to village in order to obtain relays of
porters. Even when the distance to the nearest vil-
lage was only a mile or two, most of them insisted
on being relieved, and the more refractory were com-
pelled to carry loads by our seizing their spears.
On the line of march they were lively and_ polite
enough. When any obstacle occurred on the path,
such as a sharp rock or hole, they, with their dis-
engaged hand, would slap their thigh to warn those
behind them to look out. No remark was made,
merely this simple signal given. The Seedees had
a different mode of giving warning: they called
out “ M’wiba,’—that is, thorn; “cimo,’ hole; or
“jiwee,” rock.

To return to the Nile, its scenes and sports. One
day's journal notes “four hippopotami, two crocodile,
two dead fish, and numerous small gulls,” seen in and

U


306 BEASTS, BIRDS, AND FISHES.


over the waters as we glided down the stream. The
hippos required sharp shooting, as they seldom gave
us time for an aim, sinking their heads the moment
the boat was steadied. The natives harpoon them
with barbed irons stuck loosely upon heavy poles
longer than capstan-bars; and use trimmers of “solah,”
or pith-wood, attached by long ropes to the barbs. It
must require expert swimmers to get up to a hippo in
the water and deliver the thrust. We saw small gulls
flitting about and darting at them. The dead scaly
fish upon the water were about seven pounds weight,
the shape of a thick short cod, but with a well-forked
tail, above which, as Speke observed, there was a
small rounded fleshy fin, like that seen on salmon or
trout. The boatmen eagerly picked those up that
floated along, even though they were stale. We could
not account for their being found dead, except that
they had been poisoned by the decayed matter which
filled the river. At every place where a creel-trap
was set, our men pulled in to extract the fish, but got
little for their trouble. One morning we had some
“ Macquareh” for breakfast, and enjoyed them very
much; they had as little bone as a sole, and tasted like
trout. Where the banks were high and covered with
trees, monkeys occasionally jumped from bough to
bough, and did not seem alarmed even within sight
of habitations. They were grey, with long tails,
white beards and eyebrows, black faces and ears.
The largest birds were the Batteleur eagle and the
Buceros: the former, when seen soaring and circling
in the heavens, resembles a bat in figure, and has a
black body, with the wings white underneath ; the
Buceros is a large black bird, walking awkwardly about


MODE OF ADDRESS. 307


the cultivated grounds, having short legs, and his
three toes almost of equal length.

The people were generally civil and hospitable, send-
ing us small presents of their produce—plantain, or
perhaps a goat; but they did not relish our passing
through their country, and they gave up their houses
with great reluctance. ‘This was no wonder, for our
Unyoro escort plundered wildly like the Waganda,
and escaped capture by running away. On one occa-
sion they cunningly got up an alarm in camp, and took
the opportunity, when the inhabitants were in a state of
fright, to seize their property. But in districts where
the population was numerous, all turned out to look at
us, rejoicing most heartily, leading the way in a crowd,
shouting and saluting. Some of our men became so
drunk from their good wine, taken while resting in the
middle of a march, that the natives tried, by applica-
tions of water, to bring them to their senses. They
actually wished to carry one man, and never attempted
to rob him of his clothes or gun, which he kept bran-
dishing about. We were addressed indiscriminately
as Wazoongo (white men), M’kama (sultan), Nyans-
wengeh, and Witchwezee. Those who knew us best
used the two former titles, while others spoke of us as
Nyans-wengeh, meaning, probably, strangers, sailors,
or Nyanza men.

The women wore a sort of double kilt, as if a short
one had been put over a long one. Some had tight-
fitting leggings of iron beads, as bright as steel, and
very becoming on their fine limbs. The quantity of
brass wire round some of their arms surprised me. It
seems that their husbands take ivory to the mart of
Karague, and exchange it with the Wazeenja or people


308 USEFUL PLANTS AND TREES.


of Usui, which is on the road to Zanzibar. This metal
was more commonly worn than copper; being an im-
portation, it seemed to be in greater favour.

The dwellings were detached grass huts, generally
in the middle of plantain orchards, and forming three
sides of a hollow square, with some charmed poles
outside. A store-hut raised upon piles is built in the
centre space, to contain their grain, hoes, &e. The
bark-cloth tree, or ficus, which we had not seen for
several months, abounds in the district, but never
grows to any great size. The people collect the flat
linear leaves of a rush growing on the river-bank,
and extract salt from them. After being dried and
burnt the ashes are washed, and the water, which be-
comes impregnated with salt, is used to boil potato or
plantain. Some leaves of this rush measure fourteen
feet. The papyrus is here converted into door-screens
(like a hurdle). Strips from its stem bleach white in
drying, and make beautiful fish-creels, while its pith
is converted into wrappers or coverings for jars of
wine. The pith-wood supplies floats, door-bolts, and
oval-shaped shields to the people. <A tree with com-
pound leaves was an object of Phallic worship—the
only instance of the kind we knew of. These, with
the universal bottle- gourd, were amongst the most
useful plants we observed.

We found fresh eggs placed in the forks of trees
near houses, said to be put there as medicine or M’ganga.
None were rotten, though several placed similarly in
the ceilings of the huts were shaken, to try them, and
then replaced. The spoil of hippos, their skulls, tusks,
&c., lay in small heaps near the houses of those who
possessed tackle for killing them. It was not thought


EFFECTS OF EXPOSURE. 309


lucky to throw these away, and a beautiful convolvu-
lus (Argyreia sp.) with immense mauve flowers, was
planted by their side. With a branch of this plant in
the hand of the hunter, it is believed that he is certain
of sport.

The millstone in use here is a slab from the brick-
red, rough-grained granite seen along the pathways,
and it is placed inside a hut, embedded in and edged
round with clay. Any round stone in the hands of a
woman, who kneels to her work, rubs down the grain.
These stones had not been seen in Uganda, as the people
there seldom grind corn. Another slab, with irregular
fracture, seemed of hornblende, as waving lines ran
through it.

In our short experience we did not observe much
disease amongst the people, and the country, where it
sloped down to the Nile with an eastern exposure,
appeared very healthy. Wens on the forehead and
behind the ear were noticed upon some men; and a
woman, whose hand had been cut off, probably for some
misdemeanour when in Uganda, was the only maimed
person we saw. She appeared to be an old vixen.

Tixposure in an open canoe during the heat of the
day is very trying, and told on both of us, causing
sick headaches. There was nothing, when the river
was broad, to rest the eye upon but its glassy surface,
consequently we were glad to come upon cataracts and
proceed by land. On the eighth and ninth days from
the time we embarked, both of us had attacks of fever,
sickness, and dysentery.

After a severe day of illness during the march,
I arrived in camp exhausted, at dusk of the 19th
November, and found Speke also unwell, but with


310 THE KARUMA FALLS.


the delightful sound of a cataract on either side of his
position. The night air conveyed this sound to us
distinctly, and when morning came, after a night of
fever, vermin, and musquitoes, the noble sight of the
Karuma Falls quite revived us. It was health and
joy to convalescents! There were three cataracts
upon less than a mile of the river at this point, and
each had its own music. Seated upon the rocks of
the central fall of Karuma, we were strongly im-
pressed with its grandeur. The cloudy sky tinted
the river a mossy brown, and the water was broken
into white foam by a fall of six feet over three
channels worn in the rock. On the centre block a
hut has been daringly placed to commemorate some
event. Below the falls, upon an island, other huts
are erected, but they are uninhabited, and approach-
able only with considerable difficulty. They may
have been placed there as stores for graim, as the
Kidi people on the opposite shore are constantly
plundering. The trees upon the island had their
branches connected by cords, on which were slung the
wings and feathers of birds, giving it the appearance
of a charmed spot. Looking up the river from this
fall, there is a long reach, broken by foam in two
places; but what gives enchantment to the scene is
the view of the steep banks densely covered with tree
foliage, forming a frame to the picture, and recalling
similar scenes on our wildest Scottish rivers.
Immediately below the Falls, where the water eddies
amongst rushes, we observed several baskets suspended
from trees; they were put there to contain fowls as a
bait for hippopotami, or rather as an inducement for
these animals to come and fall under a trap placed not


AN ALARM IN CAMP. Olt


far off. Across their track a cord is placed, with creepers
twined round it; and over this a short log, shod with
iron, 1s suspended from a bough. On the cord being
touched, this weight falls wpon the animal, transfix-
ing him till the arrival of the villagers, who come for
water. We tried to catch some fish with Palmer flies,
moths, and hooks dressed with red rags, but nothing
would take; although, however, we were thus unsuc-
cessful, the natives brought us large fish they had
caught in their creels.

We were not sorry to be detained here by the
officer of the district for three days, as ferry-boats
were not ready for us, and supplies had to be laid in
for a journey across the Kidi forests. As I was one
day trying to sleep after breakfast, the natives outside
commenced shouting with excitement. On going to
see the cause, Frij coolly told me to “ Nenda indani”—
2.e., Get inside—get inside! Two distinct parties had
collected for a fight—the Seedees, with their Tower
rifles at the “ready,” with bayonets, &c., and their
adversaries with spears, shields, and sticks, in position
for attack. All were on the point of fighting, but a
gun going off in another part of the camp caused them
to disperse, and we heard no more of the intended
battle. A woman, it appeared, had been insulted, and
the men got excited on the subject, but the affair was
soon over. We constantly had these little alarms.

In the afternoon of the 22d, the loud sounds of the
stringed tambira (a large harp) announced the arrival
of visitors, and it was not long before the Kateekeero
or governor arrived with a squad of rather well-dressed
Wanyoro. This official had leprous hands, looked
dull and stupid, and would give no direct reply to


OL WE FERRY THE NILE.


our questions. He was muffled up all but his head
ina yellow bark-cloth with black horizontal stripes.
He presented us with a small bull, some flour, and
three jars of m’wengé, for which on the following
day he received some beads and pills, with the pro-
mise of a handsome necklace when we reached M. de
Bono’s camp. On his second visit this governor wore
a different costume, and another variety of beads,
thereby wishing to impress us with the idea that he
was a man of importance. He was commander-in-
chief of the district, and constantly fought his men
against Reonga, the brother of Kamarasi, residing on
an island one march below the Falls. The inter-
view was not over when it was reported that a large
party of travellers were walking down the opposite
bank of the river. Through the grass we could see a
line of people going like a train, each one with a load
on his head, and some wearing white skin coverings.
They were Kidi going to assist Reonga in fighting
against the governor with whom we were convers-
ing, and they marched along with perfect security, as
a wide and rapid river divided the belligerents, and
the distance prevented the possibility of an arrow
reaching across the water. No one proposed to have
a shot at them, as we were to ferry the river, and
cross their track as soon as the party had passed. We
issued orders that our twenty cattle should be first
sent across, but Africans always reverse everything.
The cattle were not over till after the sun had set,
and we were put across in the first canoe. The canoes
were of hollowed logs, eighteen inches out of the
water, very rotten, and obliged to be caulked with
the roots of the papyrus. We had three men pad-


WE FERRY THE NILE. 313


dling with spoon-shaped sticks, who worked hard to
get us across the one hundred yards of stream, as
delay on their part would have caused us to miss the
landing-place, and probably carried us down to the
next cataract. Kidjweega, who had charge of us,
brought over a small goat as a sacrifice to the rocks,
and to propitiate our march. A “ M’ganga,” hav-
ing some boughs in his left hand, killed the animal,
and spread it out upon the path, with its head laid in
the direction we were to take. Speke was then asked
to step over it, in order that we might have a pros-
perous journey, and all followed his example. An-
other goat, I understood, had been similarly sacrificed
on the left bank. While waiting for the cattle bemg
brought across, we ascertained the altitude to be 2970
feet above the level of the sea. The manner of swim-
ming the cattle was very simple. Men in the canoe
held ropes tied to their horns, and those wanting horns
were tied by the lower jaw. There was considerable
delay on account of the tricks of the ferrymen, who,
had they chosen, might have taken four cattle over at
each trip; but when about three-fourths were crossed,
a message came that, until we gave them one cow for
their trouble, over and above the amount of their
agreement, which they had already recerved—namely,
a hatful of beads—the others would be detained. This
was acceded to, but another messenger arrived saying
they must have a larger one in exchange. On getting
this, they brought us a quantity of ripe plantain for
our liberality, and we encamped for the night a mile
from the Falls, in the middle of a forest of tropical
vegetation. A storm of wind and rain blew with
violence, making the boughs above us creak, and our


ale: OATH OF ALLEGIANCE.


unprotected camp-beds became pools of water. But
notwithstanding these and other discomforts, in the
midst of vivid hghtning and bursts of thunder, our
Seedees kept up a cross fire of shouts and songs. A
sudden ery that our cattle were wandering away, put
every one on the alert, as the beasts were to be our
mainstay for the journey of six days which lay before
us, through a country destitute of habitations. A fire
was lit for the poor animals, and they enjoyed it like
ourselves, till moonlight and the break of day.

The evening before we ferried the Nile, our Wan-
yoro escort got very tipsy, and came to salute us
with presented spears, after the manner of the Wa-
ganda, but not with such grace; neither did they find
such ready use of their tongues. After laying down
their spears, they stepped over them, and back again,
as much as to say that they were prepared to die for
us! This over, while Kidjweega hopped a dance on
his tiptoes, all his followers performed a Highland
flng round him, to the music of a humming song.
The effect, as seen by the light of a blazing grass fire,
was ludicrous and wild.

Kamarasi sent us, as his last request, that we
should go and fight his brother, who was not more
than a few hours’ walk off our track ; but Kidjweega,
his messenger, was not very pressing, and we marched
under the guidance of an active little man of Chopeh,
called Luendo. For three days we were in forest,
broken occasionally by a serpentine bog, along which
the path was a gutter with grass eight feet high, and
so close on either side that we had to push our way
through it. Emerging from this forest, the country
to the north was covered with tall grass, undulating


THE BEND OF THE NILE. oo


from our feet to the horizon, where the low hills
of Gani were visible twenty or thirty miles off in the
far distance. It was a cheering sight, for there we
expected to come upon civilisation. My field-book,
dated 27th March 1862, at this point notes: “ From
a red-clay ant-heap saw the Gani hills to the north.
Country to the right a plain of withered waving grass,
without trees. The same kind of country lay to the
west, in the direction of the river.” This note I look
upon as important, for it may be held to be a proof
that the chord of the are to the bend of the Nile,
which we actually followed, was a plain, offermg no
hilly obstacle to the flow of the Nile from the point
where we ferried, till reaching it again ninety miles
farther north. Marching through this tall grass was
harassing and monotonous; the tread-mill could hardly
be worse. If you held up your head to look for trees,
none were to be seen. If you looked for the man who
walked in front of you, he was generally hidden. If
you walked in your ordinary manner, without stoop-
ing, the sharp grasses went into your eyes and nose,
blinding you for a moment, or drawing blood ; and if
you did not keep your eyes and ears open, and take
the warning of the hole, rock, or log ahead, you hurt
your limbs, or tripped and stumbled in the most vexa-
tious manner. Several times we lost our way, but
little Luendo would good-naturedly jump upon an
ant-mound, take his bearings, and put us right again.
In going through bogs he was most careful in taking
off his sandals, which he slung upon his wrist; the
Wagani, whose only covering was the skin of a kid
in front, also took this precaution. As the journey
was nearly at an end, and a prospect before us of


316 WILD BUFFALO SHOOTING.


renewing our wardrobe, we were becoming extrava-
gant, and walked through everything with our shoes,
socks, and trousers on; but this was a mistake, as
sand got into our shoes, and the grass cut our socks
or gaiters. When we came to a pool, the scene was’
like that of a number of boys bathing. The Wanyoro
first plant their spears upright in the ground, then
take the load from their heads, doff their small cover-
ings, and proceed joyously to splash each other in the
water. Older stagers sit on the banks enjoying the
sight, smoking or eating meat cut with their spear-
heads. This lasts for nearly an hour, and then we
move off again through the tall grass, till we arrive
in camp, where arbours or huts are made wherein to
sleep. Huts left by previous travellers were some-
times met with, their fires still burning ; and we were
informed that the people of Chopeh and Kidi came
there to sport. Speke shot a buffalo, which afforded
great excitement. On his wounding him, the natives,
with spears erect, rushed at the animal, who charged
and drove them away like flies; at last, however,
several shots and spears pierced him as he lay wal-
lowing in the water. Not an inch of the buffalo
was wasted: though the Wanyoro had our loads to
carry, all was brought into camp as food. Many of
their spears were broken and bent, showing the soft-
ness of their iron. Afterwards, in our march, we saw
a knot of elephants, heard the lion, came across some
hartebeest—here also called “ gnamcera”—and were
informed that the people of Chopeh can creep up to
the wild buffalo and spear him while he is asleep.
This is strange, but is quite credible.

On the 29th of November our party of eighty souls


THE NATIVES OF GANI. 317


stood upon the face of a rock, large enough to form
the site of a garrison. Here we had the satisfaction
of seeing in front of us another height, on which
houses were actually discovered. All our rear men
and cattle having come up and refreshed themselves
from a cool spring in the rock, after half an hour's
walk we stood by cultivated ground, and in sight
once more of habitations. How delightful the feeling
after the monotony of the forest! I could not resist
a “hurrah,” and had a strong inclination to bound
forward and see this new race of the “Gani,” amongst
whom we were that night to sleep. Patience, how-
ever, was requisite. Our men walked along in Indian
file, led by Luendo sounding his small horn to con-
vey the tidings that we were upon a friendly mission.
Knots of natives appeared on the heights above us,
and we halted under a tree, waiting permission to
ascend to the village. Although we had had men of
their own race to guide us from Kamarasi’s, and they
had burnt grass on the downs the previous day to
intimate our approach, and that they might prepare
pombé and lodging for us, we had to wait till the
“lord of the manor” invited us to his residence.
By-and-by relief arrived. Two naked young fellows,
their faces whitened with ashes, came rushing like
mad “jogees” or devotees down the hill with spears
balanced, and pulled up beside us. Their bodies had
two coats of paint—purple and ash colour—the latter
scraped as a painter imitates mahogany —and this
colouring gave to their thin tall figures a very gro-
tesque look. They were soon joimed by others, no
two painted or ornamented alike; and some of them
vermilion all over. Even boys affected gay colours,


318 OUR RECEPTION AT A GANI VILLAGE.


and dressed their heads with single feathers of jays,
&c., floating lke a vane in the wind. Brightly
polished iron rings were worn round the fleshy part
of the arm, a pendant of iron-wire hung from the
under lip, large rings of copper and brass were in
their ears, and all of them carried spears with bamboo
handles. Bombay and Mabrook, who had passed
through the district some weeks previously, were
gladly welcomed with “ Verembé, verembé,” sounded
ina guttural tone of voice. They had stools offered
them to sit upon, and after some delay permission
was given us to advance.

Having mounted the side of the rocky height to its
top, we were surprised to come upon a flat cleared
space, surrounded with huts of bamboo and grass. In
the centre stood a single “miloomba,” a bark-cloth
tree, with two idol-huts of grass, and horns of wild
animals on the ground by its trunk. An aged man
with grey hair advanced, with other “elders” and
women, carrying a white chicken, some m’wengé, and
a handful of a plant with a white flower. This old
gentleman was Chong’ee, the chief of the place.
While holding the fowl he addressed us, then waved
it over the ground, and passed it to his chief officer,
who did the same. The body of our guide, Luendo,
who had conveyed us from the Karuma Falls, was
now rubbed over with m’wengé from the plant; the
liquid was also sprinkled on us, and we were invited
to sit upon the cow-skins placed in the shade of the
miloomba tree, and were presented with m’wengé,
called “water,” to quench our thirst.

The first impression made by the appearance of the
little colony was very pleasing. ‘Their beehive-looking


WOMEN AND CHILDREN OF GANI. 319


huts were cleanly swept and tidy, and their stores of
grain were raised upon rough pillars of granite, smaller,
but resembling those circular erections in our own
country known as Druids’ temples. These grain stores
consisted of an enormous cylinder made of mud and
wattle placed on the top of the stones, and covered
with a roof or id of grass and bamboo, which could
be raised sufficiently with a pole to admit of a man
entermge them. A rough ladder or stick with forks
enables the women to get to the top for the purpose
of taking out grain.

The women, married and single, old and young,
wear only a bit of frmge suspended from the waist in
front, and a pendant of chickweed, or a bunch of long
leather thongs like shoe-ties, behind. They have no
other clothing. Enormous heavy rings of iron some-
times ornament their ankles, and a few beads their
necks ; and they are not nearly so smart in appearance
as the men, who may be seen sitting upon the rocks
in the shade of trees dressing each other's hair with
shells, beads, feathers, or turned-up queues covered
with fine wire. Their whole employment would seem
to be ornamenting their persons; and they are gene-
rally seen standing in conceited and ridiculous atti-
tudes. The women carry their children on their backs,
tied by straps, and the mother has thus the free use
of her hands. The infant is shaded from the sun by
a gourd placed over its head and shoulders. This
custom is said to be common also with the Watuta
race. Here also the people sleep upon the skin of a
cow or goat placed on the clean-swept floor of mud,
and have no covering. The doors of the huts are so
low that ordinary people would have to go upon their


320 THE COLONY OF GANI.


knees to enter, but the natives are so supple that they
can bend their bodies until within two feet of the
oround, and still be able to walk. The women make
a superior description of basket, of close workmanship,
from osiers or wands brought from the rocky dells.
It may be mentioned that we had not seen the
bamboo tree growing since we were in the seventh
degree of south latitude, and we were gratified to
come upon our old acquaintance again. Many of the
trees gladdened the eyes of the botanist of the expedi-
tion, Manua, who knew most of them, as the same
species grow among the rocks rising out of the forests
in his native home of Unyamuezi. Again Bruce’s
ensete was found here, of a small size, greedily eaten
by goats; also several plants hitherto undescribed or
unknown to science, giving a double interest to the
colony of Gani. Strolling along amongst its ravines,
and wandering far in search of plants, I came upon
traps set with slabs of rock and cord: only small
animals, such as weasels or birds, could get under
them, and the circumstance shows that all races are
fond of trapping. A native from the heights above
shouted and beckoned to me; in return I beckoned to
him, and though we could not understand each other,
he was most polite in leading the way, knocking down
the thorns and branches that obstructed us, or lending
a hand over the rugged rocks. He understood my
sion that he should accompany me into the camp, but
before doing so he left his spear in a hut, probably for
fear his chief should find fault with him for appearing
armed. In return for his kindness I presented him
with some beef. Chong’ee, the morning after our
arrival, harangued the people of the village, telling


THE BEER, CROPS, AND CATTLE OF GANI. 321


them they must be kind to his guests: and that
whatever we wanted—meat, drink, house-room, &e.—
must be provided.

The beer made by the natives was strong and
pleasantly bitter, so that Bombay and others showed
the effects of it, becoming rather noisy towards night.
The beverage is manufactured from Murwa, roasted,
pounded, soaked, sun-dried, and boiled. When cooling
it ferments slightly, and it is more agreeable to the
taste in this lukewarm state than afterwards when
entirely cold. It appeared to us a wholesome, though
coarse, heavy drink. ‘The other grains here were ses-
samum, Hibiscus, and Hyptis spicigera. The last is
called “neeno;” we had never seen it before, but the
natives cultivate it, eating its seeds roasted, or making
oil of them. Although the fields were well weeded
the crops were poor, and often appeared full of the
Crotolama glauca, or “m’ceewee,” of whose inflated
pod, leaves, and flowers, the natives make a dish re-
sembling spinage. We had entirely lost the plantain-
tree of Uganda, and rarely came upon Indian corn
or ground-nut, which up to Unyoro had been always
procurable.

Like the crops, the cattle are poor, and of a small
breed, rather dirtily kept. It was amusing to see the
odd way in which our two Gani men, who accompa-
nied us from Unyoro, and who had received a present
of some small cows from the king, drove the stubborn
animals along. Simple driving they did not under-
stand ; one of the horns and the tail were caught
hold of by a man who walked alongside, and in this
way the cow was urged along the road. Of a morn-
ing, when all the cows are brought to the space in

x


322 APPEARANCE OF THE COUNTRY OF MADI.


the centre of the village to be milked, the calves tied
alongside the mother, the cow, on seeing her milker
arrive, makes water into his hands, when, having
scrubbed them, he commences to take her milk in a
neatly-made oval basin or tureen of wood. The other
domestic animals about the village were stupid-look-
ing, long-tailed sheep, with reddish-brown hair. Goats
jumped about the rocks, feeding on the leaves of the
Indian jujube tree; and dogs were occasionally met
with.

Ten hours’ marching in two days brought us from
Gani to a camp of Egyptian ivory-traders, whose ac-
quaintance Bombay and Mabrook had made some
weeks previously.

The small quantity of baggage we had left was
carried from village to village, after the manner of the
“ Begaree” system of India. Our Seedees could have
done this, but the villagers, coming forward volun-
tarily, generally enjoyed the labour. On arriving at a
palisaded village where porters were to be relieved,
we usually gathered under a tree waiting for the re-
lief. The head man of the place, when wishing to
show politeness, had the skin of a wild animal spread,
and upon this he placed a wooden stool or two;
liquor of the country or sour curd was offered, and
after enjoying his hospitality we proceeded on the
march. The appearance of the country, with its
forests and undulations of grass, and with clusters of
habitations every three or four miles, was very pleas-
ing, particularly as it was often intersected by run-
ning streams from the hills. Some of these were
torrents, and the largest was a river knee-deep, with


steep banks and bed of gravel. All flowed to our right.


ARMS AND HABITATIONS OF THE MADI. 320


We met with two new trees, both handsome, and
one of them, the Sheabutter, called “ Meepampa” by
Manua, resembled an oak in girth and general out-
line; its flowers scented the air and were covered
with the honey-bee. The other we found to be a
new species of Boscia, with long lanceolate leaves
and terminal inflorescence. The people here, though
differing very little in their mode of painting them-
selves from the Gani, are called “Madi.” Their
women have the same small fringe in front, and the
same appendage behind, formed of fresh green weeds,
plucked daily from the edges of water, and hanging
from their waists to their knees. Their arms are
spears seven feet long, bamboo bows, bound round
with leather thongs, and arrows of reed. As many
as ten arrows, each with a different-shaped barb, are
sometimes carried by one man; their peculiarity is
that they have no feathers, and their barbs are as
straight as a nail, lance-shaped, or like a broad arrow
having hooks ; and though none of those we saw were
poisoned, all were cruelly notched, to make them more
difficult of extraction. The interiors of their pali-
saded villages are kept very clean; idol horns and
miniature huts, near which grow medical plants, such
as Bryophyllum calycinum and Amaranthus (love
lies bleeding) are always to be seen. The houses are
cylinders of bamboo wicker-work, plastered inside to
make them warm, and have steep roofs of bamboo and
orass. Game-nets, arms, two-feet-long horns (made
of gourd, the shape of a telescope), buffalo foot-traps,
slabs for grinding grain, &c., are in the interior. The
mode of roosting hens is novel; a five-feet-long stick,
having three prongs, is stuck into the floor of the


324 WE REACH A CAMP OF EGYPTIANS.


house, and the hen hatches upon grass placed upon
the forks. A custom which we had not before ob-
served was, that in the early morning a jar of hot
water was sent us to wash with; and along with this
came a present of some beer of the country.

De Bono’s ivory-traders had selected Faloro, a
favourable position, for their camp, situated on the con-
cave side of a hill, with a stream below. Our junction
with them at sunset of the 3d December was one of
those happy epochs which can never be forgotten.
We announced our approach by firmg guns when
within a few hundred yards of the settlement, and a
very lively scene ensued. ‘Turkish banners flew, wel-
come guns were fired, and an army of well-dressed
men, “fezzed” or turbaned, turned out with drums
and fifes to greet our arrival and escort us the rest of
the way. A procession was formed, with music and
colours in the van, the two commanders with drawn
sabres went next, and then we followed in our rags of
clothes, the soldiers brmging up the rear. As we
passed outside the village enclosure others joined,
kissing our hands; women shouted shrily with de-
light, and we were told to be seated upon a bed
covered with leopard-skins placed for us in front of
commander “ Mahomed’s” door. The traders all knew
Petherick by name, but they either could not or would
not tell us anything about him, excepting that he was
twenty marches away to the north, and that our letter
sent to him from Unyoro had not been forwarded.

Everything around us looked strange; we had be-
come such “roughs” that the most common object in
this semi-civilised life gave us pleasure. very one
seemed so well dressed, they had all shoes, regular


CAMP OF EGYPTIANS. 325


bedsteads, crockery, &c., none of which we had seen
for more than two years. The scenes also in a camp
of Egyptians were new to us. Mahomed, the com-
mander, seated on a low stool, while being shaved by
a barber, excited the wonder of the Wanyoro. A
white napkin being placed on his chest, the boy
strapped the razor with the rapidity of lightning, and,
standing with extended arms, passed his instrument
over the whole head and beard at a frightful pace,
handing his master a gilt frame looking-elass when
the operation was completed. Donkeys were ridden
at a sharp amble, without saddle or bridle, driven by
a long stick, and the rider seated in the native fashion
on the animal’s haunches. Riding-oxen, with halters
and ropes through their noses, were exercised about
the village by negro lads, who made them go at a fast
trot. Our bedding and cooking utensils not having
arrived, we requested Mahomed to have some dinner
prepared for us. At once he offered a cow, but it was
late, and we did not wish to wait till it was killed.
Coffee in true Arab style was served, and an attend-
ant stood by offering occasionally tin mugs full of
native-made beer. When dinner was ready, a crowd
squatted beside us, and a woman stood with water to
drink. The repast was minced meat in balls served
in a tureen, a roast leg of goat in another tureen, honey
and thin cakes of sorghum ; all looked inviting, and
we longed to begin. We found, however, that there
were no spoons, knives, or forks; and we made the
most of it without them, and enjoyed an excellent
dinner, which we had not done for many a day. But
the greatest treat was to come—water was brought us
to wash our hands, and, luxury of all luxuries, soap !


326 CAMP OF EGYPTIANS.


After the repast was finished, we were gratified to find
that the remains were placed before our Seedees ;
Mabrook was so surprised on receiving a cup full of
honey, that he inquired whether it was to be eaten ?
and after having dined, they all had soap and water
served to them by one of the Nubians. A large open
shed was made over to us, but we could not retire to
rest without a prayer of thankfulness to the Almighty
for having preserved us through so many difficulties,
and at length, by His all-protecting arm, brought us in
safety to the boundary of civilisation, after twenty-six
months of unceasing toil and anxiety.


CHAPTER XIV.


FROM DECEMBER 3, 1862, TO JANUARY 11, 1863—-FALORO, LATI-
TUDE 3° 15° N.—THE TOORKEES OR TURKS — REGIMENTAL
PARADE—MOONLIGHT DANCE—PRODUCTS OF FALORO—WILD
ANIMALS—MIANIS TREE AT APUDDO—AUTHOR HEARS OF
THE DEATH OF CAPTAIN SPEKE—PREPARATIONS FOR ENTER-
ING THE BARI COUNTRY.


At Faloro we found upwards of a hundred men of
every Hoyptian caste, colour, and costume. They were
called by the natives of the country “Toorkee,” or
Turks; but there was not a true Turk amongst them,
and only one or two European countenances. Curly
locks were exceptional, and wool predominated. They
were adventurers without homes, born in the most
northern Egyptian dominions from negro stock. We
afterwards ascertained that the bazaar at Khartoum
was full of such idlers ready for any employ. The
merchants there engage them to go into the interior
for the purpose of collecting ivory ; guns are put into
their hands, an intelligent native is placed over them,
and they are sent up the Bahr Abiad (White Nile) as
ivory-hunters, not to return perhaps for several years.
These were the men we were so glad to meet, but from


328 OUR LIFE AMONGST THE TOORKEES.


whom we found it difficult to get away, although they
had been at Faloro for nine months previous to our
arrival.

The obstacles offered to our departure were many
and vexatious. The rivers ahead, we were told, would
not be fordable for two months, and we could not
cross them without using force; besides which, a
party was expected to arrive soon from Gondokoro
with ammunition and means of carrying down the
tusks in store, and it must be waited for. This we
could not assent to. As the streams were getting
dry and a march was quite practicable, our Wanyoro
men were ordered to be in readiness, but they had
deserted to their homes, and we were helpless. Seeing
that delay was inevitable, we proposed a trip to the
west, in order that we might have a look at the
White Nile, which we had left at Karuma Falls. The
reply, however, was, that there was no use looking at
the river there, because we should see it two marches
ahead on the way to Gondokoro. This information was
afterwards confirmed by our standing on a rocky height,
from whence the river was seen marked by a long line
of mist hanging over its course, which ran from the
west in a north-east direction. The next event that
startled us was the announcement that a party had
to go to a district where a quantity of ivory had been
accumulated, and that on their return we should all
leave together for Gondokoro. There was nothing for
it but submission. While we kept their camp eighty
started on this razzia or raid, bringing back about a
hundred tusks, a herd of cattle, and several slaves.
Our importunities to get away were treated as the
cravings of children, and we were told, “ Do not fear,


A TOORKEE PARADE. 329


youll get to Gondokoro before next moon.” We sur-
prised them, however, by packing up our luggage and
preparing to start with our remaining twenty Seedees.

Our residence amongst the Toorkees reminded me
of a military life, for at break of day the reveillé was
sounded regularly with drum and fife; at certain
fixed hours we had more music; and at night sentries
were placed the same as ina cantonment. But the
erand spectacle was their parade every Friday, which
was equivalent to our Sunday. We were once re-
quested to attend and see them manceuvre, and any-
thing more ludicrous can hardly be conceived. All
were drawn up in line, but no two were dressed alike,
neither had they uniform guns. Captain Mahomed
stood in front, with drawn “shumshere,” in a red
jacket and loose Turkish trousers, fez, and silk tur-
ban. His second in command had adopted the rifle
uniform of green jacket and black braid, loose pyjamas,
gaiters, and tasselled fez; he also carried a drawn
sword. Speke was the reviewing officer, and I stood
on a height in the distance. Bombay, looking very
dissipated, thought it his duty to stand alongside of
his master; but his appearance, bare-headed, with a
dirty shirt worn outside his dress, and holding a spear
in his hand, betokened a pretty hard morning’s car-
ousing. Our second interpreter, Frij, was also de-
cidedly tipsy, but had not the sense to remain quiet.
While the men were marching he would rush wildly
at them, flourishing his sword-bayonet, then attempt-
ing to show them how to march, blow his boatswain’s
whistle, repeat the commands, and interfere with the
commander, who took it all good-naturedly. The
series of manceuvres embraced file-marching, forming


330 TOORKEES AS SENTRIES.


square, and open columns of companies—moving in
these formations to any flank, over rough ground, to
drum and fife music, in slow and quick time. The
“ oeneral-officer,” who had served with Turkish troops
in the Crimea, was, of course, obliged to compliment
them on their discipline, as their marching and
shouldering passed muster; but the commander
seemed to be of a different opinion, as any man who
lost distance was at once cuffed and shoved out of the
ranks, and when one side of the square faced inwards,
I thought he would have cut them all down.

After parade, the standards were planted in the
open space inside the village, and were there saluted
by the men marching round them with drums; or a
cow was killed and the colours consecrated by putting
some of the streaming blood upon them or on their
staffs. This custom was known to our Seedees, who
had seen it done by the Sultan of Zanzibar’s Moham-
medan troops. During the night sentries were posted
all over the village, and they performed their duties
very regularly, never sleeping, although they sat the
whole of their turn of duty upon a stool or stone.
This is more than most men could do; but I watched
some of them and never saw one fall asleep. Had
we asked our Seedees to do this, they would have
laughed at us, showing the difference which discipline
had made between these two classes of men. The
Nubians were seldom idle, employing themselves in
curing skins, looking after their cattle, or conduct-
ing household matters; seeing this, our men at first
were very shy, appearing like savages amongst them,
but after ten days the restraint wore off, and they
had their usual dances and sport. We could not keep


TOORKEES AS PLUNDERERS. ool


them from getting drunk and quarrelling, until, at the
end of a week, we refrained from speaking to them,
and then they desisted. One day I saw Frij riding
with another man upon a bullock, and he offered me
a ride, thinking I should enjoy it after the long jour-
ney on foot. There were numbers of riding donkeys
and bullocks in camp. On the detachment making a
flying march in quest of ivory, &c., the line was par-
aded with a colour on either flank. At the signal of
one gun all moved off, with the three commanders
each upon his donkey—the baggage, beads, and ammu-
nition on the heads of natives. Before they returned
from this trip, a native brought us information that
three villages had been ransacked of their cattle and
ivory, and that one more was to be swept before their
return. This was pleasant news for us, their allies,
as we now felt we were nothing but spies in the camp
of a set of land-pirates! A circumstantial proof of
this was that their chief banner, embroidered in two
characters, “ Andrea de Bono,” had been left in camp
with us. They could not conceal this fact, though they
tried to keep us in the dark about their movements ;
neither could they drown the cries of a girl they
had captured. The story of this young captive was
curious. Her father had heard and recognised her
cries, and brought a tusk to offer for her release,
apologising for the people of his village having fled,
instead of hospitably entertaining the traders as they
passed. The child was returned, and a cow given
along with her. They had many more female than
male slaves; but there were numbers of captured boys,
who, being of naked races, would all their lives be
ashamed to return to their homes because they had


oon THE WIVES OF THE TOORKEES.


been marked by circumcision. Grown-up women,
generally the best-looking, were prevented from de-
serting by having a few rings of solid iron tied be-
tween each ankle, the links so short that, in fetching
water from the stream, they could only advance a few
inches at a time. There were about twenty women
in this camp of the Unyoro race, distinguishable by
all the lower incisors being extracted. Our Seedees
could talk with them, and by this means obtain infor-
mation for us. Some boys also, who were considered
more trustworthy than the Nubians, were placed by
them over their property of beads and ivory. No
doubt they, as well as many other races, were destined
for Cairo, and through them information regarding
the Nile could at any time be obtained.

The wives of these soldiers were natives of Bari,
Madi, &c., and very industrious. They might be seen,
in their only dress of a single petticoat, on their
knees cleaning what was equivalent to our doorsteps,
in the early morning, by covering the space with a
preparation of cow-dung. They kept the interiors of
the huts very clean, and employed themselves in
orinding murwa, making beer, baking cakes, or tend-
ing their infants. The women of the villages carried
a small knife in their girdle, or stuck into the rings
of iron worn above the elbow. This was a curious
practice, but not so Amazonian-like as what was told
us of a cannibal race nine marches to the north-west,
where the women carry ten small knives with leather
handles in each side of their girdle. These they hold
by the tip of their blades, and throw them at their
adversary. Our informant remarked, that after his
party had obtained sufficient ivory, and wished to


NURTURE OF CHILDREN. o00


leave this cannibal race, they were told, “ No, you are
our food, and must not leave us;” but one shot dis-
persed them, and they escaped being eaten! He
further added that they were not a nude race, neither
did they keep cattle, but they wore the skins of goats.
A knife which he had brought from Koshee, three
marches to the west, was formed of one piece of iron,
and had a round spoon as the handle to its dagger-
like blade. He probably exaggerated when he said
that the people gouged eyes with it. When a
birth took place in the Toorkee camp, drums were
beaten violently from break of day; and women as-
sembled to rejoice at the door of the mother, by clap-
ping their hands, dancing, and shouting. Their dance
consisted in Jumping in the air, throwing out their
legs in the most uncouth manner, and flapping their
sides with their elbows. One would have supposed
the whole to be drunk, but it was their mode of con-
oratulation. When the mother sufficiently recovers,
a goat is killed, and she is asked to step over its
body, and return again by stepping over its throat ;
this operation is repeated. Mothers nurse and tend
their children with the greatest care, washing them
daily with warm water, and licking their faces dry as
a dog would her litter of puppies. After this, the
body is smeared with a vermilion-coloured pomade,
and the infant is laid upon its back on the skin of a
goat, which forms its cradle. The four corners of the
skin are then knotted together, and the child is sung
to sleep while slung in the hand or over the shoulder.
When the mother is otherwise busy, the tender burden
is hung upon a peg in the same way that we hang a
cloak. A wife of the commandant’s went through a


DOs PECULIAR MARKS OF THE TRIBE.


strange custom with a handful of burning grass. She
passed it three times round her body from hand to
hand, while she walked to the left of her doorway.
The grass was re-lit for her, and the same operation
was gone through as she walked im front and again
to the left of her door. The whole was performed
with perfect solemnity until she saw herself observed,
when she returned our smile. This ceremony was
connected with the birth of her child. The women
of the Bari race cut three horizontal lines on the
cheeks of their children, and a black oily paste is
rubbed into the incisions, which are kept open, looking
raw and inflamed for ten days. I watched the opera-
tion upon an intelligent child of two or three years of
age. ‘Three deep scars were cut on its plump cheeks ;
fever seemed to ensue, as the little thing lost its
wonted playfulness and its amusing imitation of the
mother in her household duties. Ultimately these
marks become lines of raised skin, and are cut in
different parts of the body according to the race or
district. Some have them in horizonal lines on the
top of the arm-sockets; others have half-circles on
the buttocks; and a very common mark seen at
Faloro amongst the natives, was having the temples
disfigured by barb-like cuts pointing to the eyes.

The people of Madi, to whom the village of Faloro
belongs, did not seem happy under the yoke of the
Turks. Their head men only showed contentment
when presented with Arab gowns, pyjamas, &c., and
they walked about the villages with canes or whips of
buffalo-hide, like the Turks. However, they had their
enjoyments of dancing and drinking. Their most
pleasing performance was when a band of young


THE DANCES OF MADI. oD


men, usually about thirty, each with a hand-drum and
a single stick (looking like kangaroos), danced in a
circle to a lively quick tune, closing to a centre and
retiring again at particular parts of their music.

By moonlight of the 5th December, we witnessed a
most extraordinary dance in the village above where we
resided. Some three hundred nude men and women
were assembled. Six drums, of different sizes, slung
upon poles, were in the centre ; around these was a
moving mass of people, elbowing and pushing one
another as at a fair, and outside these a ring of girls,
women, and infants, faced an outer circle of men
sounding horns, and armed with spears and clubs,
their heads ornamented with ostrich-feathers, helmets
of the cowrie-shell, &c. Never had I seen such a
scene of animated savage life, nor heard a more
savage noise. As the two large circles of both sexes
jumped simultaneously to the music, and moved
round at every leap, the women sang and jingled
their masses of bracelets, challenging and exciting the
men facing them to various acts of gallantry; while
our Seedees jomed in the dance, and no doubt
touched many a fair heart. But although these night
scenes are enjoyed by the inhabitants as well as the
Turks, they are during the day oppressed by their
masters, and compelled by the lash to labour. In-
stances of this were constantly seen: a Toorkee
thought nothing of giving a woman a cut with his
cane if she stood the least in his way; and to escape
such cruelty, we saw the people removing the
materiel of villages for a new erection on a spot
more distant from the Toorkee encampment. Any
information regarding the neighbouring countries


336 MODE OF CARRYING ELEPHANT-TUSKS.


could not be obtained, because the natives feared the
Turks, who in turn were jealous, and asked us what
business it was of ours to interfere with their sub-
jects? They had also their guests who came on
private affairs. These affairs were generally con-
nected with razzias for cattle and ivory, which it was
their object to conceal from us. Having been at
Faloro for three successive seasons of nine months
each, the Toorkees had collected an immense store of
ivory, purchasing it with plundered cattle, and occa-
sionally with a few beads—sixteen pounds of ivory
fetching but two strings of large blue beads with cut
sides. Durimg this their third season, about one
hundred monster tusks, and three hundred small
ones, called karashas at Zanzibar (averaging sixteen
pounds weight each), had been gathered together.
All these were easily distinguishable from the
eighteen that had been shot by the party, as they
were red, and blackened with the flames of fire,
applied by the natives in extracting the tusk from
the elephant’s head. When about to march, sets of
tusks were securely lashed together with thong, cut
in a single continuous stripe from the hide of a cow.
One man could carry from fifty to sixty pounds
weight on his head, and when the load was heavier,
two men carried it slung to a pole between them.

In discharging our Gani guides by payment of
beads at Faloro, we gave one of them, in addition, a
pair of trousers. He at once put all his small beads
loosely into the pockets, but on sitting down, in his
usual native manner, the beads kept dropping out,
causing much laughter amongst us. To make him
still more happy, Fry tied a turban of red rags round


KNEE DISEASE IN MADI. 337


his head, which was much admired ; but the knowing
African rubbed his arms, as much as to say, “ Where
is the coat?” This man’s father, Chong’ee of Gani, a
decrepid old man, with wrinkled skin and dull eye,
had received some small beads in return for a cow he
presented. They did not satisfy him,—he must have
others, the genious excuse being that he was too
old to see such small things! Other beads much less
valuable, but larger, were instantly given and accepted
in exchange.

A common disease amongst the natives was a large
permanent swelling or growth below the knee-cap of
one leg or both. Though the size of a cricket-ball, 1t
was soft, and did not incapacitate the person from
sitting, kneeling, or walking, and grown-up women
seemed more lable to it than the male sex. Dr
Murie (whom we met at Gondokoro) imagined from
my description that it might have been brought on
from exposure to cold. The only death that occurred
while we were with the Turks was that of one of
their own number, arising from fever and general
exhaustion. His funeral took place at sunrise inside
the village ; a silent mass of soldiers surrounded the
grave, which was dug within the shell of a hut
accidentally burnt down a few days previously. And
on the occasion of this fire, | may remark that we
were all saved providentially by the stillness of the
day. The huts bemg made of grass and bamboo,
huddled close together—ammunition and property in
every one of them—and water half a mile distant,
the alarm was frightful. No one knew what to do,
as the unmanageable flames burst through the roof,
or kept creeping onwards for more prey. Nude men

Y


338 CATTLE AND PROVISIONS.


could not approach it; in their attempts to quench
the flame, they held skins of animals to screen them
from the heat, which we in our clothes could hardly
bear. Its further progress was happily stayed, but
the hut with all that it contained was soon a heap of
ashes.

In December, the people burn down the grass on
the hills and dales. The black ashes fill the air for
some days till laid by rain, serving the purpose of
manure for the following season. ‘The dews are very
heavy at this time of the year: one night my knife
was left on a bank, and next morning it appeared
rusted all over. After eight in the morning it was
too hot to walk out with comfort before the after-
noon; and although no musquito troubled us, the
place was infested with flies, which stuck to our faces
and clothes durmg a morning walk. The small
stream below the village dried up as our rivulets at
home do in summer, and, during January, scarcely
afforded sufficient water for the cattle. There were
nine separate herds, and probably fifteen hundred
cows, to be seen daily. They belonged chiefly to the
Turks, but the country being overstocked, the animals
were small and poor, and many of the calves were
not able to follow the flocks. While housed in the
villages, each animal was tied to a peg in the ground;
and when released, in order that they might be taken
to graze, all rushed to a salt bank of earth which had
been scooped out by their tongues. We obtained
provision here by sending our men with a cow to a
neighbouring village, where they killed it before the
natives, who exchanged their grains or vegetables for
the beef. Very often, when a fowl was required, the


HANDSOME TREE-CLIMBERS. 339


natives, though they would not take beads in ex-
change from us, were obliged to submit to see the
Turks knock them over with sticks, and walk away
without payment. The vegetable products were
tobacco, murwa, a few sweet potatoes, and the stringy
seed-vessel of a species of mallow, called here bamea.
The cultivations were all at least a mile away from
where the people dwelt, probably to allow a cleared
space for their cattle to range. The field-hoe had a
handle as long as the English one; it was large and
heavy, but preferred to those made in Unyoro, which
were refused here when offered in exchange for sweet
potatoes.

As has already been mentioned, the situation chosen
at Faloro by the Turks was a very pleasant one. We
were surrounded by low hills, the country afforded
delightful rambles by rocky streams, through forests,
and over downs, with distant prospects. The plants
gathered were many of them new and interesting. A
plum-tree, having fruit larger than the green-gage,
was found in the woods, and large black caterpillars
of great beauty, armed with rows of white porcupine-
like spikes, fed upon its leaves. A species of silver
bush (Protea sp.), its flowers spread out like a silvery
sunflower, with its scaly calix a pink colour under-
neath, was interesting. A. tree-climber (Landolphia
jlorida ?) lay with its trunk winding like a huge snake,
and then serving as a bridge to the stream. If traced
further, you found it had mounted a lofty tree, and
spread itself into innumerable branches, covering with
luxuriant white flowers the highest foliage. The
natives of Uhiyow convert its milk into playing-balls,
like those of india-rubber, and consider the rubber


340 SUPERSTITIOUS OBSERVANCES,


superior in quality to that obtained from another tree,
M’pira, which has not such adhesive properties.

A very handsome branched lily (Crinum sp.) was
one day brought in by Speke, who had found it on
the bank of the stream-bed. We could find no other
in flower, but succeeded in preserving and bringing
home this single specimen, which is now in the Kew
herbarium. Later — probably by February — their
bulbs would throw out fresh shoots for the year. A
variety of resinous trees were also found—Boswellia,
Balsamodendron, Khaya, Soymida, &e.

Trees of the “Sheabutter,” and others of similar di-
mensions, sometimes had diminutive seats placed
against their trunks, with the ashes of fire alongside.
The seats had been placed there for some idolatrous
purpose, to produce rain or probably to remove sick-
ness. The only other trace of superstition we saw was
in front of the chief entry to the village. Here a
slab, two feet out of the ground, with a circular hole
across, faced the entry in an upright position. A pole
with a branch of the meelalla palm (Borassus) flying
from its tip, was planted alongside it.

We had no sport at Faloro, killing only one bush-
boc, which we found feeding in the jungle of sweet
pasture and shrubs bya stream. Further up, amongst
rocks, we saw two descriptions of monkeys—one the
Lungoor, with black face and bushy head of hair,
which barked angrily at us; and the “ Yanee”—so
called by our Seedees—a smaller monkey, red behind,
and said to be so vicious that he will return a spear
thrown at him! Both were wild, and changed their
ground so often that we did not obtain a shot. The
way the Turks have of inflating a sheep or goat after


BUSTARD AND OTHER GAME-BIRDS. 341


it has been killed appeared strange to our Zanzibar
Seedees. A rattan was passed, from an incision in
the hock, to the stomach ; air was blown in, not with
a bellows as in France, but from the mouth, till the
animal became distended. Where the air had not
reached, a passage was made for it by striking the
part, and the skin by this method was drawn off with
ereater facility.

The bustard, or “cock of the woods,” was occasionally
marked down. On starting him he would get up with
the usual hurried flight and noise,make a majestic sweep
over the woods, and disappear in low ground, or, fold-
ing his wings, alight on some cultivated spot. He is
a noble bird, with rich game plumage, and nearly the
size of a vulture. The other game-birds were chiefly
quail and guinea-fowl, but our supply of shot being
almost finished, we did not disturb them. Flocks of
guinea-fowl were running in the fields three marches
north of Faloro. I had never before seen them so
numerous ; but they were wild, bemg killed by the
inhabitants with bow and arrow. A few rooks, with
peculiarly short tails, were now and then observed.
They took swift cutting flights from tree to tree, call-
ing like crows, and cleverly evading the darts made
at them by kites.

We left Faloro on the 11th of January 1863, our
loads being carried by our remaining Seedees, twenty
in number. We then travelled without the Turks for
a few days to the north, and were joimed by their
headquarters on the 31st. In this interval we em-
ployed the time in shooting over the desolate-look-
ing undulations of grass jungle. Rhinoceros, buffalo,
onameera, n’soono, &c., were killed; and elephant,


3492 GIRAFFE—CROCODILE’S EGGS.


oiraffe, eland, pig, the white-eared antelope of Peth-
erick, and other smaller fauna, were observed. The
natives would not eat the rhinoceros. Giraffe were
numerous, but very wild, they being in open cover, over
which they could, by means of their long necks, see
the sportsman. Nothing is more handsome than their
bright-yellow black-spotted skin when seen shining
in the morning sun; but as you approach to shooting
distance they canter away like camels and lash their
sides with their tails. Gnameera or hartebeest are
also most provoking animals to stalk; they allow
you to approach within three or four hundred yards,
when they wheel round with a whisk of their tails,
take a canter, and turn back to look at you. The
Turks shot a crocodile, and carried him into camp to
extract his teeth, which are used by the natives of
Madi as necklaces. They are like the long incisors
of a sheep, and being pierced, are strung to be worn
on the neck. Most of the Turks ate of the croco-
dile, but our Zanzibar men regarded it with disgust.
We ate their eggs to breakfast; and although they
were sweet and good without any particular flavour,
we had no desire to try another. Ninety-nine of
them had been found buried a foot under ground in
the sandy bed of a stream, all laid in very neat order.
They were longer and larger than the eggs of a turkey,
pure white, and uniformly shaped at both ends, with
one-third of them an air-chamber.

The stream below the village of Apuddo, where we
encamped for several days, had cut a wide channel
through the plain. Observing some shining scales on
its sandy shore, they so much resembled gold that I
thought I had made a discovery, and washed the sand


MAGNETIC IRON ORE. 343


for several hours. The result was, glistening black
sand resembling iron filings, and a mixture of these
gold scales, probably mica, but which remain to be
analysed. (Vide Appendix B.) While at this operation
of digging, a number of bees of the ordinary size came
round me, and I could observe them alighting on the
sand to enter burrows they had made. They were of
two colours, green and yellow, the latter predominat-
ing, and barred with black stripes. A few inches
underground, a cocoon of the tender leaves of the
Stereospermum sp.—a tree with pink-white blossom
—was found neatly wrapped round some scented yel-
low substance, having the faintest taste of honey. It
may have been liquid wax, as the natives told me that
the bees ultimately transport this preparation to their
hives. But the curious thing was to see it lying in the
wet sand, and almost in water, probably put there to
keep it cool from the hot winds. The natives dig wells
in the sand and take their drinking water from them.
At first we imagined they had been digging for gold, as
numerous little pits were in the ground, each with a
tumblerful of water; but we observed that the natives
filled their earthen “ gurrahs” from them in preference
to taking water from the running stream close by.
The strong barricade of sticks and logs placed
round the villages had numerous openings for en-
trance. At night these were closed by pulling thorny
bushes into them; and during the day one had to
stoop to gain entrance. Even their women, when
carrying a pitcher of water on their heads, were ob-
hged to go on their knees to pass inside the village.
The huts had not room for a camp-bed, not being of
greater diameter than seven feet; but, luckily, at this


344 THE PEOPLE CONFIDE IN US.


season, quantities of ripe grass were stacked for thatch-
ing purposes, and we could always get a temporary
shed made to shelter us from the sun. The mhabi-
tants of Panyoro, on seeing our small party arrive,
showed a disinclination to admit us inside their vil-
lages, and the Turks tried to dissuade us from hving
there; but in our previous travels we had always
fraternised with the natives, and wished to make no
difference in the present case. The consequence was
that the people confided im us, bringing their property
to be placed in concealment under our beds lest the
Turks should come and rob them. They also gave us
small presents of milk, flour, ears of grain, &c.; and
one chief kindly brought us a basin of soup and a
mess of porridge. The soup was very nitrous in taste,
too much salt of the country having been used.
Another dish they had was a mixture of uncooked
flour and water, savoured with the fruit of a date-sized
plum, the Balanites Aigyptica, Dal. The chiefs had
a singular mode of salutation, which the common
people did not venture to copy; they took our hands
successively in theirs, lifted them up as high as they
could, and then allowed them to drop. This custom
was never seen in Unyoro, Uganda, or south of the
equator; and although the hands of the chiefs were
not very clean, we were glad to submit to the cere-
mony. After the natives had become familiar with us
by our shooting animals for them, they got up dances
similar to the Madi “ quadrille.”. The men held spears
over the heads of the women, pointed their elbows at
them, and bent their heads to the right and left in
time to the drum-music. The Toorkees did not join
our men in these dances ; they were encamped outside


LETTERS CUT ON A TAMARIND-TREE. 345


the villages, and thought it was too much like savage
life, and beneath them, to participate in the festivities.

As there is no conveyance in the country except by
porters, the Turks found it very difficult to get their
two hundred loads of ivory carried. The natives on
several occasions refused to aid them, saying they were
not slaves to be made to carry their property. Re-
sistance being continued, active hostilities were re-
sorted to, and disastrous results ensued. What be-
tween the firing of guns and discharge of arrows, three
Toorkees were wounded, fifteen natives were killed,
and seven made prisoners, the village was burned to
the ground, and about one hundred cattle captured !
This was told us by some Seedees we sent back to
find why the Turks were not coming to join the party.
The women captured on these occasions remain the
property of the captor, while all cattle and ivory must
be shared by the master and his soldiers.

Within sight of Apuddo stands a tamarind-tree,
three or four miles from the right bank of the Nile, at
3° 344’ N. lat. and 32° E. long. The Turks informed
us that a Huropean had, two years previously, accom-
panied them from Gondokoro as far as this point, and
had returned to Egypt from hence, because the rains
were heavy, and he had not sufficient escort to push
further south. They did not know his name, but they
described him as having a long beard, and said we
should find his name cut upon the tree. My notes on
the 1st February 1863 are as follows regarding it: “I
visited the tree on which a European had cut some
letters, but they were so indistinct, that I walked
twice round it before I could distinguish them,—they
were grown over with a thorny creeper and bark, and


346 MIANI’S TREE.


had been merely scratched in the wood. They ap-
peared like—AIAA ; the centre letters were I and A,
and the outer ones either A without the stroke, or part
of W. Nails seem to have been extracted, and to read
it properly, I had to stand upon some lower branches.”
I at once concluded that the traveller was not English,
because his letters were not deeply cut into the tree as
an Englishman would have done it, and also because the
letters were curiously formed. The illegible letters with-
out strokes were scored in thus—AA,—as a foreigner
writes the capital letter M. Not until we reached
Khartoom did we find out for certain who this traveller
must have been. His name was AAIANI (Miani), a
native of Venice, who has protested against owr Nile
being the proper Nile, because we have placed his tree
in a position of latitude and longitude (obtained by
daily observations) different to what he made it, with-
out scientific instruments. His assertion is bold, con-
sidering the above evidence; but as M. Miani is trying
to organise another expedition, I have no doubt he will
discover, and perhaps ultimately acknowledge, his error.
In the mean time, Mr 8. Baker will in all likelihood
have passed the spot, and taken the exact position of
the tree and river. The Nile at 34° N. lat., had quite
changed the wild character 1t possessed at Karuma
Falls. Its banks were tame and flat, with but few
trees. The opposite, or left bank, rose into three
blocks of lofty bare hills, almost mountains, called
“Jubl Kookoo.” Round their north-east bluff end the
majestic Nile made a sweeping turn from the west to
the north; and looking down the stream from this
point, the scene appeared wild and romantic like the


Highland Pass of Glencoe.


AUTHOR HEARS OF THE DEATH OF CAPT. SPEKE.


At this point of my narrative I was arrested
by startling intelligence: the first dark cloud
connected with our African journey had sud-
denly appeared. In a moment, without warn-
ing, the devoted leader of the expedition was
cut off in his prime, and just as he had told the
wondrous tale of his adventurous life! On
the 17th of September, when engaged as usual
in transcribing from my Journal, my apartment
was entered by my brother-in-law, the Rev.
Peter Mackenzie, whose countenance wore an
unusual expression of grief. It was to break to
me the sad news that my fellow-traveller—poor
Speke—had been shot by the accidental dis-
charge of his own gun. I could not realise the
fact. Could he possibly be dead? Was there
no hope? The telegraph gave us none. A few
days only had elapsed since he and his brother
invited me to their home in Somersetshire to
be present at the meeting of the British Asso-
ciation at Bath, and had I gone thither and
been with my friend, this calamity might have
been averted. Innumerable such thoughts hur-
ried through my mind on the first shock of the
melancholy tidings. It was hard to believe that
one who had braved so much had thus fallen,
and that his career of usefulness was run! I
reproached myself for having silently borne all
the taunts and doubts thrown upon his great
discovery, the truth of which will ultimately be
acknowledged by all but those determined to


348 CAPTAIN SPEKE.


cavil. We had corresponded on the subject,
and agreed that controversy on my part was
to be avoided. Any attempt of the kind might
only weaken his cause, and I felt that no asser-
tions of mine were necessary to bear out the facts
which he had recorded. Truth in time would
conquer, and bear down all gainsayers, while that
erand reservoir of twenty thousand miles—the
Victoria Nyanza, with its fountains and tribu-
taries—would speak for itself. Knowing that
on our travels my attention was more directed to
the habits of the people than to the geography
of the country, he expressed a wish that I should
write an account of our camp life in Africa. I
complied, and part of this narrative lay on his
table on the day of hisdeath. It now goes forth
without his revision or suggestions —a public
loss; for my fellow-traveller had a thorough
knowledge of the country, loved its inhabitants,
was a practical ornithologist, and would have
aided me with his views on all topographical
questions. Added to a singular adaptation for
the work he had made choice of,—arising part-
ly from his imperturbable temper and great
patience-—Captain Speke was, in private life,
pure-minded, honourable, regardless of self, and
equally self-denying, with a mind always aim-
ing at great things, and above every littleness.
He was gentle and pleasing in manner, with
almost childlike simplicity, but at the same
time extremely tenacious of purpose. This was


CAPTAIN SPEKE. 349


strikingly displayed in his recent efforts to pro-
secute his work in Africa, which, had he lived,
he would ultimately have accomplished. But
God has ordained it otherwise. His will be
done! To Captain Speke’s mourning relatives
and friends, there remains the consolation that
though he died in the prime of life, he had at-
tained to immortal fame, and now rests in his
own beautiful native district, lamented by all
who knew him, and a brilliant example to the
youth of future generations. His remains were
laid with those of his ancestors in the family
vault of the parish church; and had the toll
of the funeral bells reached the shores of the
Nyanza as it touched the hearts of those in
the valley of Ilminster, there is one at least
—the Kine of Uganda—who would have shed
a tear for the untimely death of the far-distant
traveller who had sought and found his protec-
tion. J must now resume the course of my
| narrative, which has been so painfully inter-
| rupted.


At Apuddo gales blew hot and powerful enough to
melt any number of glaciers. The “ Kousee” wind
from the N.E., carrying dust with it, blew as if through
a funnel during the latter half of January ; it was no
doubt reflected with greater violence on account of the
proximity of the Jubl Kookoo range of mountain to
our N.W. While sheltered from its blasts we perspired
profusely ; but by sunset it had lulled away, and we


350 VILLAGE OF APUDDO.


were able to walk about with comfort. A coat was
then bearable, and during the night we wore sheets
of serge to keep us warm. Rain was noted in my
journal on the 12th of January from the N.E., and
another note mentions at this time, wind “all day
N.N.W., blowing with great freshness.”

Provisions—namely, koonde, murwa, and jowari—
were scarce and dear in the villages opposite Jubl Koo-
koo during the month of January, which was their win-
ter season. Large figs, called M’kooyoo, though thick-
skinned and full of seeds, were now sweet and palatable.
No crops were seen growing—all looked desolate
wastes and covers. Even the stream which flowed
past Apuddo, for three miles up its tortuous course had
not a thicket to mark its windings through the plain.
The banks dropped straight down fifteen feet to its
sandy bed, which was sometimes broken by grass-
topped and fissured rocks, and in places by ridges of
rock, making a cataract or waterfall. Above this, in
one reach two hundred yards long, the water lay deep
and almost still, teeming with fish two and three feet
in length. We had no means of catching them, and
the natives did not use nets, but most likely they had
basket-traps.

The people dwelt in villages surrounded by pali-
sades. Some of these villages contained two hundred
souls, young and old. It would not be considered
safe to have a much smaller settlement, as their neigh-
bours to the east, the Kidi, would come down to
plunder them of their herds of cattle. We observed
a leper with white hands and limbs. Whether he had
succeeded by right to his position of “M’koongoo,”
or head of a district, or whether from being looked


CURIOUS NECK ORNAMENTS. 351


upon as a favoured man he was elected president, we
could not say, but the latter is not unlikely ; for the
natives of Africa have a respect for men with spotted
skins. The Turks generally apphed to us for medical
advice. One day a tooth had to be drawn; a rag
was tied round each half of a pair of scissors, and [
had to make these answer all the purpose of a forceps.
Again, a disease which very much resembles diph-
theria, and which was said to be fatal unless cut, was
treated in an odd way. ‘The patient had a white
abscess in the throat, and it required to be cut. They
had no instrument for the purpose, and we had only
a penknife, and there was further the difficulty of
reaching the seat of the disease. The natives, how-
ever, are ingenious ; they pulled out the tongue so far
that a hair noose could be put round the abscess, and
it was then cut, much to the poor man’s relief, who
speedily recovered.

It has been mentioned that the people of Madi
wear the teeth of crocodiles as neck ornaments. The
natives of Bari do the same, and the pearly white
colour of the teeth is most becoming to their deep
bronze complexions. Another ornament seen here
was new to us: the thigh-bones of sheep and rats
were pierced at one end, and slung from the neck.
I had seen nothing like this since leaving Delagoa
Bay, where the Zulu Kaffirs, called im Central Africa
“Watuta,’ wear bones, bird’s-feet, &c, as charms
round the neck.

On the Ist of February 1863, we marched in a
caravan or troop of no less than three hundred souls
from our camp at Apuddo to some villages fifteen
miles distant on the route to Gondokoro. Having to


352 FORDING THE RIVER ASUA.


cross the river Asua, a wild rocky torrent, the journey
occupied six hours and forty minutes, our escort con-
sisting of two hundred ivory-carriers, the Toorkees,
their wives, women, slaves, donkeys, cattle, &c. The
route lay above the right bank of the Nile, and al-
though the country was uninhabited, I do not recol-
lect ever making a more interesting march. At the
fourth mile, and to the west, we heard from the
heights on which we stood the White Nile sounding
below us, like the ocean, but we could not see it until
we had proceeded two miles further. The beautiful
noble stream was breaking now and then into foam
upon hidden rocks ; or running at the rate of about
four miles an hour past islands so laden with trees and
vegetation that we could only partially discern the
opposite bank, and obtain occasional glimpses of the
river. On our side we had several species of acacia,
the double black thorned and the white; with other
trees in lilac bloom, wild figs, &c.; and, had the un-
derwood of thorny scrub been cleared away, the place
might have been deemed a paradise. The ivory-car-
riers marched steadily onwards, but I longed for the
halt, that we might have a drink of the water that
appeared so inviting. At the eighth mile a happy
break in the thicket gave us this opportunity ; and
we who had traced the stream from the Victoria
Nyanza were so glad to see our Uganda acquaintance
once more, that’ we addressed it in the language of
that country, exclaiming, “Awangeh! awangeh !”—
old friend! old friend! While resting on the rocky
bank, the views across, up or down the river, were of
oreat interest. At our feet, by the side of a foaming
rapid, fish rose like porpoises, showing their backs in


THE RIVERS NILE AND ASDA. 3093


a whirling black pool, where reeds, rushes, branches,
and logs floated about, making it impossible for any
but an adept to attempt fly-fishmge The shore was
strewed with fish-scales, and remnants of fires showed
that the natives had been enjoying dinner at an ap-
propriate spot. Looking across, an island, covered
with grass and aquatic vegetation, hid the other
branch of the river. For a quarter of a mile at this
poit no boat could live at any season; it would be
dashed to pieces on the bed and sides of sunken rock ;
and the immense body of water is so strong that no
boat could sail up it. Looking down stream, the
river ran in a deep one-sided gorge, the left bank
bemg the Jubl Kookoo range, forming a straight
barrier of escarped hills, probably two thousand feet
in height. They were bleak and barren, diminishing
in size and breaking into cones as they receded into
the blue distance to the north. At the ninth mile of
this march, we suddenly dropped into the bed of the
Asua river, and crossed to its right bank. Our first ©
remark was, “Is this the Asua we have heard so much
of?” The fording was fifty yards across, waist deep
in the strong middle current over sharp slippery rocks,
painful for bare feet. The water was good, though
not refreshing nor transparent; it ran through five-
feet-high rushes (Cyperus longus), on the right shore.
During December, this river, judging from the appear-
ance of sand lying above its present water-mark, must
be a wild torrent, impossible to cross; but we were
disappointed with its small appearance when we came
to ford it. Our large cortége amused themselves for
two hours in crossing the cattle and laden donkeys,
and in bathing. At this place I saw the brutal
Z


354 THE NILE AT 3° 47’ N. LAT.


nature of the ivory-traders. One of them, in getting
upon his laden bullock, mounted so awkwardly, that
he tilted the load over to one side, and the animal
would not start with him. He belaboured it on the
head with a loaded life-preserver, till the poor animal
sat down. Immediately he dismounted, and in rage
put a bullet through its head ; and the men around
him cut off the hump and legs to carry with them as
food, while the owner sat gloomily apart looking ‘on:
anything more revolting I never saw. Having forded
the river we encamped in a village, the inhabitants fly-
ing at our approach. We had been from sunrise to sun-
set on the road, having passed several deserted villages
and a jungle of thorny wood. The path along which
we had travelled was on the top of vertical strata, point-
ing to the north-west. It was of slaty blue rock, cleaved
into loose squares and oblongs, with quartz veins.

One morning I walked, along with three of our
Seedees, due west for two hours, to have another look
at the Nile. We tried to get guides from the villages,
but after promising they generally slunk back into
their huts. However, when approaching the river,
past the dwellings, I induced a native to give me
tobacco, when an escort of about forty men, well
armed with bows, spears, and handfuls of arrows,
accompanied me to the water's edge. For two miles
the calm river ran in a straight reach, unbroken, as
far as I remember, by rock or cataract. Its breadth
appeared to be about eighty yards, and the current
four miles an hour; both banks were dead-level, and
of stiff clay. Beyond these, rather barren hills rose
abruptly. While sitting on the bank, my feet almost
touched the water; and the level ground was dotted


CORPORAL PUNISHMENT. 355


with tamarinds, fig, palm, plum, and jujube trees, the
soil itself being then, in parts, lying under cultivation.
The people had a ferry-boat—that is, a log of wood
scooped out to form a boat; and they tied together
large bundles of the jowari straw, and ferried over
upon them. I[ had never seen this before, but further
down the Nile it is a common practice. On my
way back from this excursion, the villagers at several
places invited me to partake of milk, and the guide,
on being rewarded with a single string of beads, in a
coaxing and familiar manner asked for another. One
of the Seedees whom we had picked up in the heart
of Africa, was convicted at this encampment of Madi
of having stolen a cloth belonging to a Toorkee with
whom he lived. The offence was a grave one, bringing
dishonour upon our Zanzibar party; he, therefore,
was awarded fifty lashes. Bombay administered forty
with a whip of buffalo-hide, and Frij the remaiming
ten. The offender, after receiving the first few lashes,
eried, “ Kill me! kill me!” meaning that death was
preferable to the pain; but little Bombay, who was
flogeing him, said, “Are you a woman that you scream
in that way?” ‘The fellow was at once silenced ; but
though his back was scarred, he ate his dinner before
us and carried a load the following day. He was a
hardened culprit, and deserted from us in Heypt, after
being detected in stealing from a comrade.

The sick of this district of Madi were not allowed
to reside within the enclosure of the village ; but huts
or hospitals were erected outside for all who were
diseased. It was curious to find such a civilised pre-
caution taken in Africa. But the huts were also re-
markable for neatness and cleanliness ; bamboos were


356 SHELLS, THE COINAGE OF THE MADI.


numerous, so that they had the material for making
themselves comfortable. The floors were of red clay,
packed hard, and the thresholds of the doors the same,
but paved or macadamised, with fragments of earthen-
ware neatly inlaid. Many of the doorways had gate-
posts, with bamboos as movable bars, which prevented
goats or cattle entering. Upon the grass tops of the
huts in Barwudi numbers of large univalve shells lay
bleaching ; they were the same large, spiral species
as those seen five degrees south of the equator. The
natives cut them into circles the size of shirt-buttons,
and string hundreds of them to be worn as ornamental
white girdles round the waist. They formed the or-
dinary coinage, and if beer or fowls were required they
were used in the purchase. The value of labour was
estimated in cows. The porters engaged by De Bono's
party to carry their ivories were paid one small cow
each for a journey of four marches, and they were ex-
pected to carry a return load; so that travelling in
these parts is a difficult matter, unless you have plenty
of camel and donkey carriage: the hire is always paid
beforehand. It was amusing to observe the distribu-
tion of the cattle, but it presented much the same
scene as that witnessed at home in a cattle-market.
Here the naked natives, mingling with the well-
dressed Toorkees, as soon as they received their “ one-
cow hire,” chased it away to be tied up in some secure
place till their journey was completed. On arrival at
one of the villages, I asked the Sheikh what his beer
was like; he made no reply, but at midnight he stole
into our camp, passing our Seedee sentries, who were
fast asleep, tapped Speke on the head, and then shook
his hand to awake him. Speke immediately called


CONSEQUENCES OF COERCION. BOW


Frij, to find what the old man meant by coming at
such an hour, when it appeared that he had brought
us a taste of his beer. It seemed raw and spiritless,
but as soon as the sun had risen, the old Sheikh gen-
erously brought us a large jar full of the beverage.
The country was populous: but in this month of
February, though displaying pretty undulations or
downs, dotted with shady tamarind and fig trees, and
though the double-coned hills have wooded tops, all
had a parched appearance. The brooks were dry.
During several of our marches we met with no stream,
and what water was obtained was procured by digging
holes in the dry and rocky beds. Sometimes wild-
fruits would refresh us, such as the fig; it was the
size of a strawberry pippin, and tasted excellent. The
natives gathered quantities of the fruit of a Cucur
bitacee, the size and shape of a fowl’s egg: its yellow
rind was dried and eaten by them. Their grain they
stored in separate houses from their dwellings, and
built or placed them upon a few piles of wood or
rough pillars of stone. On arrival in a village the
Toorkee always made his way to these stores for the
purpose of pillaging. On my desiring one of them to
desist, he coolly laughed; but Bombay succeeded better
with him. As soon as our caravan arrived at a village
for the day, the Turks formed camp outside of it by re-
moving the roofs of the houses, and making their owners
carry them for them! Ifresistance was shown, the butt-
end of the musket was applied to the poor owner, or the
muzzle of the gun was presented to his stomach. One
consequence of this system of coercion and plunder was
that, whenever the people of Madi or Bari had the oppor-
tunity, they retaliated and stole from the Turks freely.


308 GAME—WEAPONS—EARTHENWARE OF MADI.


The country was too open and populous for game.
Along our route we saw none; but the men often
wore ornaments of the wild boar’s curved tusk. This —
was tied with a thong above each elbow, and looked
very jaunty on their well-formed arms. Their spears
were some inches taller than most men can stretch,
with handles of bamboo and handsomely-shaped iron
blades. Hach was shod with a sharp point of iron, or
had its end like the leaded end of an Indian hog-
spear. ‘Their iron weapons were of superior construc-
tion, and were chiefly made on the spot, as there were
traces of smelting. The earthenware was very ordin-
ary; but we remarked an unusual article of luxury,
a strainer actually of earthenware—the only civilised
bit of crockery we had seen since leaving Zanzibar :
it was chiefly used for straining beer. ‘The perennial
cotton-bush grew 8 feet high, without irrigation, close
to the houses; the pods, thick and numerous, were
now ripening. Three or four bushes give sufficient
cotton to each family for all the use made of it; the
women dye it brown, and make their scanty dress—
waist-belts and tails—of the fibre. The men practised
archery a good deal, placing a number of the large
seed-vessels of Kigelia pinnata on end and aiming
at them at 40 and 50 yards’ distance. They must
be practised shots, as a villager was brought us in a
sinking state with an arrow-mark in his side. The
wound was covered up, and plastered all over with
leaves—their remedy for everything. He had, in all
probability, been struck by a poisoned arrow, as they
sometimes use these in Madi.

We had very little sickness, and all were in high
glee at the thought of going to Hgypt in boats. Some


MANUA’S PLANS FOR RETIRING. 359


men had arrived from Gondokoro reporting that three
boats were lying there; we concluded they must be
those of Frith, Petherick, and De Bono, and we were
delighted at the prospect of meeting Petherick. The
time we were detained by the Toorkees, because they
had difficulty in procuring porters to carry their ivory
to Gondokoro, was occupied in botanising or gossiping
with our men. Manua, the “ Man of the Moon,” was
forming his plans as to what he would do after he
got paid for the journey. He said, very truly, that
Zanzibar life would not suit him; he could not afford
it; because if he retired there, he would have to pay
for water, food, drink, clothing, and house-room. His
plan, therefore, was to purchase beads and cloths and
take them for sale to his native land of Unyamuezi—
a resolution which shows the mercantile nature of his
race. This little fellow was very intelligent, and a
oreat traveller. He talked in high praise of his late
king, Foondeekeera, and was quite in raptures when
he mentioned his name. It seems that before the
king’s death a man and woman were suspected of
having worked an enchantment upon him, and they
were slain; but the king died nevertheless ; none of
his wives were buried with him, and a house was
built over the grave. The chief of Wakeembwah, to
the west of Unyamuezi, is laid in the bed of a small
stream when he dies, and fifty living women (his
wives), and fifty men, are tied to frames and drowned
in the same stream to commemorate the event. Their
race practise the rite of circumcision, which is excep-
tional in Central Africa.

Between the district of Madi and Gondokoro there is
a tract of country 40 miles long, inhabited by the Bari,


360 TRAITS OF SEEDEE CHARACTER.


who are the terror of all ivory-traders, as they are an
independent and powerful race of people. In passing
through their country we were told that our guns
should always be at hand, that we should not drink
any water, as it was poisoned, and, above all, that we
should move across the country in a compact body,
and not in procession. On seeing the nipple of Bom-
bay’s gun blown out, I inquired how he was to get
through the Bari ?—was the gun safe to fire in its
patched state? Oh yes, he’d fire it, because the gun
was strong—it had stood the proof of three cartridges !
How was that? “It’s some time ago now; but Ubede,
Abdulla, and a man who deserted, had a spite at me,
and each of them put a cartridge into this gun, thinking
it would blow my head off, but the nipple was only
blown out.” He was such an excellent little fellow
that he never told us this when it happened; and
when asked whether he had suspected his enemy Bar-
aka to have played him this trick, he generously re-
plied, “No, I never suspected him.” One other in-
stance of the Seedee character may be mentioned
before giving an account of our travels through the
Bari people. Our cook boy, M’kate, a very tall good-
looking lad, ever obliging and good-humoured, one
day left a cooking-pot twelve miles behind. He was
admonished by Frij, and took the matter so much to
heart that he travelled back for it alone that same day
and returned during the night, having recovered the
old pot, which was certainly not worth the journey.
It only proves what men will do with kind treat-
ment; he was not asked to go back, and had walked
by himself thirty-six miles through a strange country.


CHAPTER XY.


PASSAGE THROUGH THE BARI—POISONED STREAMS—-GONDOKORO
—MEETING WITH MR SAMUEL BAKER—MR AND MRS PETHE-
RICK ARRIVE AT GONDOKORO—TRADE AND TRADERS —THE
NILE AND MODE OF FERRYING IT — EMBARK IN BAKER'S
BOATS FOR KHARTOOM.


THe Bari country was a series of gently swelling
downs, sloping to the Nile a few miles to our left.
The downs were covered with grass now ripe and
only a foot high. During the bright mid-day sun,
with a fresh, hot breeze, the grass, when set on fire,
burns with alarming rapidity ; but in the darkness of
night, when the air was still, it burned quietly but
brilhantly, and we dined by its hight: no theatrical
footlights or exhibition of fireworks could compare
with the brillancy of the consuming flame. Densely
foliaged tamarinds covered with ripe fruit, wild plum,
sheabutter, and several other umbrageous trees scat-
tered over the landscape, gave it the appearance of an
English park, for here no palms nor other tropical
genera were to be seen. We had to step over num-
bers of running rivulets whose channels and banks
were generally of rock. In the rainy season these
torrents must be difficult to cross, as they have all


362 BARI MEN AND WOMEN.


worn deep beds for themselves; but now in fording
the largest they only reached to the knee, and with
bare feet we enjoyed the wading. Their waters were
rather insipid and tasteless.

We dared not rest at any of the Bari villages, as
the Toorkees distrusted the people; but Bookhait,
the second in command of the traders, beckoned
to a Bari, and he frankly joined us. He was a
tall, erect, thin man, naked from head to foot, but
with all the airs of a well-dressed beau, for his
body was smeared with a red clay pomade. Above
each elbow he wore a massive ring of ivory, upon one
shoulder he carried a diminutive stool of one piece of
solid dark wood, and he had a rope-sash which pos-
sessed a five-finger-like charm ; he was unarmed. Next
morning he brought into camp a very fine tusk, for
which he received in exchange a female goat and its
kid—cheap ivory certainly. The women wore each
along apron of leather to the knee and a separate
broader one of sewn leather behind: these skins they
colour with clay, and they seem to wear no ornaments;
however, there was not much opportunity for obser-
vation on our part, as they ran away on observing us
watch them. It seems strange that these people, who
for the last thirty years have been only from twenty
to thirty miles distant from the Austrian mission-sta-
tion at Gondokoro, should still be so wild; but the
missionaries state that the ivory trade has spoiled the
country for civilisation, and whenever the inhabitants
see a foreigner, white or black, they look upon him as
an enemy, come for no other purpose than to seize
cattle or whatever else he can.

In travelling through the Bari our large caravan


THE BARI POISON THE STREAMS. 363


was astir at the rattle of the drum in the morning,
and marched the whole day, except the three hottest
hours, which were spent under shady trees. Dur-
ing the march the colours led the way, no one
was allowed to precede them, and a complete cor-
don of armed Toorkees surrounded the moving mass
and kept order. In this way we proceeded across
country at a smart pace, allowing no straggling, but
making many halts. Sometimes, at several fields’
distance, or outside their palisaded huts, or under
trees, knots of the people watched us. A favourite
position with them was to stand on one leg, resting
the foot of the other leg against the standing limb
above the knee. A spear balanced them more firmly,
but the posture would be most uncomfortable to a
Huropean. We passed through one body of the men,
and they showed no fear till they saw our white faces,
when they ran wildly away. While halting to drink
and refresh at a stream, after I had quenched my
thirst, seeing some large branches of the Huphorbia
antiquorum placed in the water with stones over
them, I inquired what could be the cause of the
branches being so placed, when they replied, “Oh!
have you drunk of the water? that plant has been
placed there to poison it.” The Toorkees laughed
when told that I had been drinking heartily, but as
the stream ran as clear as crystal I had no hesitation
in partaking of it again, and felt no bad effects. The
natives preferred digging holes in the sand of the
stream, and drinking from them. The Bari are no
doubt a dangerous people. We had two porters
wounded by their arrows, of which they carry num-
bers, and they showed such a front on the occasion


364 PREPARATIONS FOR AN ATTACK.


of my umbrella being accidentally left behind, that,
although thirty of our men went back to recover it,
they thought it prudent to abandon my old and trusty
friend! Our most serious affair with them was on the
night of the 14th of February 1863, the day before
getting into Gondokoro. A most anxious night it
was: we were all lying encamped upon a grassy slope
round a large tree within a mile of the Nile, when,
having dined, Frij came to us, saying, “Have you
heard that the natives are coming to attack us? Ma-
homed says we must be prepared with our guns for
a fight.” “Do you hear that, Speke?” “ Yes,” was
the calm reply. On reflection, we remembered having,
shortly after our arrival, seen the porters and Toorkees
go to the village and take away a quantity of pali-
sading, and whatever other articles they could carry.
The smoke of two guns had also been seen; but
whether any natives were killed, the Toorkees would
not say. The people had fled at the time, and their
return accounted for the present alarm. Darkness
soon fell on the camp. We ascertained that the sen-
tries were unusually alert, so we retired to rest; but
about ten o'clock my servant Uledi awoke me, saying
that “the natives were about to attack us. Do you
not see their fires?” Sure enough one-third of the
horizon was a flame of burning grass, and my first
impression was that we should immediately be sur-
rounded by the spreading fire. The natives screamed
and beat drums, and men carrying torches made of
orass collected from other villages. We now dressed,
placed our rifles by us, and sat watching the scene.
Dances in circles were performed to drum-music
beaten in the most furious manner, and the women’s


WE SEE GONDOKORO IN THE DISTANCE. 065


shrill voices sounded loud amidst the bargoma and
other horns. Overcome at last by sleep we lay down
again, and at daybreak awoke to find the rest of the
night had passed without further disturbance. This
was very fortunate, as had the maps, journals, and
collections of our expedition perished on this occasion,
the loss to us would have been irreparable. During
the night, Captam Mahomed was asked to send them
by a bearer to Consul Petherick at Gondokoro, but he
replied that no one dare travel at night, and that the
fires and dancing we saw were only an intimation that
we would be attacked in the morning. Twice the
enemy had come up to our camp, but the click of the
sentries’ gunlocks frightened them away.

We all moved off in a compact mass by daylight of
the 15th February, and were not molested, though we
passed villages, outcropping rocks, and jungle of low
trees, all favouring attack. After proceeding seven
miles the features of the country completely changed
from highland to lowland. As far as the eye could
reach, there was to the north a dreary plain, dotted
with the Punjab madar, growing upon firm and heavy
sand. As we approached Gondokoro, a white speck
was pointed out to us as the keneessa, or church, the
spot where the Austrian mission-house stood. After-
wards we could see the masts of Nile boats, the ap-
pearance of which increased our excitement—I could
have flown to them; and when our band of Toorkees
drew up a mile from them to form line and fire a feu-
de-jove, | had great difficulty im submitting to the de-
lay. However, Speke was tolerably cool, and we all
marched in together. Entering the first respectable
hut we reached, we inquired for our friend Petherick,


366 OUR MEETING WITH BAKER.


and were informed that a gentleman had been there
only a few minutes before. The inmates offering to
conduct us, we proceeded in quest of the gentleman
referred to, and soon had the happiness to see a sturdy
English figure approaching. With a hearty cheer, we
waved our hats and rushed into the arms, not of Pe-
therick, but of Baker, the elephant-hunter of Ceylon,
who had bravely come in search of us. All England,
he said—nay, all HEurope—believed that we should
never get through the tribes! Here we were, however,
orateful for our preservation, and grateful also for the
sympathy of our kind friends and countrymen. Baker
led us to his “ diabeah,’ or Nile pleasure-boat, and we
found him surrounded with many of the comforts of
civilised life long denied to us—tea, sugar, coffee,
bread, wine, &c. We had had no English news later
than August 1860, and now it was February 1863 ;
so that there was much for us to hear of national af-
fairs, as well as matters of private interest. But where
was Petherick? Had he made no preparations for us ?
or, finding we had not been able to keep to time, had
he despaired and given up the search? A handsome
diabeah and luggage-boat of his were here, but there
were neither letters nor instructions for us. He him-
self was not at Gondokoro, and had never been there.
Instead of co-operating with our expedition, he had
gone to his own ivory depot in the west, and only
arrived at Gondokoro four days after ourselves. We
learned from Baker that kind friends in England had
placed £1000 in the hands of Mr Petherick for our
succour, and were doubly surprised that he had made
no effort to meet us. It was to M. de Bono’ men,
and not Mr Petherick’s, that we were indebted for our


THE CLIMATE OF THE WHITE NILE. 367


escort. I feel it due to the memory of my companion
to state these facts, and to say that I had the same
feeling of disappointment which he had, and that our
meeting with Mr Petherick was by no means the cor-
dial one we anticipated. Having been previously
supplied with all necessaries, and three return boats
by Baker for conveying us to Khartoom, we required
nothing save a few yards of calico to replace the bark-
cloth rags of our twenty Seedees, and this we obtained
from the stores of Mr Petherick.

We halted at Gondokoro from the 15th till the
morning of the 26th, so that Speke might find the moon
in lunar distance for the longitude, which he ascer-
tained to be 31° 46’ 9” east, and latitude 4° 54’ 5”
north. During this dry season it was very hot, the
thermometer ranging from 94° to 100° in the shade ;
but it was thought a better climate and more pleasant
residence than Khartoom, there being only two hot
months, January and February, during the year. Be-
tween Gondokoro and Khartoom the White Nile is
reported unhealthy; and amongst its many European
victims was a distinguished French naturalist, Dr
Penny, who had explored farther south than any pre-
vious traveller. His loss was deeply felt at Khartoom.
Many of the servants of the traders were suffering from
ulcers, having been in swampy countries; and on the
tenth day of my arrival at Gondokoro I had an attack
of fever. Nearly all our Seedees had tapeworm dis-
ease, contracted on the journey. The animal gener-
ally appeared in single white portions, one inch long
and one-third of an inch broad. It gave them no
pain, nor did it reduce the men in flesh, but it was
very inconvenient. Bombay vomited one, which meas-


368 THE NILE AT GONDOKORO.


ured six to nine inches in length, with pointed head
and tail. This happened several times to him; but
he thought that until he got rid of the great one,
which he called their “mother,” the disease would
stick to him. On our arrival at Khartoom I prescribed
half a tumbler of salt dissolved in water; but having
once tried my remedy, the Seedees pronounced it too
nauseous to try a second time. Speke, half-a-dozen
of our twenty Seedees, and myself, were the only men
of our expedition who escaped this disease.

The Nile at Gondokoro is in two branches; the
main one lying on the right, and a small low island,
on which cattle feed, divides it from the left branch.
The old banks were at this season fifteen feet above
the alluvial deposit of the river, which again was four
feet out of water. There seemed a greater body of
water, because it was spread over a larger surface, than
when we had seen it thirty miles farther up. Here
the strongest current, bearing to the right, was about
three miles an hour, and the breadth a hundred and
fifty yards. Standing upon the bank, and looking
around, the country presents a flat Egyptian aspect,
with the solitary hills of Rujub, Beeleenja, &c., to the
N.W.,S.W., and 8. The water was full of lake debris,
making it muddy and disagreeable to drink until al-
lowed to settle. All day long parties of three and
four natives swam across, resting upon a log of the
pith tree or ambadj. They do not swim as we do in
England, but stretch out their arms alternately over
the water, crowing loudly “ ow, ow,” as they go merrily
across. Although there were small canoes on the
river they were not often used, even when produce was
to be conveyed from one bank to the other. They got


|
a


ANIMALS—GONDOKORO AS A PORT, 069


sooner over by swimming, and when a cow was killed
on the opposite bank, its meat was placed inside the
inflated skin, and propelled through the water by the
man swimming behind it. Crocodiles were no doubt
numerous, but we saw no accident; they must be
frightened by the number of people who daily cross at
this point. We heard from Petherick of crocodiles as
high as a table, and twenty-five feet long. At night
the stillness was often broken by the trumpets of the
hippopotami, which sound softer and more musical than
when heard during the day. Baker had an excellent
fishing-net, with which, in a jolly-boat, his men would
cross the river to still water, and in a couple of hours
bring back half-a-dozen species. Some resembled her-
ring in shape, but the best for eating was a large flat
fish. Of birds, the most interesting was a scarlet and
ereen fly-catcher, which nestles in the perpendicular
banks of the Nile lke a swallow. We had not met
with it on the journey. It took short flights, rapidly
skimming the air, and then resting for a moment on
the brink of the bank. From the Nyam Nyam coun-
try to the west very handsome black goats are brought,
remarkable for their small size and long hair. It may
be worth mentioning that we here saw leeches, which
we had not met with in any previous part of our
journey ; whereas, in the Himalayas, one cannot go
through the grass returning from a day’s sport with-
out having a dozen of them fastened on one’s legs.
Gondokoro presented quite the appearance of a sea-
port, there being twenty large boats anchored there.
We had understood it to be an outlandish place—dan-
gerous and almost inaccessible. But for the last five-
and-twenty years or more it has been a mission-station
2A


370 KOORSHID AGA’S HOSPITALITY.


and place of trade. For about fourteen months previ-
ous to our arrival, it had never been without Egyptian
boats and boatmen. A sailing boat, “diabeah,” or a
“neeour,” leaving Cairo in November, can reach Gon-
dokoro, with a north wind, in three months. On the
19th February, Baker received English news dated 1st
November. ‘The return journey to Khartoom is made
so as to insure arrival by June, with the advantage of
the south wind ; but we made the voyage much earlier,
and landed on the thirty-third day from Gondokoro.
To give an idea of Nile travelling in these regions, [
may mention that a boat which conveyed Baker, with
his crew, attendants, and four horses, was hired by
him at Khartoom at eight pounds per month—a most
comfortable boat, with two cabins. The pay of his
sailors was lower than what we paid our Seedees for
the journey—namely, two dollars per month, and the
helmsman and carpenter seven dollars each. Their
food, “doora,” grain—+z. e., jowari—would cost, say,
ten dollars monthly; so this, altogether, was cheap
travelling on the, Nile. He had also brought up
several camels and donkeys; and the former gave an
Oriental look to the scene around his encampment.
Koorshid Aga, a Circassian gentleman, lived here for
some months, and was noted for his hospitality.
Plainly dressed, and living in the most simple style,
he would produce to his friends sparkling wines and
other luxuries in profusion, for which we could make
no return. Here he remained in security, with his
guard-ships at anchor in the Nile below his premises,
while his three or four hundred dark Nubians, armed
with beautiful, though cheap, percussion guns, were on
their beat for ivory in the interior. He had his tract


THE WHITE NILE TRADE. 371


of country or “preserve,” like all other traders.
“ Latiffe’s beat,” “ Petherick’s beat,” “ Koorshid Aga’s,”
“De Malzac’s,”—all were known by these names,
just as we know the “Black” or “ Braemar” forests.
A trader who attempted to go upon another’s beat
was considered a poacher, and a fight would certainly
ensue if this etiquette were violated. Events taking
place in these wide ranges of country are little known,
as every party is a world to itself, and all are jealous
of one another. But if the stories of “ White Nile
trade” be true, it is considered disreputable for any
Kuropean to engage in it. The “Blue Nile trade,”
on the other hand, is esteemed respectable ; but here
also there is some jealousy when a new competitor
enters the field. The reports we heard at Faloro of
Mahomed’s men attacking villages by surrounding
them at the hours of deepest slumber, and capturing
their people and cattle, &c., were here confirmed to
us, and these raids had taught the men of Gondokoro
the most lawless habits and practices. Life was un-
safe, guns loaded with bullets were constantly fired
out of bravado close to our boats, the consequence of
which was that fatal accidents occurred, and there
was no government or police, and no river steamers to
stop the slave-trade. Consul Petherick was looked
on as an interloper; he tried to put down this illicit
traffic, but he was opposed by a clique, and his men
saw no advantage in his service or that of any Huro-
pean. They could not keep slaves, so there was great
discontent.

We saw with Koorshid a splendid and well-shaped
old tusk, which weighed one hundred and thirty-five
pounds, and which at Khartoom would fetch 114


372 THE MISSION-HOUSE AT GONDOKORO.


dollars. Every country has its own particular quality ;
and I should imagine the ivory produced from the tall
reed grasses of a forest country like Uganda would
not be so favourable for forming huge tusks as the
vegetation in a lower and more swampy country, al-
though the ivory would be of firmer texture. We
were told that the ivory of Kitch on the Nile, at
6° 49’ N., was of a superior description ; the country
there is swamp and covered with reeds to the horizon.

The mission-house at Gondokoro had been built
some thirty years ago. Dr Knoblecker, a very
eminent man, had long laboured in it, but now it is
a mere shell, and its garden of lime, pomegranate, and
orange-trees 1s a waste for cattle to graze in. We
met a kind hospitable gentleman, Mr Moorlang of
the Austrian mission, on his way to Khartoom : his
station had been at Kitch. He gave a mournful ac-
count of his labours, and was now recalled because
the influence of the traders had checked his endea-
vours to propagate the Gospel. He had found the
natives always civil, but if they or their children were
not presented with clothes and beads, they kept aloof
from him, and ultimately looked upon the missionary
as having paved a way for the Nile trader to traffic
in slaves.

In walking about Gondokoro, the natives always
addressed us with “ Adhoto,” which may mean Good-
morning ; some got as far as to say, “Salam alek.”
They were all nude like the Bari, and carried a small
basket, in which were a few pieces of charcoal with
which they lit their pipes. A baron, very highly
spoken of, was killed by them a few years ago; his
men had accidentally, when firmg their guns at ran-


PREPARATIONS FOR LEAVING GONDOKORO. 373


dom, shot a native, and as no redress was given, the
men were attacked, and sixteen of their number slain.
The poor baron was away shooting ducks at the time,
and, returning in the middle of the tumult, was killed.
A missionary, whose boat was close by, was not touched.

At Khartoom it was not expected that we would
ever succeed in crossing Africa, but Madame Tinne,
her sister the baroness, and Miss Tinne, had more
hope of us, and in the most philanthropic manner,
braving the malaria of the White Nile, they reached
Gondokoro in a steamer expecting to aid us. The
natives will long remember their humanity and
generosity ; but the deadly swamps have since proved
fatal to poor Madame Tinne, and also to a medical
man of her party, and several HKuropean servants.
Mr Baker, too, was full of hope, and had told the
people of Khartoom that, as Bruce had discovered
the source of the Blue Nile, our party would decide
that of the White. At length it was time we should
leave Gondokoro. By the 25th of February 1863,
Speke had found the moon in proper position for
taking lunars. We had heard all the English news
from Baker, we had shared his hospitable table during
our stay, seen his spirited sketches, and listened to his
animated conversation. Our boats were filled with
the necessaries and comforts of life, and everything
was prepared for our starting with the stream in the
morning.


CHAPTER XVI.


GONDOKORO TO KHARTOOM, FROM 26TH FEBRUARY TILL 30TH
MARCH 1863—-LEAVE GONDOKORO BY BOAT——-THE SHIR
COUNTRY— AUSTRIAN MISSION -STATION AT KITCH— THE
RIVERS BAHR-EL-GHAZAL, BAHR-GIRAFFE, AND SOBAT——THE
SHILLOOK COUNTRY—BANKS OF THE NILE— ARAB SETTLE-
MENT OF EL EIS—ENTRY INTO CIVILISED COUNTRY—ARRIVAL
AT KHARTOOM.


Our Seedees were divided among the three return
boats furnished by Baker to convey us to Khartoom.
Two were negurs or baggage-boats, made roughly of
the Acacia Arabica or soonud, and having each an un-
wieldy sail, without awning or cabins. ‘The third was
a diabeah, which we and our private servants occupied.
Her build was lower in the water than the others, the
hold was neatly boarded over, and upon it was built
a poop-cabin. She drew three feet of water when
unladen, and had the peculiar Nile rig, with twelve
rowers, a helmsman, and a captain or “nakhoda”
named Diab. Two of the other hands were not forth-
coming, preferring to lead a roving life with their
former master, Baker; but at two in the afternoon of
the 26th, having bade adieu to all, we shoved off, and
floated down with the current. The oars were rudely


THE PEOPLE OF THE SHIR COUNTRY. 315


tied with rope to the gunwales, and the men only re-
quired to keep the boat in the stream and prevent her
getting ashore on banks of sand. When any exertion
was required, they rose from their seats, laying the
weight of their bodies on their oars, and joined in a
pleasing monotonous song, led by the “stroke” of the
party. Proceeding in this way against a slight head-
wind seemed no labour to them; they rowed, joked,
sang, or munched dry “ dooro,” bread and garlic, from
sunrise to sunset. By noon of the third day we had
made great progress—namely, one degree of north lati-
tude—notwithstanding that we lay-to during the night
on account of the shallows. We had reached a sta-
tion of Koorshid Aga’s in the Shir country, and passed
through a corner of the Berri country. The banks
were orassy and flat, and the trees were covered with
creepers, giving them the appearance of old towers or
abbeys. ‘The river was divided by islands into four
branches, and it required all the knowledge of our
captain to decide which of them to choose. Some of
the islands were covered with cattle, which ran off as
they saw our boat approach. In the dry season, the
natives bring down their cattle to graze and water
them near the river. Their rustic settlements, of a
conical form, with numerous people about, were built
upon the very banks of the river, and were so small
that a single man could hardly le at length in them.
The people sometimes spoke to us, wishing to get
beads; but possessing so many cattle, they certainly
were not objects of compassion. Nearly all of them
were covered with ashes, as if they had lain in them
during the night.

Sitting on the poop-deck, we watched the scenes on


376 SCENES ON THE NILE.


the river. Pelican flew in solemn procession, or
marked the water's edge by a line of white. Myriads
of the Indian paddy-bird perched upon the trees.
There were cranes, divers, and sometimes a fish-eagle.
At one time I[ counted the heads of twenty-two hip-
popotami, a perfect shoal of them, packed as close
as they could swim together, looking like monstrous
retriever dogs in the stream. Some were spouting
water, others dipping, others snorting, and others
rearing their heads and shoulders ; but as we got near
them, all dived to come up again scattered. This
packing seemed common, as at other places we came
on them in the same order, with cranes perched on
their heads.

We saluted Koorshid’s colours with two guns from
our deck at a Shir village where we lay-to for some
hours. Two of his soldiers, holding possession of the
place, were posted with a supply of beads, &c., with
which they purchase ivory. The village chief came to
call on us; he was dressed like a Turk, with a fez and
long-sleeved gown of pink striped calico, but the crowd
of natives who sold commodities on the bank were nude,
only that their skins were covered with wood-ashes.

They made here an excellent basket, shaped like a
finger-glass, from the fronds of the doom palm. Its
fruit and flour, tasting of gingerbread, as also tobacco,
were exposed for sale, in exchange for our men’s pro-
visions of doora-grain. Many of the nude natives
had been circumcised, and all had their lower incisors
extracted like the Wanyoro. On entering the village
we found it clean and tidy; the part before each
doorway plastered as a space to sit upon. Here, sit-
ting by some standards, three women received us


WOMEN OF SHIR—RACE OF ALIAB. 377


eraciously by shaking hands and saying, “Adoto.” They
were the last race that we saw wearing only fringes and
switch tails of corded fibre. They smoked clay pipes,
in shape like a reversed cone, with two resting-prongs,
each holding half a handful of tobacco; and their long
stems had mouthpieces of iron, quite fashionable in
comparison to those seen in Uganda. The young
men sported a two-feet-long piece of solid Dalbergia
wood, the shape of a marline-spike, but tapering at
both ends, and often nicely milled longitudinally.
There was nothing further to remark about this Shir
village, but that the cattle were comfortably housed
under sheds made of the fronds from the doom palm
—a tree we had not seen since leaving the Zanzibar
coast.

The next race we came among were the Ahab,
known at once by their women being partially dressed.
Here they slung a goatskin over the shoulder, like the
Wanyamuezi, to hide their chests, and two other skins
were tied round their waists, depending in front and
behind. We were told, however, that only married
women were allowed to wear all this clothing. The
men were also distinguishable by a tuft of wool on
the crown of their heads, a circle of very white mud
plastered round it, and their faces and bodies covered
with ashes. They did not seem at all afraid of us, for
they assisted in pushing off our boat. Their diet is
said to be almost entirely a milk one, and they have
numerous herds. We put in to the left bank at the set-
tlement of Shenooda, a Khartoom merchant, and found
the latitude to be 6° 5’ 9” N. Another station, where
there were forty men and a boat, was low and un-
healthy, the musquitoes at night being in myriads.


378 OUR PARTY ARE FIRED UPON.


Our crew were somewhat lazy, and stopped nearly a
day at this point under pretence of laying in wood,
but in reality to talk with the people, and kill a cow.
However, we were rewarded for the delay by getting
a favourable breeze near the point where we again
joined the main stream.

From thence to the Austrian mission-station of
Kitch the banks did not present any landing-place ;
we were hemmed in by reeds, and not a tree was to
be seen. The station consists of a few round huts,
with doors and glazed windows—a miserable place
for the clergyman, the Rev. Mr Moorlang, who had
there spent three years of his life. To land we had
to be carried through swamps which lined the banks,
and as we touched the tall grasses, clouds of mus-
quitoes rose from the vegetation. Here was the good
Christian’s little glass-roofed chapel, surmounted by a
cross of wood; there was his schoolhouse too,—but
all desolate and forlorn, for not a native would come
to learn. ‘The mission was therefore about to be for-
saken, as Mr Moorlang had informed us at Gondokoro.
On his passage down to Kitch, the natives had fired
poisoned arrows into his boat in open day; one man
had been wounded, and was since dead. ‘This story
elicited from our men mention of a similar incident.
They also had been attacked while in rear of our larger
boat, but 1t was during the night, and the arrows and
spear fell harmlessly into their boat. ‘To remedy such
evils, I should say that the frequent visits of a river
steamer would be highly desirable, both as protecting
the natives from being plundered by the followers of
traders and travellers, and as tending to civilise the
people themselves.


|


TORTUOUS COURSE OF THE NILE. 379


Mr Moorlang, in the fulness of his heart, was
unbounded in his kindness and liberality. Candles,
wine, and goats were pressed upon us by the generous
Tyrol mountaineer. He was to be in our wake to
Khartoom ; and Speke having taken the latitude of
Kitch, we roused our crew, asleep on the shore, and
rowed during moonlight to Abu Kuka station. Here
was another miserable swampy spot; not above six
huts of grass, closely surrounded by water ; not a tree,
only high grass and reeds. The place was unworthy
of the name of a station. From this point Consul
Petherick had gone across the country to his trading
depot of Neambara, in Moro. We came upon another
station in this Kitch country, known as Mr Binder’s,
late De Malzac’s; its latitude was 7° 8’ 18” N. It
was rather pleasantly situated on flat ground, and
consisted of a dozen round huts, plastered outside,
and having a neat thorn fence surrounding them: but
the natives were about the most wretched I had ever
seen. They brought us their small loads of firewood
to exchange for grain, and seemed like living skele-
tons. They had bead ornaments upon them ; but of
what use were they ‘—there was no grain for them to
purchase. Before reaching this point the river had
been winding in the most fantastic manner ; a gentle
breeze blew; and over the tops of the tall reeds we
could perceive by the sails of our other two boats that
we three were sailing mm a circle, or that the stream
ran in the shape of the letter S.

From the 5th till the 9th of March, while passing
the Nouer country, we lost sight of our two other
boats. ‘The wind had been contrary, and the hands
were reduced by sickness. A breeze luckily came


380 NOUER COUNTRY—BAHR-EL-GHAZAL.


from the south, and brought our fleet together again.
They had been alarmed, and expressed a wish for
gunpowder, as the tribe of Shillock had lately killed a
trading party three hundred strong, and were bent on
attack. Some traders’ boats we met “kedging” up
stream conveyed us this news. It must be extremely
tedious going up the Nile where the shores do not
admit of landing to tow the boat. The plan adopted
is this,—ten men being engaged, a row-boat goes
ahead with a cable and anchors, and the large boat is
then pulled up to the smaller, much in the same way
as they “kedge” on the Ganges. We observed that
the huts in the Nouer country were numerous and
large ; they lie in open plains, which are dotted with
cattle and goats, at some distance from the river bank.
The papyrus, the pith-tree, or ambadj, and reeds, line
the sides of the river, and beyond them was a forest
of acacias, which afforded us an opportunity of laying
in a supply of firewood. The tracks of elephants were
numerous; and the damage done by the gigantic
brutes in eating the pods of the trees and breaking
down the branches is very great. While in the Nouer
country we had the extreme pleasure of seeing the
polar star for the first time after nearly three years,
as bright as ever, and in the old place!

On reaching the Bahr-el-Ghazal, an affluent of the
Nile, our boatmen fired a single gun as a salute.
They told us this was done both on the up and down
voyage. Our river, which had lately been averaging
eighty and a hundred yards wide, kept its course, not
mingling its waters with the Bahr-el-Ghazal, which
here was without debris or apparent current, looking
more like a back-water or still pond half a mile


RIVERS BAHR-EL-GHAZAL AND GIRAFFE. O81


square. After their junction there was an evident
increase in depth and breadth; the waters, also, were
less like a sewer in colour,—they had become clarified
to a certain extent, and the rate of current was esti-
mated at two miles per hour. The sides were rushes
to an unknown depth; indeed, from the accounts
given by our captain, the Ghazal must at one time
have been almost choked with water vegetation. He
mentioned that the first explorer of it took three
months to penetrate through reeds a distance which
can now be reached in five days. I expected to have
found it looking more lke a river; but instead of
this, had we not been prepared for it, we should have
passed it without notice. The White Nile was at
once pronounced by our captain to be the nobler
stream; and he added that, with a favourable wind,
it takes ten days to reach the Ghazal from Khartoom,
and one month more of fair wind to reach from the
Ghazal to Gondokoro.

While waiting at the junction, our cook, M’kate,
discovered a crocodile’s nest with seventy-seven eggs.
They were nearly all presented to us; but their taste
being disagreeable, we made them over to our boat-
men. Rowieg for nineteen hours almost due east, at
the rate of two miles per hour, brought us to another
stream, the Giraffe, coming from a south-east direction.
It seemed to flow with rapidity—probably four or five
miles an hour—was from fifty to sixty yards across,
and bore down with it quantities of the pretty rosette
called Pistia Stratiotes L., which was first gathered in
the Karague Lake. Our captain, who was an autho-
rity, said of this river that 1t had received its name
from the circumstance that cameleopard abound in the


082 THE RIVER SOBAT.


country through which it passes. “It is a large river,
and if you were to sail up it for fifteen days, you
would only be half way to its source in the Bhor
country.” The character of the Nile changes soon
after the Giraffe joins it; the current becomes scarcely
perceptible, the width increases from one hundred and
fifty to two hundred and fifty yards, and you can
generally land, there being acacia trees on the right
bank. We observed on both sides of the Nile distant
mole-like solitary hills, the first seen since leaving
Gondokoro, which may give some idea of the flatness
of the land. ‘There were several large islands also—
one in particular, to our left, dividing the stream
above the junction of the river Sobat, which joined
us from the right almost at an angle of ninety degrees.
The Sobat (lat. 9° 20’ N.) was a hundred yards across
from bank to bank—a large body of water, its surface
undisturbed by current or weeds, and sweeping round
to the left in a remarkable manner as you looked up
its stream. The left bank of the Sobat was abrupt,
and from twelve to twenty feet high, with a few
acacias. Its right bank was lower—say eight feet—
had more slope, and down to the water’s edge grew
a dense thicket of reed vegetation. From general
appearance, [ judged that the body of water thrown
into the Nile by the Giraffe during four-and-twenty
hours was equal to that contributed by the Sobat
in the same time. The distance between those two
rivers was calculated to be sixteen miles. We had
rowed it in 94 hours, not including the time we
rested while a gale blew from the east. These gales
came on suddenly, and detained us generally from
nine till three o'clock; the boats stood them well ;


HIPPOPOTAMI BECOME MORE RARE. 389


but, from the impossibility of quickly lowering the
yard, to which the immense sail is securely fastened,
the boat was often very unmanageable. The crew
found the yard so unwieldy, pivoted as it was on the
top of the mast, catching the wind and _ nullifying
their rowing, that it had to be finally lowered, the
operation taking three-quarters of an hour!

Our course improved after we were joined by the
Sobat ; instead of sailing east, we were going north-east.
The river varied in width from two hundred and fifty
to five hundred yards; sometimes it branched round
long stripes of islands, or a beautiful reach of water
was presented. We had no longer the low swamp on
either side ; the banks rose boldly ten feet above the
water ; we could land anywhere,—either in the Shil-
look country, which was a plain clear of all vegetation,
or on the opposite or right bank, the country of the
Denka, where firewood might be obtained. Huppo-
potami in such a locality were scarcer than where there
were reeds, but they were met with even here; and at
night, between those steep walls, their lowing reverbe-
rated pleasantly from bank to bank. An oarsman by
chance struck one while sleeping in the water. The
sport it afforded caused quite a commotion in our boat,
for after being touched, the animal arched his back in
self-defence, sending himself half out of the water.

On the wooded banks of the Nile, about 10° N. lat.,
opposite the Sultan of Dainab’s territory, we found
thirteen boats at anchor. They had come to demand
redress from the sultan, and to settle some political
matters regarding the annihilation of a whole zariba, or
station of Arabs, in the interior. Their commander,
we understood, was one Ibraheem. He and his party


384. ENCAMPMENT OF BAGARA CAVALRY.


of three hundred soldiers, foot and horse, formed a
picturesque encampment under some beautiful large
soonud trees—Acacia Arabica. The Bagara Arab
horsemen reminded me of the wandering tribes we
read of in the Bible; the listless way all walked about in
their long gowns, the docility of their pony horses, the
Oriental-like saddles, the women grinding corn, all
camped so close together looking in amazement at the
white men, wondering where we could have dropped
from, and smiling as we walked amongst them. These
boats had been two months on the voyage from Khar-
toom, and had been joined on the route by upwards
of a hundred Bagara cavalry, who with fifty camels
travelled by land, keeping pace with the fleet. The
Bagara wear no covering on their heads; their hair is
straight, black, and silky, worn off the face in long
broad plaits pmmned flat down behind. Their horses,
though small and thin, were well cared for, having no
galled backs, as might be supposed on looking at their
awkward-shaped saddles. With these animals, and
their long-handed, broad-bladed, glistening spears,
wonderful feats are said to be performed by them in
elephant-hunting, although no guns are used. At night,
their camp was guarded by sentinels, who called out at
intervals, instead of our custom of going the rounds.
Music was indulged in to a late hour by incessant beat-
ing on drums. An interesting funeral scene took place
in this camp, on occasion of the death of one of the
Khartoom natives. The body, veiled in white linen,
was laid on the brink of a grave, and a line of well-
dressed Arabs stood over it reading prayers from a slip
of paper held in their hands, all mm the most devout
and solemn manner.


———


THE PEOPLE OF SHILLOOK. 385


The canoes of the natives are small, and made of
planks, with poimted bows and sterns. Rafts of grass
or ambadj are used for ferrying the Nile, the natives
standing up to their knees in water while paddling or
propelling them with a stick. After coming out of this
raft, they place it on end to dry on the shore. The
Shillook men, residing ina large tract of country about
10° N. lat., are nude, and, looking at them from be-
hind, the hair is so trained that it resembles a black
fan. We took one of the men as a guide to conduct
us in searching for our two rear boats that had not
come up, as we believed, and had caused us some un-
easiness and alarm. Sailing up stream, he landed to
speak with the people of Shillook, who immediately
flew away in fear of us, commencing to drive off
their cattle. Our boats had passed us during the
night unobserved, and we found they had preceded us
twenty miles. This may give some idea of the size of
the river. The guide was not satisfied with two yards
of calico, saying, “If I were not alone, you dared not
offer me so little ;” he was very impertinent, and before
leaving the boat exchanged his calico for a spear. We
had now got to about 114° N. lat., where the territory
of the true original Shillook race ends, and that of the
mongrel Shillook and Bagara horsemen begins. On the
left bank was an Arab station called Kaka, its two hun-
dred huts being fenced and ditched against the hostile
natives. For the first time we came upon irrigation in
the true Eeyptian form—a large pole weighted at one
end, with a leather bucket at the other. Indian corn,
tomato, onions, and plantain were grown here in great
luxuriance. The native who commanded at this post
was carried on board of our boat to be treated for a

2B


386 CURIOUS SMALL FORMATIONS.


swollen imb. From our remnant of medical comforts
we were able to give him some plaster, and he went
gaily away on one leg, so pleased, that he sent us a
plate of rice and some tomato. I have a recollection
of seeing strewed on the broken ground about Kaka,
curious formations, which may have been ancient relics,
or concrete ; but, in order to direct attention to them,
I may mention that Dr Falconer, the fossil authority
of the day, suggests that they may have been fossil
remains. The whole depot of Kaka turned out to
ereet our captain, calling him by name “ Diab.” They
intrusted him with messages, billets-doux, and money,
till he seemed astonished at their number. Even
after we had sailed, two men ran along the shore
with letters, which were thrown at our boat, and
cleverly caught by one of the crew.

The evening before our arrival at Kaka we saw
twenty boats at anchor in a river said to be a branch
of the Sobat, on the right bank of the Nile. They
lay one mile up its stream, and the people were on
their way to punish some Denka, having with them
camels, donkeys, and ponies. I could not learn the
name of this unexpected river, but our captain assured
us that it was not a branch of the Nile, which, indeed,
it did not appear to be. Hence Captain Speke has
written of it as a second Sobat; while Consul Pethe-
rick asserts that it only exists i Captaim Speke’s
imagination. The windings of the river in this lati-
tude, about 12° N., were very eccentric: sometimes
our “head” was west, at other times direct upon the
polar star, as when passing a solitary hill, a strange
sight in the Denka country. The heat was excessive
—94° in the shade, making the bilge-water very dis-


WATER-SNAKES—FISH-EAGLE. 387


agreeable, though causing no sickness. Indeed, the
native sailors considered the smell to be healthy.
Our boat was full of cockroaches, climbing about at
all hours; musquito also abounded. Our crew were
sometimes put into a flutter by seeing a harmless
water-snake making for the boat with head erected
out of the water. ‘These creatures steer along so
direct that they seem to see nothing before them ; but
the natives imagined that they were purposely mak-
ing for the boat to get on board! The shores were
often lined with thousands of black and white geese,
or the solitary fish-eagle might be seen standing
apart. He is a bird of remarkable beauty; his gen-
eral colour is black, but his head is white, and the
shoulder-tips and feathered thighs are a glossy red.
Although highly favourable for cultivation by
means of irrigation, not a single field or village is to
be seen as you glide down the splendid, almost lake-
like stream some 400 yards wide. Hither side is a
flat dry country of alluvial soil, covered with natural
bowers of climbers connecting the trees. The banks
reminded me of the beautiful Garden Reach on the
Hoogly at Calcutta. One evening, in the distance, |
thought a range of swelling hills was visible, but their
outline seemed suddenly to change into a cloud!
This mystery was soon explained: the forms I had
seen were myriads of finches covering part of the
horizon: the creatures were migrating, and resembled
swarms of bees in the air, quite darkening the sky.
A day or two afterwards, one night on deck, I was
startled by a sound as if wind blew through a forest,
and was about to beat upon our boat; but we had


only disturbed the birds, which in their flight had


388 BEAUTIFUL COUNTRY—SIGNS OF CIVILISATION.


rested for the night in the tall reeds of an island; the
wave of air caused by their motion and their twitter-
ing reached us, though we could not see them in the
darkness.

We travelled without an accurate chart of the
river, and the beautiful parts of it cannot therefore
be mentioned by name; but about 13° N. lat. five
hills (“Jubl Denka,” or “Jubl Nyamat’ee” of the
maps) appeared three-quarters of a mile from the
right bank. Some were ridged with vertical strata,
and descended to the river; but none appeared above
water. From this point we may say that civilisation
was fairly entered upon, for we were addressed in
friendly Arabic from both banks. Boat-building went
on in the forests of “soonud” or acacia, and hundreds
of camel and cattle stood upon the receding banks of
white sand, or drank the waters of the Nile) Women
were clothed from head to foot, and carried water-
pitchers on their heads— forming a peaceful and
pleasing sight after the hardships and anxieties we
had endured. The last trace of our jungle life was
seen in the acacia forests, where trees lay prostrate,
and where occasionally some antelope, new to us,
with large horns bending over their shoulders, browsed
on low bushes with the camel. A flight of wild
geese, a host of monkeys, and a brood of guinea-fowl
gave warning to the antelope, and none of them fell to
our rifles. Domesticated animals now took the place
of the denizens of the forest, and the trading-boats
had driven away the wild inhabitants of the water.
The sound of the hippopotamus was rare after we
had passed the hills of Jubl Denka. Small grey duck


no longer flew in line skimming the water; and the


WILD-FOWL BECOME SCARCE. 089


black duck with yellow bill, said to be very palatable,
no longer stood packed in hundreds on the banks.
The myriads of monster black and white geese were
left behind. The familiar quack of the mallard was
seldom heard at night. The pin-tailed duck shot
past the boat, seeking less busy scenes. The crocodile
had been scared; he had lost his boldness, but still
watched for a victim. Against his attacks thorn
fences enclosed portions of the river, where cattle or
goats might drink in safety; and it was remarked
that in these more frequented regions wild-fowl were
seldom seen upon the water; the Heyptian goose,
which floated in scattered coveys near the sides, was
the only species which showed no fear amidst the
sounds of human voices: he fell an easy prey to the
sportsman. These, and sundry other familiar sights
and reflections, gave warning that our journey was
fast drawing to a close.

El His, or the Well, at about 132° N. lat., is an Arab
settlement on the right bank, on the highway between
the countries of Sennaar in Abyssinia and Kordofan.
Its houses are not seen from the river, but the shore is
lined with troops of camels, a mounted guard or herd
‘beg over each batch, denoting that the country is
well peopled. Khartoom, we were informed, could be
reached from here on a donkey in six days. The river
at Hl His is five hundred yards in width, but increases
to a mile of shallow water, with islands, as we float
down its stream to Shellai and Al’aga; farther down,
when opposite Jubl Musa on the left bank, it becomes
narrower, being only twelve hundred yards wide, and
sluggish as a mill-pond. The next feature in the flat
landscape is Jubl Broeme, a table-topped solitary hill,


390 THE BANKS OF THE NILE AT EL KIS.


three hours’ row from Jubl Musa; and the object last
seen before arriving at Khartoom is Jubl Aolee, so
called because it is the first hill observed when ascend-
ing the White Nile from its junction with the Blue. It
is not above a quarter of a mile from the right bank,
and rises two hundred and fifty feet in a barren mass
of rock, which sends a spur down to the brink of the
river and crosses it in a N.W. direction, showing one
small peak in the stream. The country is finely varied
about this hill; the verdure of the shore recedes under
small acacias, or the bush euphorbia dots the streaks
of white sand.

The banks of the Nile at El His shelve gradually
into the water: the soil is so rich from the quantity
of floating sediment brought down by the White Nile,
that it was no uncommon occurrence to see the goats,
which had gone to nibble the short sweet grass and
drink the stream, sink up to the knees in the soil,
and remain there bleating, quite unable to extricate
themselves. Beyond this green line the soil becomes
cracked, and strewn with several species of shells,
some of which we had seen in the interior. Drifting
sand, conveyed by the north winds, spread itself over
the rest of the shore, and there the walking is firm,
and forms the highway for Arabs proceeding upon
ambling donkeys to or from their capital of Khartoom.
A curious line of sand-hills margins the river almost
the whole way between El His and Jubl Aolee. There
are none upon the left bank. It is naturally an abrupt
wall eight feet high in the alluvium of the country,
and these violent north winds, bringing the sand of
the desert with them, have given it the appearance of
sand hillocks; at Gutoena, this is particularly obser-


THE CULTIVATION OF COTTON. 391


vable where the sand has not perfectly covered them.
The consequence is, that wood gave way to sand; and
the voyager has to lay in his last stock of logs from
the woods above El His. Below this all firewood must
be purchased, or stolen from the walls and fences on
the banks of the river.

We were all much struck with the industry of the
natives, who are called “ Hassanyeh Arabs,” and are
fine powerful -looking men. Though differing from
the Bagara who live higher up the river, and not having
so many horses, they arm themselves with the same
broad-bladed spear, and have few guns amongst them.
The chief dwellings and cultivated grounds are at
some distance from the river; they reside there dur-
ine the rainy season, and migrate with their flocks to
the edges of the Nile for the dry season. Temporary
abodes are erected, and they trade in salt made from
the subsoil of the river. In March we observed bare-
headed, good-looking men, with a sheet covering their
shoulders and with loose “pyjamas,” pulling the rip-
ened pods of the cotton. ‘Towards the equator women
would have been employed im this occupation, but
here, with a Mohammedan population, they are kept
indoors cleaning the cotton, making butter, or out
drawing water from the well. The cotton bushes are
eighteen inches high, planted in lines a yard apart—
very luxuriant, i consequence of the rich clay soil
being shaded by drifted sand from the rays of the sun.
By this provision of nature the soil does not cake, and
the roots are kept cool, and free to send out their
branches. The islands vary in leneth from three
hundred yards to that of Marda, which is estimated
at five miles. All are strips cleared of their natural


392 WOMEN DRAWING WATER.


vegetation, and flourish under a hard-working people.
In the brightest of suns we observed two men, har-
nessed to ropes, pulling a toothless rake, guided by a
third man, over the soft mud, preparing it for seed ;
and, unlike the Africans, the Egyptians never cease to
work while a boat passes them. The islands in March
were not less than three feet above water; no houses
were upon the smaller ones; straw was stacked; a
few plough-oxen might be seen; and a small boat lay
to ferry the labourers to the mainland at night.

The operation of drawing water from the wells dug
in the shore is interesting. ‘T'wo women, a boy, and
a donkey are required: the wells are five feet deep,
thirty inches across, and only half-a-dozen yards from
the ripple of the river. We saw a fair woman stand
down the well and pass the water in a gourd to an-
other, who filled it into a goat’s skin. Her beautiful
black hair was parted in the centre, and braided in
small plaits, which hung over her flushed cheeks and
neck. Though her bosom was bare she showed per-
fect mmnocence. On my asking for her cup to drink
from, 1t was at once given, apparently without any
fear of its being defiled by the touch of a Christian.
The water, in comparison with that obtamed from the
filter on board of our boat, was warm and not refresh-
ing. Two goat-skins or “mussocks” having been filled
and allowed to rock about in the river, they were
placed on the donkey, the boy jumped up nimbly
behind them, and with one hand heid the water-bags
steady, and with a wand in the other he guided the
unbridled donkey to the huts.

The people were listless and indifferent to us if we
went near their poor abodes, but their dogs at once


BATHING SHEEP IN THE NILE. 393


challenged the intruder. This struck us, because in
our journey through Africa we had rarely heard the
voice of a dog. We now found that we could no
longer purchase produce with beads or cloth. Money
was the mode of exchange. We were amused with
Bombay going amongst these Arabs to buy fish with
an iron hoe: the honest fellow thought, from their
simple mode of life and appearance, that we were still
amongst a wild set of people; and so they were to a
certain extent, for beyond the produce of the soil,
and their cattle, sheep, and goats, they seemed to have
no other desire. Great care was consequently taken
of their flocks. The large lop-eared breed of sheep
are bathed in the Nile by their owners. ‘They are
carried into three feet of water and dropped on their
backs or sides, then scrubbed to the tail, and allowed
to run back to jom the flock. The goats are tall,
generally black, with immense udders and long hair ;
they are clipped with a knife, and their hair, with that
of sheep, is made into a coarse blanket or bernoose by
the women. Powerful smooth greyhounds, indigenous
to the country or to the western parts of Abyssinia,
are used as we use sheep-dogs, and seem to guard care-
fully the habitations as well as the flocks.

Our captain, Diab, was known to many of the
people along the river’s bank. The Arabs would call out
eagerly to him, asking after their brothers or husbands
far in the interior ivory-hunting. I watched several of
these interviews. Once an elderly woman called him by
name from the shore while our boat moved down the
stream. Without asking for our permission, he landed,
and they saluted by each placing the right hand on
the other’s shoulder, then a solemn shake of the hand


394 COLD NORTH WINDS FROM DONGOLO.


took place, and Diab for a moment left her to go and
sit upon a dry spot of sand. She followed, sat by him
and told her tale, while a boy joined them, and was
kissed by Diab on the cheek. Master Frij seeing what
went on, thought he had better join the small party,
and listen to what they had to say to one another.
Taking his place close by them, he sat there with the
greatest coolness, without introduction to the lady, or
any previous knowledge of her. The Africans are
generally a free-and-easy race, and despise the for-
malities of society. When Mr Moorlang, the Austrian
missionary, was pressing upon us the acceptance of
some delicacy, Fri, too proud to confess our poverty,
found a reply by saying that our larder was full to
excess—we did not require anything! He was the
Caleb Balderston of the Nile Expedition.

Our passage down the Nile from El His to Khar-
toom, though only one hundred and fifty miles, occu-
pied us eight days. The stillness of the current, the
head wind, and the enticements offered to our crew by
the bazaars at Shellai and Gutcena, prevented our
reaching sooner. Although the diabeah was all that
we could wish for in comfort, yet knowing the dis-
tance to be so short, the delay was vexatious; the
more so as we were told that at that point, or more
particularly at Gutcena, the north wind coming from
the Dongolo direction sometimes, at this equinoctial
season, detained boats for eight days, or even a month.
I was astonished with the coldness of the atmosphere,
even after the sun had risen, occasioned by these
northern winds from Dongolo, and I asked Diab, the
captain, regarding them; his reply was, that they
and the Cairo winds are colder than any ever ex-


TOWING, TACKING, AND SAILING. 395


perienced at Khartoom. We had to lay-to so often
that walking on shore was resorted to as a pastime ;
and we were glad to renew our acquaintance with the
Persian wheel, driven seemingly by the same old bul-
locks and the same drivers as are seen on the plains of
Hindostan ; even the squeaking music from the wheels
was there to complete the parallel.

The management of the diabeah was left entirely to
the captain, who, with his crew, tried every possible
means of progress—towing, tacking, sailing, and row-
ing; but all generally failed. The truth is, they were
waiting for a fair wind, and preferred a little quiet
society on shore every evening, to making any great
exertion to get to their journeys end. When they
rowed, the boat was held with its broadside in the
direction we wished to take; and when they tacked
from shore to shore across the river, which was a mile
broad, we stuck as recularly as the tack was made,
not getting off till the crew jumped into the water
and pushed the diabeah. Instead of making progress
by these movements, we generally lost ground, in con-
sequence of the awkward way they had of making the
boat wheel a complete circle, or fall off the wind at
the particular moment of changing the tack. Towing
was willingly adopted by the crew, who harnessed
themselves to ropes, and walked at a staid pace on the
hard part of the shore. However, at this operation it
was often very disheartening to find the wind blow,
retarding, and finally stopping their advance. We gen-
erally put up for the night by the shore, to enable the
crew to eat their dinners, and we were on the move by
daybreak. When at Shijr Nagara (literally, tree-drums)
we were told that, if we stood by a solitary tree on the


396 KHARTOOM IN VIEW—THE BLUE NILE.


island, we could hear the drums of Khartoom. We
did not make the experiment, and doubt the truth of
the saying, on account of the distance. On the night
of the 29th March, having rowed for Shijr Nagara till
the moon was well up, we lay-to, our captain not wish-
ing to enter the port of Khartoom at so late an hour,
because all éclat and firmg of guns would thereby be
lost. Accordingly, on the following morning, we saw,
when looking across a plain as bare as a table, at two
miles’ distance, a single conspicuous minaret, with an
extinguisher top, numbers of mud houses, and groves
of the date-palm. This was Khartoom—lat., 15° 36’.
Our route was down the White Nile for two miles, and
then up the Blue Nile or Bahr Azrak for another mile.
Wishing to take particular notice of the junction of
the two rivers, Speke and I were both on deck by
daybreak. As the main branch of the White Nile
approaches the junction, the current gets strong and
rapid, showing a broken surface, with a dangerous
sunken rock in its right centre. The crew got excited,
and shouted ; but in an instant the danger rock was
past, and we were carried a dozen yards beyond the
junction of the Blue Nile. The sail was here spread,
and we soon recovered our lost ground, and proceeded
up the Blue, whose waters now, in March, had scarcely
any flow, and were so shallow that we had to pole a
good part of the way up-stream. The colour of the
water at once attracted our notice, being somewhat like
the Mediterranean ; it was a green-blue, and, on being
disturbed, was lively and sparkling in comparison with
the muddy waters of the White Nile. The junction
of the two rivers, the sweeping curve, and both shores
of the Blue river, are not unlike what we had seen at


— EE | ee


ALI BEY WELCOMES US AT KHARTOOM. 397


the place where the Sobat joins; but the night bank
of the Sobat is of gigantic grasses, while here the Blue
river is of shelving, drifted sand. Their left banks
resemble each other in being an abrupt break of twenty
feet in the alluvial soil. A pier of stone lies unfinished
near the confluence of the rivers; and after we had
passed it by sailing and poling slowly up, the left bank
was enlivened by boat-building operations, irrigations,
sardens, date-trees, walled enclosures, &c. Two of De
Bono’s men, to whom we had given a passage from Gon-
dokoro, fired a salute in our honour from the shore.
We had not anchored when Ah Bey, the Wukeel of the
Governor, Musa Pasha, arrived with a friend in his boat,
and stepped on board. He embraced us in the most
affectionate manner before we had even time to learn
who it was that had thus welcomed us. We proceeded
on shore in his boat, which was shaded with an awning,
and carpeted. Ali was very nicely dressed @ la Turk,
in a claret-coloured cloth suit, quite a contrast to the
ragged clothes we wore. There was no such thing as
a pier or platform. We stepped ashore and ascended
the steep incline of the river bank, and then stood upon
the level of the town. Proceeding at a great pace, our
hands being held by our kind conductor, down lanes
and round corners, every one we met on the way show-
ing him great respect, we at last reached a house and
garden. A white Arab horse stood eating from the
same bundle of grass as a caparisoned donkey, and
we were directed to sit upon a charpoy (four-poster)
covered with carpet, while the Wukeel bustled off into
the interior of the house. During his absence, the
friend who had accompanied him to the boat told us
(native fashion) that the Wukeel who had taken us by


398 ALI BEY DRESSES US.


the hand was a man of great influence and importance.
As yet we had no interpreters, and it was difficult for
us to guess what was ultimately to be done. How-
ever, the Wukeel soon rejoined us, and, more myste-
rious than ever, he beckoned and led us into the first
or outer room of his house, where we were shown a
quantity of seedy old-fashioned clothes, and told that
we must put them on,—they were his. I don’t know
what possessed me—whether affection for my own tat-
ters, or a natural repugnance to put on clothes that had
been worn by another—but I shrank from wearing the
garments, and objected strongly to a thick cloth sur-
tout, stating that it was too hot for 94° in the shade.
The Wukeel then commenced to put his fingers into the
holes and rents of my ragged old flannel friend, and
said, that I must really oblige him, because these holes
were “ibes” or blemishes, which the expected visitors
would observe. I accordingly submitted to being
stripped by Bombay and our host, who seized my arms,
pulled off my old coat, and replaced it by an extraor-
dinary sky-blue paletot. Speke’s costume was ludi-
crous; he looked as if dressed up for some boyish frolic.
His trousers, in front, though short, were passable,
being of English blue cloth and cut; but when he
turned round we saw an immense piece of calico let
in, so as to enlarge them for a figure of twenty stone.
The next difficulty arose from his unwillingness to
change his comfortable plaid waistcoat for a chintz
jacket, which buttoned to the throat and had tight
sleeves. He objected, because there was no watch-
pocket, but one was found, and he yielded. Over this
garment a tight-sleeved frock-coat was pulled on by


ENTHUSIASTIC RECEPTION. 099


the good little Wukeel. There was great trouble in
squeezing him into it, but it was effected, and I thought
all was completed. No; Ah Bey took the wideawake
off, and placed instead a tasseled fez on the back of
Speke’s head ; and then, fully equipped, Ali Bey stood
back, examined him from top to toe, clapped his hands,
and pronounced the whole get-up highly becoming!
The ingenuity of the Wukeel was not yet over. Tying
a knot on each leg of the cast-off trousers, he crammed .
into them coats, waistcoats, wideawakes, &c., making
a decapitated Guy Fawkes, and bundled them over to
Bombay. I thought I had escaped all further dressing,
but my toilet was not considered complete until an at-
tempt was made to fit a fez upon my head; and this
proving hopeless, we were ushered into a room with
sofas all round, to partake of coffee, brandy, and cigars.
About twenty fashionably-dressed gentlemen in Euro-
pean and Turkish costumes then came rushing in to
welcome us. They had heard of our approach the pre-
vious day by a letter which we had forwarded from
Gutcena, and they had already despatched the message
that first reached England regarding us, announcing
that the “ Nile was settled.” It was the intention of
these gentlemen to have ridden out on horseback
and camels up the bank to bring us into Khartoom in
triumph, but their messenger had failed to find us, and
they politely expressed regret at being taken unawares.
However, their welcome was most enthusiastic. M.
de Bono, commonly called Latiffe by the natives,
whose trading depot we had found at Faloro, took the
lead in offering us hospitality. We all adjourned to


his beautifully fitted-up house, and enjoyed the “ chi-


400 RESIDE AT THE BRITISH CONSULATE.


book” amidst animated conversation, interpreted by
Bombay, who stood looking as great a rough as one
could well imagine. M. de Bono generously offered
us his house as a home during our halt at Khartoom ;
but there being a British consulate, we considered that
it would be more correct to reside under its protection,
and therefore we proceeded thither.


CHAPTER XVIL


KHARTOOM, FROM 30TH MARCH TILL 15TH APRIL 1863—~THE BLUE
NILE—NATURAL PRODUCTS—ALI BEY—-KHARTOOOM A CAN-
TONMENT FOR TROOPS—ITS BAZAARS AND MANUFACTURES
—THE COPTIC CHURCH—THE AUSTRIAN MISSION-HOUSE—
EGYPTIAN REMAINS—DEPARTURE BY BOAT FOR BERBER.


HALF a century ago no town existed where the pre-
sent Khartoom stands, at the confluence of the Blue
and White Niles; but, in the days of Eeypt’s great-
ness, a city stood on the plain, on the right bank of
the Blue river, not ten miles from the modern site.
The origin of Khartoom forty-four years ago was a
military post on the Heyptian frontier. Previous to
annexation it belonged to Abyssinia: now it 1s a place
of considerable trade, governed by Musa Pasha, and
held by fifteen thousand Egyptian troops. The point
of land on which the town is built is so low, that
every season the streets are flooded by the overflow of
the river, and still its locality is not changed, though
all agree as to its unhealthiness. The derivation of
Khartoom is most probably from the safflower (Cartha-
mus tinctorius L.), called here “Gartoom,” cultivated
all over Egypt for its oil, used in burning. Except
2 C


402 THE BLUE AND WHITE NILES.


where irrigated, the country everywhere presents an
arid, uninteresting aspect ; drifting sands cover the
land; there are no trees or anything green to relieve
the eye from the glare. In the distance to the north,
about seven miles off, there are a few bare hills—those
of Dongola, and a small range to the left. It is truly
a land of banishment, cut off by deserts and a river of
cataracts from the civilised portions of the world. To
this Soudan, or country of the blacks, many whose
conduct is questioned by their government are sent to
pine without hope of release, unless their shortcomings
should be forgiven, or a change of rulers take place,
When they might hope for pardon, and permission to
return to their homes in Egypt proper.

In April the Blue Nile was twenty feet lower than
it is during the months of July and August; the
snows in the mountains of Abyssinia bring it up to
this height; and I suspect this flood has more to do
with the inundations of Lower Egypt than the more
constant flow of water from the White Nile. The
latter river we saw at its maximum height in Novem-
ber, and it has another flooding season in April.
Where do these waters go? A great portion is lost
in overrunning a space of perhaps 1000 square miles
of lowland ; and the White Nile thus robbed, as it
were, never displays those sudden changes in height
that the Blue Nile, more confined to its bed, presents.

The waters of the two rivers are very different in
taste and appearance. Neither is considered first-class
drinking water by residents at-Khartoom ; but after
their waters are mingled well together, the mixture
is esteemed excellent. Opposite the town the Blue
Nile is two hundred and fifty yards across, and of a


FRUITS AND VEGETABLES OF KHARTOOM. 403


greenish colour. Six miles up stream it narrows be-
tween steep banks to one hundred and fifty yards.
The town being on the brink of the river, and every
year its houses getting cut away by the falling in of
the bank, there is no room for walking along—no quay,
as it were, for the exports and imports. You are ob-
heed for half a mile to brush past the walls of houses,
the wells, goods, and animals—a most uncomfortable
state of things. During our stay at Khartoom the
sun was very powerful, and we had but one shower in
a fortnight. Bathing in the Blue Nile was much re-
sorted to by men and women, who appeared to enjoy
it thoroughly; but I only attempted it once, because
the river was so low that I had to walk thirty yards
before getting into water deep enough to enable me
to swim. Fish were generally to be had in the town.
They are caught in various ways ; some by nets nearly
fifty yards long, with large meshes and short floats of
wood. Irrigation from the Blue Nile is effected by
cutting narrow channels in the bank; or the Persian
wheel, with its hanging earthen jars, overhangs the
river, and so raises the water to the height of the
fields and gardens. Fruits and vegetables thrive at
Khartoom. The former include a small variety of grape,
oranges, limes, custard apples, pomegranate, plantain,
dates, and figs; the vegetables are beans and pease,
onions most luxuriant, lupin, nole kole, bamea, lettuce,
&c. The tobacco grown was different to what we had
met with in the interior; here it was the low bushy
description called Nicotiana rustica L., that of the in-
terior being NV. tabacum L., which grows with a longer
leaf. Senna is one of the herbs cultivated, also safflower,
already mentioned. The harvest of bearded wheat


404 THE HOUSES AND VICINITY OF KHARTOOM.


is cut in March, and the grain is large and rich in
colour. No pleasant walks had been made in the
neighbourhood ; the few groves of date-palms, afford-
ing the only shade that existed, are generally walled
round ; and if you proceed into the country, with one
exception there is nothing but a desert of sand. This
exception is a “cottage in the wood,” belonging to M.
Bartolemy. It had been surrounded by a belt of the
fast-orowing yellow-blossomed Parkinsonia aculeata
Z., aud, when within the grounds, the flowers and
vegetation looked so green and fresh, that one
might imagine he had been transported to a quiet
retreat at home. The other European residents lived
in the town. Their houses, generally of one storey,
are large flat-roofed structures of mud and brick, sur-
rounded by walls, having a single gateway guarded
by a doorkeeper. They reminded me of the serais, or
stations made for travellers upon the grand trunk-road
of India. In their courtyards tame birds or antelope
walked ; wild animals lay chained ; camels, donkeys,
cattle, goats, or horses stood about ; lumber and store
rooms filled the space; and a corner perhaps was de-
voted to a shady retreat under the vine. Hach con-
sulate—and there were French, Austrian, American,
and British—at Khartoom had its elliptical signboard
over the main entrance. ‘The principal room of the
house is the hall; there business is transacted, and
visitors are received in the morning, which is entirely
devoted to calling, smoking, and drinking coffee. It
has been mentioned that we chose to reside under the
British flag, although at that time the consul was ab-
sent at Gondokoro. The attentions we received from
the various gentlemen residents were such as are per-


TRAVELS OF THE BARONESS CAPELLEN, 405


haps only met with in a foreign country—so friendly,
free, and unrestrained. Unfortunately neither of us
could communicate with them, except through Bom-
bay or Friyj; but they had become great adepts at
interpreting, and we succeeded pretty well. How-
ever, a lady, the Baroness Capellen, sister to Madame
Tinne, could speak English fluently, and we en-
joyed her society frequently. She had been a great
traveller, had reached Gondokoro, and had seen the
miseries of sickness amongst the slaves of the ivory-
traders. Smallpox had broken out amongst a party
when opposite Jubl Denka, and the shocking remedy
of throwing the slaves overboard when attacked by
this disease was resorted to by these native traders.
On making our first call upon the Baroness, we were
astonished to see Frij and Uledi follow us into the
room, both the worse for drink, and each carrying a
rifle and spear. We all laughed at their ignorance of
European customs; and having asked them to place
their arms outside the door, we were amused at their
advancing, rather unsteadily, to the lady, kneeling and
kissmg her hand—this being the most polite mode of
salutation known amongst the inhabitants of Zanzibar.
We brought her the three young girls of Uganda, to
let her hear their language, and see their mode of
sitting and of returning thanks. They were highly
delighted, received great kindness, conducted them-
selves very gently, and gave great satisfaction, making
friends with a servant girl whom the Baroness had
rescued from slavery. While calling upon another
occasion, a steamer arrived from the Bahr-el-Ghazal,
having made the passage in fourteen days, and_bring-
ing news of Madame Tinne and her accomplished


406 OUR RECEPTION BY M. DE BONO.


daughter. The Baron Von Ablaing was on board, and
was to return with stores and baggage-donkeys, to
enable the party to prosecute their journey as far as
Fernando Po. Since then we have learned how fatal
has been the result of this expedition. Poor Madame
Tinne has died, and their labours at exploration have
thus been suddenly arrested.

We were hospitably entertained at a large reception
by M. de Bono, whose ivory-hunters at Faloro were
the first to welcome and render us aid on the Egyptian
side. ‘There were present four ladies and upwards of
twenty gentlemen, French, Italian, Austrian, German,
and natives. After dinner our health was proposed,
and a toast by M. Thibaut, French consul, “'The alli-
ance of France and England,” was cordially pledged
and applauded. Our twenty Seedees were introduced,
and, to amuse the party, went through a number of
antics they had learned in Uganda.

Ali Bey, Effendi—or, to give the address written by
himself, Ally Fud(h)lee bek, Wakeel, Hokumdariut, el
Soudan bil Khartoom (minister, Government House,
country of the blacks, Khartoom)—was most constant
in his attentions to us. He was the first to receive us
and the last to part with us—showing us over the
Government House, the schools, manufactures, and
magazines, giving us horses to ride, parading the troops
for our amusement, and doing numerous other acts of
kindness. He had a white Gulf Arab, the most docile,
at the same time fiery, creature I had ever beheld.
When caparisoned in blue velvet trappings, richly
embroidered in gold, and a Busserah bridle of silver
chains and hanging tassels, the animal looked the
most perfect and picturesque of steeds. The bit was


ALI BEY’S CHARGER—-A REGIMENTAL PARADE. 407


a circular ring placed round the lower jaw. If the
ribbon-like rein was slightly pressed, the animal, from
the utmost speed, was in an instant sent on _ his
haunches, and continuous working of the bit put him
into fits of high spirit. I thought from this instance
of horse-management that we have still a good deal
to learn in England ; for there was no pace or figure
that this animal would not go through, even if a child
were upon his back. We were brought by Ali Bey to
see his private house and family. The ladies, how-
ever, did not appear. Ajim carpets and luxurious
couches filled his suite of upper rooms; all had been
brought from Cairo by boat and across the desert. In
his Turkish politeness, he said whatever we fancied
was ours! He paraded five hundred troops in line
one morning for our amusement. They were black
sturdy young men, out of mixed races from the Sou-
dan, and were armed with flint-muskets. The uniform
was a white suit, jacket and loose trousers, cross-belts
covered with calico. In putting them through the
platoon exercise, the officer in front stood giving the
commands, which were repeated by another officer
in the ranks. They went through the exercise with
perfect uniformity, quite as well as any sepoy regi-
ment. Their passing in review and forming squares
required considerable practice ; but these were mere
lads, recruits, Ali Bey remarked; and the old trained
soldiers, from ten to fifteen thousand in number,
were at present on a tour with the governor of the
Soudan, Musa Pascha. Every Saturday, Sunday, and
Monday morning they parade for exercise, and march
through the town, headed by an excellent bugle or
drum and fife band.


408 CURIOSITIES TO BE SEEN AT KHARTOOM.


Another gentleman, one of the oldest residents in
Khartoom, was kind and attentive. This was Micha-
eel, commonly called Lutfullah, a highly respectable
banker and merchant. In advancing us funds, he
would not accept the rate of exchange, so glad was he
to serve the English Government!

Khartoom being upon the highway to Abyssinia
and the countries of the White Nile, it is quite an
emporium for the trade and products and animals of
those regions. At the residence of M. Thibaut, we
saw a happy family of black and white geese, guinea-
fowl, a Koodoo antelope, ariel, a Soakim long-horned
goat, a Nyam Nyam goat, with immense long hair
and short legs, and other genera. In his drawing-
room, a chetah, a species of leopard, played with a
pup-dog; and in the garden a striped hyena, not
thought fit company for those in the yard, was amus-
ing himself on his chain. At the British Consulate
two ostriches walked solemnly about the yard picking
up sand; they had no feathers upon them, having
been plucked as bare as the dead fowls in a poulterer’s
window. At the premises of a Marseille Mussulman,
who had been in Khartoom for thirty years, we re-
cognised a great assortment of arms and curiosities
brought from the southern counties of [yria, Bari, and
Shillook, but none of the Uganda weapons had reached
him. The most remarkable shield we saw was in the
possession of M. de Bono, who said it was used in
Ilyria by the “rain-makers.” It was of iron, dia-
mond-shaped, three spans long, and above one span
broad, with a handle of wood. Of M. Miani, whose
name we had seen cut on the tree far up the country,
we heard an amusing account. Having proceeded


SIGNIOR MIANI—MR AIPPERLY. 409


farther up the Nile than any previous traveller, his
information was always sought for by gentlemen
arriving from Europe. Four Frenchmen asked for
counsel and advice; but Miani gave them such an
unpromising account of the country that they said
they would defer their journey, and returned to
Kurope. Another traveller sent for M. Miani, and
told him he wished to go up country; “ Very good ;
but you will find the monkeys up there very savage.”
“Oh, then,” replied the other, “I shall not go.” The
Signior, I suspect, is somewhat of a “character,” or
original. In his native town of Venice, one room,
with his name in large characters upon the door, is
entirely devoted to his collections of arms and curio-
sities, and the wall is hung round with sketches of his
battles, as he has designated them, with the natives.
He himself is made to figure very largely in his col-
lection of sketches.

We were much interested with the honest frank-
ness of a clergyman belonging to the Pilgrim Mission
from the Swiss Protestant Church, Mr Aipperly. He
was under middle age, and seemed to have great de-
termination of character and kindliness of disposition.
He had come in from his station at Galabat, Blue
Nile, riding upon his handsome camel, to transact
business in Khartoom, and, knowing English, he came
frequently to visit us. His labours were amongst the
Dacrooree people, who originally settled in Galabat,
in preference to returning from their Mecca pilgrim-
age to their own country in Kordofan. These people
clothe themselves in coarse “damoor,” or calico, made
into long “jungeers,” somewhat like the trousers worn
by the handsomest of races—the Seikhs of the Pun-


410 CONVEYANCE OF COTTON.


jab. They cultivate jowari (or doora), have numbers
of goats, but few sheep. Weekly markets are held by
this race, at which about 250 camels, laden with cot-
ton for sale, are seen; also cattle and goats. Hach
camel-load of cotton costs three dollars, and, as there
are no Kuropeans to purchase it, all goes into Abys-
sinia, where it is made into country stuffs, such as
the damoor. Mr Aipperly expected to receive from
England a machine for cleaning the cotton. From
the market it might be carried by camels a few miles
to Aboo Kharaz, on the Blue Nile, and thence, when
the Nile is at its height in August, to the Mediter-
ranean by water. This worthy Swiss interested me
very much, living, as he did, such a contented and
happy life with a single missionary companion. ‘Two
servants (a native Christian and a Mussulman) formed
their entire establishment—one would not eat a fowl
or goat killed by the other, but neither had any ob-
jection to eating them when killed by his master.
For the last year these two missionaries had together
only received £43. Mr Aipperly had learned black-
smith’s work, and made friends with the natives by
assisting to put up their irrigation-wheels, and other
carpentry. I was struck with the docility and obedi-
ence of his camel, which he had purchased for fifteen
dollars in the Galabat market; a single word from
him made the animal kneel, and there was no rough-
ness on his part, as with an Indian Surwan, and no
reluctance shown by the camel. He described the
wine made from honey as remarkably good. Bees
abound ; they are kept in trees or houses, and the
natives do not kill them, but smoke them away from
the honey. The Dacrooree people pay tribute to both


FRIJ GETS MARRIED. 411


the Egyptian and Abyssinian or Mokad’a Govern-
ments, as their territory lies between both. Their
country is hilly, stony, and cool; the hills of Abys-
sinia are seen in the blue distance, and the minister’s
station is on the postal route between Khartoom and
his fellow-labourers of the Pilerim Mission in Hubeesh
or Abyssinia.

Our Seedees had been living a life of freedom ever
since their arrival in the capital of the Soudan. Ma-
nua and the Uganda girls had never before witnessed
such grandeur. Bombay and Fry were seldom sober,
and went about smoking cigars. The clothes in which
Ali Bey had dressed Speke and myself were given to
Bombay and Fry, with instructions that it would be
indelicate of them to wear them while in Khartoom ;
but they forgot the injunction, and Bombay paraded
the town in a blue frock-coat and fez! rij contem-
plated marriage, and on the same evening that he an-
nounced his intention, the ceremony was performed
by a “ Fakee,” or clergyman, who was paid the fee of
one dollar. The lady had been the property of Bom-
bay, and was given him by the king of Uganda, but,
for a trifle of twelve dollars, promised to be paid at
Zanzibar, she was made over to Fry, who told me
that the clergyman exacted a promise from him to
protect her and be a faithful husband for hfe. How-
ever, there was a clause in the contract that, should
he tire of her, she was again to become the property
of Bombay.

Nearly twenty years ago Khartoom was a canton-
ment with twenty thousand troops. ‘The regimental
officers led a gay social life, and the town increased
oreatly. In 1868, it had rather a decayed look, with


412 TRADE OF KHARTOOM.


few or no troops; but there were shops kept by Euro-
peans and natives, where nearly all commodities might
be had, including such varied articles as guns, ready-
made clothes, wines, Bass’s pale ale, groceries, hard-
ware goods, &c. All manner of trades are carried on
in Khartoom; and on the streets water-carriers and
people selling pigeons and fowls plied their voca-
tions. Old Turks sat playing chess and backgammon;
and in the uncovered streets and open spaces stalls
for cooked fish, trinkets, sweetmeats, and vegetables,
were laid out as at a market. One is surprised where
all these things come from in such a desert country.
Except the irrigated parts, and the senna-plant grow-
ing as a weed, Khartoom does not yield a single natu-
ral or manufactured export. The river presented a
busy scene ; all the firewood, corn, earthen jars, bricks,
orass and palm-leaves for matting and rope, stones
and lime, Berber salt, and Huropean goods, were being
landed from boats for the use of the inhabitants.
Gum (the best coming from Kordofan), ivory, bees’-
wax, cotton, and sesamum (called sin-sin), are brought
thither, but merely pass through on their way to
Eeypt. The White Nile is said to have 250 boats
trading upon it yearly, including those on the Sobat
and Bahr Ghazal. The Blue river probably has as
many more ; but we saw only forty-five boats lying off
Khartoom, and ten on the stocks, of which the largest
measured twenty yards in length. The only manu-
factures we observed at Khartoom were a few for oil
and soap for home consumption. ‘The oil-press was a
heavy millstone placed on edge, and pulled round over —
sesamum -seed by a bullock with blinders. After
being well bruised, the grain, now looking like a mash


THE BAZAAR OF KHARTOOM. 413


of bran, was removed to a screw-press, made of wood
(without a nail), cow-hide, and grass. The oil, so ex-
pressed, dropped at intervals into a receiver below.
At the soap-factory belonging ,to Shenooda, an ivory-
trader, we saw two boilers busily at work. The lime
and sesamum-oil used in the manufacture were both
from Azrah. Al Bey, who kindly showed us over
these places, brought us also to the gold and silver
smiths’ shops. ‘The artificers are celebrated for work-
ing in filigree, similar to that of Delhi or Cuttack,
and must originally have learned the art from Hast-
erns. Cups with stalks, made for holding the Turk-
ish coffee-cup, are formed of the purest soft yellow
gold, found as a dust in the Soudan. Napoleon or
sovereion gold would not answer for such fine work-
manship, having too much alloy; consequently, when
cups are ordered, gold-dust 1s given to the workman.
At the two shops we visited several youths were busy,
sitting on the ground, each with a small anvil before
him, hammering at threads of pure metal. Handsome
small drinking-cups are turned out of the rhinoceros-
horn, which has this advantage over the horns of
cattle, that, in a hot country, it retains its shape,
and does not crack.

The coinage of Khartoom was puzzling, on account
of the variety of pieces and their names. The follow-
ing are some of those in circulation :—


1 para, equal to one-fifth of a pice.
8 pice or 8 five-para pieces, equal 1 piastre (copper silvered over).


21 piastres or groosh, »  l thick sixpenny piece of silver.

45 ” ” » Shilling ”

Wor 53 »  l Egyptian dollar or five-franc piece.
20 9 », 1 Maria Theresa dollar.

ul 55 », lL napoleon,


LOO? 45 » 1 sovereign,


414 GOVERNMENT HOUSE—BARRACKS.


Besides these there were small coins of gold valued at
4 and 8? groosh or piastres. In Abyssinia, where the
smallest coin is a bit of salt, the five-frane piece is
valued at 28 piastres; at Galabat, Mr Aipperly in-
formed me, its value falls to 18 piastres; but at Cairo
it rises to 84. On Speke drawing £150, the account
was as follows, the banker (Lutfullah), with great
liberality, remitting the charge for exchange :—


Piastres. Para.


100 napoleons, at 77 piastres each, . 4 - 4700 )
379 francs or Egy ee apne at 19-10 pistes each, 7295 30
At piastres, . ° . 4 10


Total, 15,000 0


There is but one public building in Khartoom, the
Government House, which overlooks the Blue Nile,
and is a substantial brick edifice. A flight of steps
leads up to the reception-hall, which is lofty and hand-
some, hung round with engravings of naval engage-
ments, &e. In the courtyard Lubach-trees (Acacia
lebbek) give shade to orderlies and officials. Baths
and all conveniences are attached to the suites of
rooms, and comfortable stabling is provided for cavalry
and horse-artillery. We were shown through the pow-
der-magazine, a mile distant from the town; it con-
tains an immense store of ammunition, neatly arranged
in cases. A barrack, simply walled round and almost
smothered with drifted sand, is in the vicinity. The
minaret we had observed on first approaching Khar-
toom is part of the mosque of the town; it is pro-
tected from the houses of the city by a high wall of
stone, and sentries guard the gateways.

Walking through the streets with Ali Bey, he led


us into a walled enclosure, where there were from


THE CHURCHES OF KHARTOOM. A15


twenty to thirty tombs surmounted by crosses. The
fumes of frankincense met us, and we began to wonder
what sight was in store. We entered an arched build-
ing; a man in spectacles read aloud from a volume
placed on a desk in the centre, and around him were
men wearing large turbans, their shoes placed on one
side, and several children, all sitting on a carpet listen-
ing devoutly. On the walls were draperies and pic-
tures of our Saviour, and within a doorway was the
high altar covered with a cloth marked by the figure of
the cross. We were in a Coptic church. As the ser-
vice proceeded in Arabic, a handsome old man entered,
bearing a staff surmounted by a golden cross. He
proceeded to the altar, and knelt at each of its four
sides, after which he returned to where we stood, and
conversed with us. By his invitation we left the
church to have coffee at his house. I have seldom
seen a finer face than that of this venerable Copt.
His name, we found, was Gabriel; he is at the head
of the Coptic church at Khartoom, and has a con-
eregation of about five hundred persons. He showed
us his copy of the four gospels, printed in Arabic
and Hebrew characters; and on our taking leave of
him, he thanked Ali Bey and ourselves for having
visited his church.

The Austrian Mission has a large and long-estab-
lished station at Khartoom. It occupies a few acres
of ground upon the river bank, and is surrounded by
a wall ten feet high. The main gateway faces the
town; it is handsome, and built of sandstone from the
Rao. Their temporary church is small but very neat ;
the front pews are occupied by the men, and those in
the rear by the women. ‘Through the kindness of Mr


416 BAPTISM OF A NEGRESS.


Moorlang, we took our Seedees to church, in order that
they might be gratified with the sacred music from the
harmonicon, It was a Sunday, and many other na-
tives were present. Mabrook became greatly excited.
On seeing the bleeding figure of our Saviour upon the
cross, he held his mouth with his hand; he wished to
touch the figure, thinking it was real. While at Khar-
toom Speke was asked to be godfather to a grown-up
neeress, a servant girl in the Mission establishment.
Mis bemg a Protestant did not preclude him from
officiating in this capacity. The ceremony took place
in the morning, and there was an immense gathering.
The lberal-minded Ali Bey, though a Mussulman, was
present, also the Baroness Capellen, who was god-
mother to the girl. Another christening took place at
the same time, when Madame Bartolemy and M. de
Bono officiated as godmother and godfather. During
the ceremony loud reports took place outside; pro-
bably the fellow-servants of the girls were making
merry by firing guns in honour of the event!

The ruins of Soba, on the right bank of the Blue
Nile, though as yet not much excavated, repaid us for
the trouble of a visit, as we had not seen those of
Thebes or Phyle. Ali Bey kindly arranged a picnic
for us, and in our old diabeah, Mr Aipperly, M. Angelo,
a moullim or secretary, Speke, and I, rowed and sailed
up the Blue river for three hours in the afternoon,
accomplishing about six miles. We were then opposite
Soba. There were no houses on the bank, and the
country appeared flat and dreary. Sometimes the
sround swelled up, marking the spot where houses or
temples were still entombed. Arriving too late to pay
the ruins a visit, we delayed till morning, and had


THE RUINS OF SOBA. ALT,


dinner on deck. Ajim carpets were laid out, candles
were lit, and we sat round six brass saucers full of
pastry, cutlets, and stews, which were eaten with the
fingers. The usual coffee, liqueurs, and tobacco fol-
lowed, and we rested for the night under variegated
rezzais or counterpanes on the top of the cupboards.
Next morning on the shore there was a curious collec-
tion of riding animals brought to convey us to the
ruins of Soba. None looked inviting, but we were
allotted a horse each, while others rode camels and
donkeys. The moullim, a sedate fat little man with
black turban, had by no means a dignified appearance
sitting on the donkey without a bridle, and the animal
soon dropt down on his knees, allowing the functionary
to slide over his head. The first mound we examined
had been a room ten feet square, floored with square
bricks; at each corner stood a round pillar of granite,
seven feet between the capital and square base. The
capitals were of three different designs ; the most con-
spicuous being marked with the cross between acanthus
leaves. All were now in ruin: the pillars were sunk,
and the capitals lay separate. This excavation had
been open for some time. The next we visited was
opened by Dr Dumichen, a Prussian gentleman, whom
we met upon the ground, and who kindly gave us an
alphabet of characters. It wasa small square building
of stone, with two-feet thick walls very neatly built,
having two opposite doors, and its floor four feet below
the present level of the country. The next and last
excavation was a scaly sphinx lying upon a plinth,
which, though considerably broken, was written over
in Coptic characters, which consist of figures of men,
beasts, and birds. The head of the sphinx, and some
2D


418 PREPARATIONS FOR LEAVING KHARTOOM.


ornamentation on the chest, had been broken off. The
measurements were—


Shoulder to plinth, . : : ; : 60 inches.
Centre of chest to tail, . 3 e ; Piles ies
Greatest gute: of neck, ; 22 ones
Over the saddle part, from at to aban 140 -. cays,
Over the rump, do. do. . 145 ,,
Length of the tail, . : : ; : 60a,


Although there were other ruins about Soba, we were
informed that the above were the only remains worthy
of note; so we re-embarked at noon, and returned to
Khartoom.

Preparations were making for our departure by
boat to Berber, and thence by desert upon camels to
Korosko. It was necessary, on account of the poverty
of Berber, to lay in supplies of food at Khartoom for
both these journeys. Ali Bey procured us a small
diabeah which belonged to Government. We had
only to pay the hire of the crew to Berber, namely,
twenty-eight dollars. We had twenty Seedees, and
each required to have two goat-skins, or | “ girba,”
to carry his drinking-water; Speke and I had two
“rey,” or cow-skins, each, for the same purpose, and
water-bottles to hang from our camel-saddles. All
these were purchased, the small ones for seven, and
the large for thirty-eight koorsh each. It was neces-
sary to grease and test these skins before setting out
on the journey. A number of lads, each with the
skin of a goat, blew into them with all their might,
and then tied up the inflated skins for our inspection.
Having arranged everything, we intended sailing at
noon of the 15th April; but the hospitality of the
Baroness, the Austrian missionaries, M. de Bono, and


ADVICE TO TRAVELLERS. 419


other gentlemen of Khartoom, delayed our departure
till the afternoon, when about a dozen of our kind
friends came to bid us farewell. The advices we
received as to crossing the desert were numerous, and
I may here mention them for the benefit of future
travellers :—Have a list of the stages by land and
water, mentioning what supplies are procurable.
Always sling a water-bag and bag of biscuit to the
pommel of your saddle. Ali Bey recommended a
thimbleful of rum in a good deal of water as the best
thing to keep one awake, and prevent tumbling off
the camel during night. Always take a sleep for a
few hours from nine in the morning. Water is more
requisite than food; next to this, abrey (or dry unlea-
vened bread) and hard biscuit are the best. See that
your men do not steal your water, or-the sailors your
ropes. The camels, too, are apt, from thirst, to bite
through the water-bags, which must be taken care of,
and also covered during the night, to prevent the
wind drying them up; and always have something
under them. We found all these advices excellent ;
and I have nothing to add except that a “ Hadjeen,”
or riding camel, is indispensable to comfort.


CHAPTER XVIII


KHARTOOM TO CAIRO—THE GHERRI PASS—RUINS AT SCENDI—
THE PYRAMIDS AND RUINS OF MEROE—THE RIVER ATBARA
—THE TOWN OF BERBER—SCENES ACROSS THE DESERT—
THE VILLAGE OF ABOO AHMED—THE FALSE SEA, OR BAHR
BELAMA—NATRON WELLS—EXTRAORDINARY NATURAL TUN-
NEL—KOROSKO—CAIRO—ENGLAND.


WE rowed down stream till midnight of the 15th
April, and lay-to for the remainder of the night at
Halfaya. Here Ali Bey and the sheikh of the place
appeared, bringing us a present of two sheep. We
all dined together, and afterwards our generous friend
Ali Bey took leave of us, and returned on horseback
to Khartoom, having left an aide-de-camp to escort
us to Berber. Our crew rowed incessantly till sunset.
About Halfaya the banks are either of hard shelving
sand or perpendicular clay, and low solitary hills are
generally in sight. ‘The river was again mud-colour,
and surprised us with being so narrow—not more
than a hundred and eighty yards wide. On the left
bank grew tamarisks, a species of willow, and several
other plants we had not met with on our previous
journey. While at Khartoom I had an opportunity


PASSING A CATARACT. 421


of seeing a collection of plants from the Bahr Ghazal,
made by Dr Steudner (since dead) of Madame Tinne’s
expedition; they were nearly all the same as those
found upon the Nile, but some auricularias were
interesting. The sunset view of Mount Roeean and
the low chain of mounds to its right, as we looked
down a rocky reach of the river about four miles in
length, was striking; the slopes of the hills became
purple, and the bushes on both banks were lit up
in gorgeous tints. The river had quite changed its
character ; numbers of rocks at the sides and centre
of the stream stood out of the water, making the
navigation dangerous, and impossible at night. Our
rowers had to pull very hard to escape the sunken
rocks, which we avoided through the aid of a pilot
from the shore.

17th—Having passed the island of Roeean to
our right, the river ran through a narrow pass of hills
called “Gherri.” Nothing could be more desolate-
looking : splinters of black rock lay on their sides,
like refuse thrown from a quarry. The river branches
on making its escape from these hills. Our boat
took the right channel, and had scarcely entered it
when we had to pass through a rapid and dangerous
cataract, known as the Sixth Cataract of the maps,
and called by the natives Cibleoga. It was so
narrow, that while our oars were poised, and we shot
down the sluice, guided only by the helm, the oars
almost touched the rocks on either side. The pilot,
steersman, and boatman saw that one false move
would have dashed the boat to pieces, so they did
not breathe freely till the difficulty was over. No
more rocks were met with till reaching Murnat at


422 VISIT THE VILLAGE OF SCENDI.


sunset, where it was considered desirable to rest for
the night.

18th.—There are only two large places, or “bun-
ders,’ on the route by water to Berber—namely,
Metamma and Scendi. Nearly the whole distance is
flat, bare, and uncultivated, without villages; but
numerous flocks of cattle, camels, sheep, goats, and
sometimes horses, are to be seen upon the banks.
The people were civil in offering us milk and garden
vegetables. To-day, although the mainmast of our
boat had been taken down, the north wind and storm
of sand blew so hard from nine till two o’clock that
we could make no progress. We were not, however,
troubled with rocks in the stream, and by sunset had
made as far as the tame-looking district of Bowalat.
From this point we had no rocks, but rowed steadily
down, at two and a half miles per hour, as far as some
wells and cultivations on the right bank at Go(n)cil Ilm.
A native of this place, calling himself a Shygeea, had
three lines cut upon each cheek, similar to the custom
practised on the Nile at 4° N.; but though an abori-
gine, he was a Mussulman—converted, probably, at
the time the late commander-in-chief, Ibrahim Pasha,
conquered the country. The district was reckoned
exactly half-way between Khartoom and Berber ; but
we anchored for the night at the left bank of Metam-
ma. ‘There were no antiquities to be seen ; and, hav-
ing gone down stream for an hour, we lay-to on the
20th at the town of Scendi, a straggling, dusty, miser-
able place, but which afforded liquor to our sailors,
and fresh bread to ourselves. There were mounds of
ancient remains in abundance; and three miles to the
south-west some buildings and figures in stone were


THE STORY OF ISHMAEL PASHA. 423


said to exist. In the town there had been a deep
shaft dug for a well—evidently ancient, for it is not
now in use: a deep stratum of pebbles, with concrete
above, forms its sides. There appears to have been a
canal or watercourse at this place, for its windings,
flooded with water and covered with grass, are still
visible. ‘The women, as they carried water on their
heads, struck us as having a singular way of dress-
ing their hair; but our Seedees remarked that a race
of Central Africans, called the Wabeessa, near Lake
Nyassa, adopt the same fashion. The Scendi women,
like those of Abyssinia, have a tuft of hair on either
side of the head and one behind, and the Wabeessa
have the same, but add another tuft, like a high comb,
to the top of their heads.

Scendi is a place of some note, being the locality
where Nimur (tiger), the former governor of all the
blacks, planned the death of Poor Ishmael Pasha. The
story was related to us as follows :—After Ishmael Pasha
had conquered Khartoom, &c., he returned to Scendi,
and asked Nimur what he was to give him. The
reply was, “I will give you whatever you name, silver
or gold, for | am anxious to make friends with you.”
After a time Ishmael with some followers became the
guest of Nimur, who heaped quantities of provisions
and straw for cavalry around the dwelling where Ish-
mael lived. No suspicion was excited; but the straw
was set fire to one windy night. Ishmael, it is said,
was too proud to attempt an escape. His followers
shielded him as long as they could from the flames,
and one arm only was burned, but Ishmael perished
under the ruins. After great difficulty a European
recovered the body from Nimur, and it was sent for


424 THE PYRAMIDS OF MEROE.


interment to Cairo. A bad imitation of the mosque
at Khartoom marks the place where this tragedy was
enacted.

We left for Meroe, the ancient capital of Ethiopia,
before sunrise of the 21st. Date-palms, we observed,
were here more frequently irrigated, and the doom-
palm grew wild. The bunder, or port, from which
Meroe (called by the natives Tarabil Kobosheea, or
Pyramids of Kobosheea) is visited, may be either Ko-
bosheea or Budjerewa; we chose the latter, as the
wind was not favourable for landing at the former.
The pyramids are seen two miles across a plain, upon
the right bank, near some low elongated hills. To
visit them during the heat of the day it is desirable
to have riding donkeys, which, with common wooden
saddles, may be obtained at either starting-pomt. <A
man carries water, and you make straight for the
ruins over a plain strewed with small pieces of clay of
curious shapes and lustrous colours. There are three
eroups of pyramids. The first group consists of fifteen,
dismantled to half their original height, and built
apparently, as to site, without any regular system or
order. A pyramidal shell of masonry 24 feet square,
built without lime, and eight feet thick, had been filled
with the rubble of the country. The sandstone blocks
with which they had been faced were now so soft that
a knife could cut them. The second group, consisting
of 18 or more, half a mile farther east, are in a better
state of preservation, and have their figures of men
and animals wonderfully complete. We ascended one
having ten tiers, each tier a span and a half high,
and diminishing in breadth as you reach the summit.
The porches or entries into several pyramids of this


THE RUINS OF MEROE. 425


group were arched over with stone, and handsomely
ornamented with bas-relievo figures chiselled out of
the sandstone. These figures consisted of men driv-
ing slaves, carrying sheep, or seated on lon-faced dogs,
funeral processions, women carrying palm-leaves, and
representations of birds, lizards, and elephants. The
third group of five pyramids was across a death-like
valley covered with withered grass. Having seen all,
and made some sketches of the curious figures, we next
visited three sphinxes very much defaced, which re-
main amongst the ruins of the city. They were not
marked with scales hke the Soba sphinx; they had
been cut out of a rock with slaty stratification, and
were defaced by the lamin having spht off. In the
city, several old walls and pavements, built of immense
blocks of sandstone, are to be seen; but everything 1s
in utter decay. On returning to our boat we found a
considerable number of people wishing to dispose of
curiosities they had gathered. ‘These were relics of
stone and copper, some representing the scarabeeus,
and others human figures, but no coins were produced,
for they said the coins were too valuable to show us.
22d.—A considerable number of palm and acacia
trees were growing upon the banks we passed to-day,
and we saw Jubl Ag’edah on the left bank six hours’
distance above the port of Damur. We called to get
a letter of introduction, and orders for camels from
the Mudir, Ibrahim Bey, to the Mudir of Berber.
There are upwards of one hundred flat-roofed com-
fortable-looking dwellings near the river, shaded by
acacias. A market is held every Friday, when cotton,
salt, baskets, mats, ropes, cattle, &e., are exposed for
sale. The Atbara, a river navigable for a long dis-


426 THE BLACK RIVER OR ATBARA.


tance, is not above a few hours’ sail from this port.
We lay for the night just above its confluence with
the Nile, because there were sunken rocks in the bed
of the river. In the morning we saw the Atbara,
Bahr-el-aswad (Black river), the Astaboras of Ptolemy
—the last great feeder of the Nile. We liked the
brown appearance of the stream. From bank to bank
it looked one hundred and fifty yards across, but now
there was not more than sixty yards of water flowing
slowly in its bed, with a low rock at its junction with
the Nile. It joins the latter with even a more grace-
ful sweep than we observed at the confluence of the
Blue and White Nile. For a distance of two miles
below its mouth there are sunken rocks very annoying
to the boatmen, but at this dry season of April they
are generally visible. While detained below the At-
bara on account of contrary winds, Bombay brought
his wife up to Speke, saying she was very unwell ; but
as she was too diffident to speak, we could do nothing
to help her. An hour or two elapsed, and Bombay
came, grinning with delight, to announce that his wife
had presented him with a child! One of the girls
in the boat had told him of it, but he did not know
whether it was a boy or a girl—he would go and ask.
This was the second child born to Bombay upon the
journey ; but both died, and he regretted very much
that there would be no keepsake of the journey for
him to take back to Zanzibar. The infant was buried
on the shore.

Our journey by water had now for the present
ended—we had anchored off the bunder or port of
Berber. There was some show of trade, and twelve
large boats lay alongside ours. The population of


EGYPTIAN MODE OF THRASHING WHEAT. 427


Berber and the neighbouring villages is probably five
thousand souls. The houses are built in irregular
streets and lanes, chiefly near the Nile. A handsome
embankment has been constructed around Berber,
which forms a pleasant walk at all seasons. On the
outskirts of this is the unenclosed burial-ground. The
tombs have upright slabs at either end, with white
shingle laid between, and a few are built of bricks
and lime. rom the number of graves and the extent
they cover, it would be supposed that the locality of
Berber is unhealthy, but the natives prefer this lati-
tude to Khartoom: provisions, also, are only about
half the price. Wheaten bread, milk, meat, oats,
onions, water-melons, tobacco, salt, fish, &ec., are abun-
dant in the market every morning, and other articles
can be obtained and work executed in the bazaar.
The operation of thrashing wheat is performed in the
true Egyptian style. A man sits on a frame drawn
by bullocks, and resting upon three rollers, each fur-
nished with iron discs ; the bullocks eat all the while,
and the grain is well thrashed, but the work is over-
done, as the seed gets bruised in the process. In the
bazaars the boys discovered that our Seedees had arrows
and other weapons to dispose of, and came offering
money. The exchange was very easily arranged, for
the Seedees were eager to purchase the Eeyptian dates.
The inhabitants of Berber are proverbially honest, and
their servants are considered superior to those of
Khartoom. I went to the market to buy food, and
saw the rude way it was managed. ‘The butcher not
having sufficient weights and measures, a sheep’s head
and two broken bricks were put into one scale, and
my meat in the other. Having weighed it, he said


428 THE TOWN OF BERBER.


its price was so much. Upon which, trusting to the
reputed honesty of the Berberese, [ put into his hand
more than the amount, and he told me to come back
for the change, as he was too busy to give it me then.
This I did, and received the balance. The few troops
here were a tidy set of men, in clean quarters, below
the town. Their arms were flint-musket and bayonet ;
their uniform, the fez, white jackets, knee-breeches,
long white socks, and red shoes. At a short distance
from their barracks there is a magazine with four high
walls, a single gateway to the south, a few trees in
the interior, and towers with embrasures.

Berber became Egyptian at the same time as
Khartoom, about forty years ago, when the army ad-
vanced from Wady Halfa. The present Governor-
General of the Soudan, Musa Pasha, is the man of
whom the story is told that when he was sent to
conquer the country he circumcised every one of the
Bagara Arabs, and so brought them under his sub-
jection. We were not fortunate enough to have an
audience of the Governor-General ; he was absent on
a tour of inspection, and our friend Ali Bey acted for
him. The Vakeel of Berber, Rehan Aga, came to call
upon us: he had lived twenty years in Constantinople,
and, to my surprise, he had more of the features of
a Meganda than a Turk. He has a comfortable
house, well furnished, and he kindly showed us every
attention. ‘The Sheikh of the desert, a dark, stout,
middle-aged man, we saw more of, as it was through
him that we were to obtain camels for our journey.
He was handsome, with a long black gown and high
white turban. He thought we might get off in a
couple of days; and, in the mean time, he would get


WE MOUNT OUR CAMELS FOR KOROSKO. 429


us a house to live in during the heat of the day. We
were accordingly put into a dark inner room without
a window, but it had a high verandah outside where
we could sit during the day. We engaged thirty
baggage-camels, at ninety piastres each, to carry us to
Korosko ; the party consisted of twenty-six souls in
all, and the spare camels were for carrying two guides
and two loads of water for Speke and myself. Every
other man had to carry his two water-bags on the
camel he rode. We tried to get a pair of Hadjeens or
riding camels, but failed—all were as rough as they
could possibly be. The majority of our Seedees had
never seen a camel before, and were somewhat afraid
to mount; however, once seated, their pleasure was
excessive. All was good-humour and fun the first
day’s march to El Chore, where we arrived at sunset
of the 27th April. El Chore, “the Lake,” had no
water at this season, but the Nile, which is within a
quarter of a mile, overflows the grassy ground imme-
diately below the few inhabited houses. The people
were civil in selling us milk, bringing us water, and
giving us small cots to lie upon during the night. In
the desert, amongst Egyptians, a traveller may always
expect to be treated with civility.

28th.—To-day we divided the march into two
stages, making one in the morning to El Ab’dy, and
the other to Gin’ceneet’a—the latter name as sounded
by a native is peculiarly Italian. The journey occupied
seven hours, generally over a hard road of gravel.
Although never far from the river, we saw low hills
upon the opposite bank, and travelled amongst tall
orass, madar, and palms. From this grass the people
make a coarse description of rope. The nights were


430 THE RIVER OF ASSES.


cold, owing to north winds; but, sheltered by the
walls of the small flat-roofed houses, we rested com-
fortably on the cots lent us by the people. From
Gin’ceneet'a we made twenty-two miles in eleven
hours, to stages to a poimt in the desert beyond
Aboo Ban, resting during the heat of the day at Wadi
Khumar—the bed of a stream then dry. Here there
is a bend in the Nile, and we were able to fill all
our water-sacks afresh. This route was over ground
strewn with splinters, and ridged with quartz and
clay-slate dykes. Some of the rocks were cobalt blue,
ringing when struck, and bearing marks of having
been combed down with rain. Wadi Khumar (which
signifies the river of asses) derives its name from being
the spot where wild donkeys and zebra come to drink.
We rested under some palm-trees in rich foliage, be-
side the Nile, which, at this point, runs rapidly over a
bed of rock, divided into several courses. After leav-
ing the river, the march became dreary and desolate ;
not a sign of a human being; all a waste of heavy
sand, dreary valleys in the hollows, and _ splintered
black rock on the heights. We lay down at night in
a country filled to the tops of the hills with white
sand, not a tree nor a drop of water to be seen, and a
kind of fearful stillness everywhere around! How-
ever, there never was a desert that had not some
living thing to show—some insect, bird, or animal.
Several tiny ariel appeared as we passed the peaked
height of Aboo Ban. In the morning we set off over
the sand on foot to keep us warm, but it proved
such heavy plodding work that, after some miles, we
mounted the camels and descended from the plateaux
of sand to the Nile at Bagoere, where we made our


CAMEL-RIDING. A431


noonday halt. The river may be called beautiful at
this point, for it runs at a rate of from three to five
miles an hour amongst myriads of rush-covered islets,
with high banks about five hundred yards apart, and
on the opposite side densely covered with tropical
vegetation. The people of Bagcere allowed us to
occupy a shed roofed with the leaves of the doom-
palm. They brought us milk, and for their attention
we made them a present of a lantern. Travelling as
we all did upon camels, not in file as in India, one
camel tied after the other, but like a herd of cattle
gently driven by men walking behind them, there was
always considerable jostling; and if a camel wanted
to pluck a mouthful you could not prevent him, as
there was no ring in his nose, only a rope tied round
his head, which gave the rider no command over him.
Their pace was slower than that of a man, and so
rough, that the saddle, assisted a good deal by the cold
wind every morning, chafed the skin. The march in
the afternoon to Wadi Shirceg (another dry bed of a
stream) was over rough stony ground, to the brink of
the Nile, occupying us only two hours, when we en-
camped under date-palms, and amongst houses, near
one of which a rudely-made loom was at work. On
this march we passed several cairns of stones four and
five feet above the level of the country; our camel-
men could not say who had formed them, they were
of so old a date.

lst May—The route to Aboo Hasheem, “the
Father of Hospitality,’ was so smooth and pleasant
that one might have ridden, driven, or walked the
whole distance, which occupied us more than four
hours on our baggage-camels. It lay on the outskirts


432 SUPERSTITION AMONGST CAMEL-DRIVERS.


of wheat stubble-fields on the banks of the Nile, and
on our right rose the variously-coloured rocks of
the desert. The river is about three hundred yards
across, and has a current of two and a half miles per
hour. When passing a roadside house about half-
way, we halted to go through a superstitious cere-
mony. A burial-ground was close by, with cups upon
many of the graves, said to be placed there for re-
ceiving offerings of frankincense or money. We all
dismounted at the hut, which had no appearance of
being regularly inhabited, and found several jars of
drinking water, which a boy served to us; the skull
of a lion was stuck upon a pole, and stood high over
the hut. Our guide received from the boy two hand-
fuls of sand, some of which he strewed over his per-
son, some he put into his pockets, some he licked,
some he put on the camels, pistols, and saddles, and
he finished off by putting the last grains carefully into
the bag slung from his riding animal. This odd cus-
tom is common over the desert, and is adopted by
camel-men to insure their safety on a journey. We
came upon old acquaintances as we made for the
north: the white kite, raven, sand-grouse, and stone-
finches were recognised after we left Berber, and be-
came the most common birds of the desert. At Aboo
Hasheem we were allotted a two-storeyed house to
rest in. We observed that here six or eight donkeys
in a knot are used for treading out the wheat, and are
prevented from eating it by a band tied round the
lower jaw, crossing the forehead, and fastened behind
their long ears—an artful contrivance. The afternoon
march, made to Geegee, on the Nile, occupied us till
11 p.m. We had not seen the river the whole way ;


ABOO AHMED BY MOONLIGHT. 433


the track was over heavy sand, strewed with frag-
ments of rock and pebbles. The hill of Burgul Anak
was passed when we were four miles to its left, and
on arrival at Goegee we could look back upon it seven
miles off in a south-east direction.

2d.—Starting off across the plain at sunrise, our
beacon was a pyramidal mass of quartz a few miles
distant. We passed a tomb erected by Latitte
Pasha to the memory of a Liverpool gentleman,
and at length, picking our steps amongst the splin-
ters from the blue and grey slate rocks, we arrived
at Musra Jahcesh, upon a bend of the Nile, which here
flows in a westerly direction. There were no people
nor houses on our side of the river. To avoid the
heat we lay in the deep shadow of the doom-palm,
and changed our positions as the sun veered round.
Starting again at five in the afternoon, we ascended
to a wild dreary plateau, but which became interesting
from the colours of the rocks. Every moment I was
tempted to dismount and pick up specimens in which
blue was contrasted with pure white quartz, or pink
was marbled with white, or all three colours would
blend together. By seven o'clock we had descended
from this plateau by a sandy tract, and reached the
high gravel bank of the river again. Here the moon
lighted up the rippled blue water and the palms and
oreen vegetation on the opposite bank. The village of
Aboo Ahmed looked beautiful in this light, but on
reaching it we found it ankle-deep in sand. My camel,
which for the first time I had pressed ahead with a
cane, showed his fatigue by squatting down without
warning, upon my stopping to ask for the Deewan’s
house. He knew that his journey had come to an

2E


434 MANUA'S CURE FOR COLD.


end, but the proceeding would not be pleasant were
he to try it in a desert. We rode past a large cara-
van from Berber—traders conveying young camels
and home-made camel-cloths for sale to Korosko,
whither we also were journeying. They were an-
xious to know whether we had commenced to stint
our camels in water, previous to putting them upon
the desert allowance of none at all; they had done
so, and were ready to march next day; we had not,
and therefore our march must be delayed. I may
here remark that travelling in the desert on a baggage-
camel is far from bemg comfortable. The usual seat
is the same as that of a lady on horseback, but with-
out any kind of stirrup, consequently the legs get
chafed, the dry wind chips your hands and nails, and
you get cold in the head. Manua, an old and ex-
perienced traveller, sat always upon his camel with
his nose in a sling, which, he said, was a protection
against cold; he had a cloth shutting up both nos-
‘trils, and tied on the top of the head.

3d and 4th.— Detained training our camels for the
desert journey, and getting ropes and other necessaries.
The station of Aboo Hamed is upon the right bank of
the Nile, with the island of Mokrat opposite. An ob-
long wall of mud, with a tower at each corner, encloses
the few huts that are there, and other abodes are
placed outside the walls in a straggling line of misery.
Sand has nearly banked up the whole place—walls,
fort, and all—and the majority of the people live upon
the island and opposite shore. We had a call from
two gentlemen travelling (not for their pleasure, but
till further orders) to that Siberia of Egypt, the Sou-
dan, with a line of camels and horses carrying their


MEET TRAVELLERS FROM CAIRO. 435


worldly effects. They had been fifty-one days coming
by land from Cairo, and were the first Egyptian
travellers we had met. They could not make out
where we had come from, and asked us a number of
strange questions. Was it true that the Governor-Gen-
eral of the Soudan, Musa Pasha, had made prisoners
of us? had we been serving the Abyssinian Govern-
ment? were English officers fighting for the Abyssin-
lans? was Queen Victoria to resion in favour of the
Prince of Wales? were we the remnant of fifty Eng-
lishmen who had left Zanzibar to cross Africa? These
interrogatories were all put to us by an Albanian
gentleman ; the other traveller was a priest, a very in-
teligent man. He went so far as to say, when told
that we had come from the source of the Nile, that
the Koran had always said that 1t proceeded from a
lake; but what was the size of it? Had we seen
cannibals? What did we pay for these five Seedees
and the little girls we had with us? Having answered.
all these queries to their satisfaction, we saw them
depart for Khartoom. In the afternoon we had a visit
from a fortune-teller. He sat at our feet, smoothed
with his hand the floor of sand, and asked our names,
which we did not tell him; however, he commenced
to span the sand and to mark it in his own cabalistic
way, after which he pronounced the opinion, that the
fatigues of the long journey weighed heavily upon
Speke’s heart.

5th.—Intending to start across the desert at noon,
we had prepared for the journey by keeping our
camels without water for two days, and we now gave
them as much as they could drink before setting out.
Several of them had pieces of goat-skin sewn to the


436 LIFE AND DEATH IN THE DESERT.


horny part of their feet to prevent the sharp pebbles
or rock from making them foot-sore. We killed a
sheep for ourselves, and hit upon an excellent plan of
preserving the meat, by cutting it up into portions the
size of a mutton-chop, and boiling all in grease: when
cooled, it was put into a leathern bag, and being
cooked, it lasted us during the journey. Our caravan
consisted of twenty-nine persons, including two guides,
all mounted on camels. Hach camel, besides grain
and baggage, also carried, slung on either side, two
girbas or water-bags. We had three men and a couple
of lads, over and above the experienced guides, for the
purpose of driving on and attending to our camels.
They wished us to hire more carriage, saying, our
water was insufficient, but we found that we were
amply supplied. Setting out soon after noon, we passed
to the right of a hill, called Moogeran. The route
was as firm as a gravelled garden-walk, not a shrub
nor tree upon its whole extent, and grass only where
water had coursed after rains. I had always fancied
a “desert” to be drifting sand, as is seen in the Over-
land route, but here it was perfectly level, and swept
by the wind. Several doves passed us; a jet-black
swift skimmed in front of our troop of camels, and
alighted on the ground without fear, as the Mother
Carey's Chicken alights on the billows; sand-finches
and sand-grouse, &c., flew about. We had two species
of lizard to interest us while proceeding on our march,
and the ground was riddled with rat-holes. These may
be said to have represented life, and we had skeletons
of camels representing death. The latter were in every
state of decay and position. Few seemed to have died
here (at the close of their journey from Korosko) with-


A DUST-STORM. 437


out a struggle. While crossing to the hill above men-
tioned, we saw at its base what seemed a lake with
boats upon it ; our Seedees at once said, “ Let us go for
water, let us fetch wood.” It was a mirage, the Bahr
Belama, or false sea, seen about two in the afternoon
in the most fantastic shapes, wherever there was a hill
to obstruct the current of air. There was a good deal
of bantering amongst the Seedees after the mirage was
discovered, each trying to dupe his neighbour into
walking over to it. We had been in the saddle from
noon till sunset, when we dismounted for two hours
to allow our camels to eat their corn, and then we
proceeded again, sailing over the plain of gravel till
near daylight. This was our first severe night. I felt
as sleepy as if I had been drugged ; even walking now
and then at a brisk pace scarcely kept us awake.
6th—We had rested well at Aboo Inteh Shurrut,
with the glorious heavens for our canopy, and jumped
up off our blankets hght and joyous, and were saddled
by sunrise, having, with the aid of some of our fire-
wood, got a luxurious cup of coffee. We had two
severe days’ work before us. Tirst, we had to reach
Furoodh, a four hours’ morning ride across a hard
plain, with solitary hills in the distance, and mirage
near them. Then we had an afternoon march to Ta-
boon, or Taban (trouble), where the camels were baited.
Here, the place, true to its cognomen, gave us the
benefit of a dust-storm: the bank of cloud rolled
on from the east—every one lay upon his face; the
camels turned their backs and rested their long necks
on the ground; the lights were blown out, and for a
minute, while we were pelted with sand and gravel,
all was dark. The blast, however, was soon over. We


438 IPSEHA, OR THE CLOUDS.


were off five minutes after it, making for the pass
called Durb-wait, or Udder-a-weep (signifying narrow
road), and entered it after passing two hills, named
Gorebat (solitary) and Abnoogara (the drummer). The
pass wound very much, and varied in breadth from
three yards to a thousand, being sometimes so rocky
that our camel-men cheered up the spirits of the ani-
mals by calling out to them “ Abdil Ka-a-dr,” as much
as to say, “God preserve you from harm over the
rough stones.” But when the sandy level bed of the
valley widened, and rugged mountains imprisoned it
all round, there was something wildly-erand about
the scene. The natives had christened this place [p-
seha, or the clouds. We encamped some distance up
the valley, where a few acacias, having pods lke ear-
rings, grew upon the plain of sand. We had been for
ten hours on the move, and we left again at one
o clock, keeping still in “ Udder-a-weep,” or the pass,
for six miles. Waves of drifted sand almost buried
the higher hills, up whose sides it lay like snow-
wreaths. Here, curious enough, were some dead trees
which we might have carried in as firewood, but the
Seedees were too apathetic. The desert we were about
to enter was our first genuine sandy desert; all the
preceding had been firm and hard. Nothing but miles
of heavy sand, as deep as a lake, was now seen. The
camel-drivers and guides again shouted “ Abdil Ka-
a-dr” to give heart to their camels, and with this short
prayer urged the animals quickly over the danger.
There was no trace of a path, and the night was com-
ing on, but the sky was clear. The Seedees knew no
danger; all were jolly; and as there was no chance
of a dust-storm, we lay down for two hours. We then


NATRON WELLS OF MORAD. 439


resumed, and continued the journey till three in the
morning, not feeling so sleepy as we had done the first
few nights. It seemed extraordinary that the Sheikhs
could find their way in such a desert in the dark,
without the aid of hills or trees as landmarks, but
they do so unfailingly. They are extremely careful,
and when any of our men lay down for a moment’s
sleep, the ever-vigilant Sheikh would report him for
being so indifferent to his own life as to linger behind
for an instant. However, by midnight of the 7th the
danger was past, and we walked upon rocky ground
where the Morad valleys commence, and where there
are springs of brackish water.

As we approached the natron wells of Morad, the
country appeared to open, though covered with slaty
rocks bristling above ground. Hills and valleys,
patched with drifted sand, presented the most dreary,
waste-like appearance. The heat was relaxing—a
crow appeared, and the Sheikh informed us that it was
a good sign—we should certainly find water in the
wells. A turn in the road suddenly disclosed a long
valley below, running from east to west, with camels,
donkeys, goats, and sheep standing languidly around
five or six wells. Carcasses of animals were numerous
in this valley of death. Our camels showed no anxi-
ety for water, although they had been without it for
three days; but they seemed eager to have a roll upon
a clear patch of sand in view. The well our party
took possession of was protected from sand by a wall
on its upper and lower sides. It was dug ten feet
below the surface, and had only six inches of water.
After having been used all day it had not run dry ;
but the water was like saltpetre in taste. In this


440 NITROUS DRINKING-WATER.


dreary valley several huts built of matting are inha-
bited by Arabs and their flocks. Who else could live
on the spot? Where do their small long-haired
goats get a single blade of grass to feed upon? It
would seem as if they could not exist; yet before us
is a flock of sixty, which are brought to drink at the
well every third or fourth day, and though living on
this brackish water, no animals ever appeared more
healthy. The people residing here are not different
from the natives of Aboo Ahmed, and are not more
unhealthy ; but one of them begged for medicine to
cure a chest complaint. Several of their children were
pretty, with intelligent eyes, and looking wild as
colts, with all the hair shaved off their heads except
a forelock and long tress from the crown of the head.
In this valley of Morad there is not an atom of
firewood ; indeed, for three days’ travelling, day and
night, we had not met with more than thirty trees ;
and, being so rarely seen, we took them almost every
time for a mirage.

9th.—At eleven o'clock we left the wells en route
for Korosko, still some days’ journey without wood or
water upon the way; and therefore we carried the
brackish water of the Morad wells with us. It was
very unpleasant to wash with, as it curdled the soap,
and the exterior of the water-bags became powdered as
with flour. The camels did not suffer much from drink-
ing it. Our route was across a series of rocky spurs
and dykes, all tapering down to the Nile far away to
our left. The strata of the rocks seemed reversed in
position, as if they had been uplifted by a convulsion
in the north. One of the ridges which crossed our


road at Wadi Soofoor was four hundred yards long,


INTERESTING SPECIES OF PALM. 441


and so remarkable that 1t looked as if a waving wall
had been built there as a boundary between two pro-
perties, standing up in the sky-line like chevaua-de-
frise. The colours of the accumulated debris and
sand in the gorges of the hill-sides were striking. At
the top of the incline the sand was flesh-coloured and
fiery ; lower down the debris was grey and purple,
consisting of slate in various shades, and blue rocks
like masses of cobalt; bits of spar were also collected.
Between each of these are tempting valleys for a
ride, the ground being of firm hard sand.

The connection between each valley is formed by
a steep rugged path, sometimes, as on entering the
valley of Dullah, with high cliffs on either side; and
looking through this vista upon the scene below, the
effect is picturesque. There is a line of palm-trees
which adds a charm to the spot. At a distance they
might be mistaken for the doom-palm; but their fruit,
unbranched stems, and leaves are different. We had
not seen them before, but Manua had found them
srowing eight degrees south of the equator, in a
country where there are numerous rivulets. Some
seeds, brought home by the expedition, were propa-
gated in Kew, but they ultimately died. Having
passed the valleys of Dullah, Wadi Soofoor, and
Thillatha Jindeh, with its acacias, we rested between
six and eight o'clock on the sands of Wadi Mereesha,
and were on the move again till three of the morning.

While riding along upon the march, conversation is
continued in order to keep each other awake. The
topics are generally upon the natural objects around
us, whether it be the hills, stream-beds, trees, or rocks.


The Seedees laughed, mimicked, and ridiculed each


449 EXTRAORDINARY NATURAL TUNNEL.


other as they rode along briskly on their camels. We
had with us a poor half-witted fellow, or fool, named
Mahoka, whom Bombay had obtained for a few yards
of cloth, and kept as his servant. He was a hard-
working fellow, but would often burst out into fearful
rages, refusing to work. There was something of the
rogue about his fooleries, and he held his own amongst
the men. One night he fell asleep upon the top of his
camel, and dropt down upon his back on the ground,
his legs, arms, and spear flymg in the air. I thought
the creature was killed, but he got up, laughed,
snapped his fingers, and danced a war-dance. He
would not, however, remount his camel for an hour or
two. While marching through the picturesque valley
of Dullah, a circumstance elicited from Manua in his
account of his wanderings, may be mentioned here as
noted at the time. I repeated it to Dr Livingstone,
who also had received some information regarding it.
Extract, 10th May 1863: “While riding along on our
camels last night, Manua told me of a tunnel, the
work of God, which runs north and south between
Loowemba and Ooroongoo (two months’ march from
Kazeh), which took the caravan of Arab Khamees,
with whom he was travelling, from sunrise till noon
to march through, and which was as broad as from
that white stone to the back hill (a distance which I
judged to be four hundred yards). Over this tunnel
an unfordable river with rocky sides (here he pointed
to the hills around us) runs at right angles to the
Tanganyika Lake. If boats were to attempt to ferry
this river, the cliffs are too steep to permit of their
landing,—the river is forded by passing through the
natural tunnel underneath. As to its height, this


EXTRAORDINARY NATURAL TUNNEL. 443


camel, with me mounted, could march through the
tunnel and then not touch its top. No water comes
through ; it is obtained by digging holes in the sand.
The reed from which the Waganda make flutes,
erows inside it. ‘The rocks are black, and look as if
they had been planed (basalt, from his description).
White pebbles are plentiful there. Inside it is not as
clear as day, but once within it there is sufficient heht
the whole way. The natives consider it a m’zimo
(namely, wonder or worshipping spot). They have no
name for it, but the river above it is called Kaoma.”
On my interrogating him further, as if doubting his
tale, and making him repeat it to Speke, he got net-
tled, and asked with a sneer, “ Did not the people of
Wambweh take shelter in it, with their cattle, from
the attacks of the Watuta? (meaning a branch of the
Zulu Kafir). And if you do not believe my story, be-
cause I did not mention it before, ask so-and-so of
Unyanyembe, who was of our party.” Manua added,
that “he went and returned by this tunnel, as it is
the regular highway road between Loowemba and
Ooroongoo.” It will be interesting to know what ac-
count was received of it by Dr Livingstone. In the
mean time the above description as to size, direc-
tion, &c., must be considered vague and general. From
Manua’s description I understood him to say that this
river Kaoma flowed into the Tanganyika Lake.

We went smartly over the Bahr Hut’ab, the water-
less sea, in ten hours’ marching, and by breakfast-time
of the 10th reached Aboo Rakeeb, or father of shade,
a shelter-rock of sandstone upon a commanding height.
The surface of the country was dotted with black coni-
cal masses of sandstone, intermixed with which were


444 PAY TRIBUTE AT THE MOUTH OF THE PASS.


volcanic bombs, single and stuck together, varying from
one inch to three in diameter. Those that had become
detached lay like round-shot on the expanse of the
desert. We next marched, for four hours, across the
Bahr Belama, descending to a pass called El Bab,
where we dined, and then travelled all night between
bare abrupt hills, which, as we advanced, broke up
into cones, looking like huge redoubts and batteries.
The footing in these valleys is of level sand. On
arriving at the pass our cavalcade was halted by the
Sheikh i command, and his men immediately com-
menced to rattle and beat the bones of some dead
camels that lay on the spot; the men also screeched
and shouted, making a great noise. ‘The cause of this
demonstration, we found, was, that we had there to
pay a certain footing or tribute, and this being agreed
to, we advanced. rij tells me that the same custom
exists on board of an Arab vessel when she is leaving
the port for the first time; the new hands amongst
the crew are obliged to contribute money, to be ex-
pended in a jollification. In ten hours, over firm
sand, we reached Oogab Ghowab’, where there is a
sandstone shelter-rock written upon by foreigners.
It protected us during the heat of the day. An
effendi (secretary) had dug a well, and surrounded it
by a wall, but there was no water. There was, how-
ever, some vegetation, giving us an idea that water
was not very distant or very deep: the wild senna
was growing, and some withered bushes of another
plant blew about in balls with the wind. With two
rests on the way, we reached Korosko from Oogab
Ghowab’ after sixteen hours’ travelling. In a few
places there were slabs of sandstone, and as we neared


THE SHEIKH OF THE DESERT. 445


Korosko we came upon old red sandstone and conglo-
merate as hard as flint. Our direction during six days
had been mainly upon the pointers to the north star,
when they are westerly and horizontal. The cry of
the Sheikh to rouse us for the march from our com-
fortable couches upon the desert sand, can never be
forgotten; his “Abdil Ka-a-dr,” repeated and repeated
till he saw us up and saddling, was at the time pro-
voking, but how very necessary with such a waterless
country to pass over! In my Journal I have noted,
with reference to the Sheikh and his followers, that
we should never again meet their superiors for civil-
ity, their unpresuming modest manner, their thorough
knowledge of their work, and their willingness always
to serve. They would assist our Seedees in conveying
water during the march, picking up for them what-
ever they let fall, packing and tying up our baggage,
and never murmuring or begging. They left us smil-
ing, satisfied with our treatment of them.

The first indication of the Korosko habitations was
the appearance of some date-palms, long-stemmed,
like the wild date-tree of Uganda. As we emerged
from the sandy wastes there was a general impression
that the Nile was amongst the hills we saw; and the
old Sheikh confirmed this by stating that shortly we
should drink of the waters of the Nile. Rounding a
hill, the scattered village of Korosko was full before
us in the midst of an amphitheatre of hills, their fiery
sides of sand nearly killing every living thing around
them. There was, however, some shade by the river
bank; and we hired a diabeah, and a party of seven
men to convey us to Shellal. It was a luxury to get
rid of the camels—to experience any change—and


446 THE PASHA SENDS A STEAMER FOR US.


especially to taste a water-melon after such a journey!
The effendi gave us every aid; and, as it was not
desirable to stay long in a place which he called as
hot as hell, with no wood or provisions to be had,
our crew, glad to escape, ejaculated, “In Sha Ullah!”
or “God be praised,’ and we floated down old Nilus
on the evening of the 12th of May. The song and
the sailors’ mode of rowing were strange to us; the
former was powerful, harmonious, and pleasing, and the
men stood two feet above the deck pacing upon planks
as they propelled the boat; their language also had a
strange twang to our ears—a regular Nile patois. As
we glided past the Bar’edy hills, with narrow terraces for
cultivation, the country appeared hot and dry; every-
thing was parched and arid in comparison with the
ereen of the Soudan. The present Pasha will, I trust,
open up the country of the Soudan, for it might be
converted, by draining and irrigation, into a valuable
possession. We were beginning :to feel that the tour-
ist’s route had at length been reached, for at Korosko
we were pestered for “buxees,” or money. Our cap-
tain also made an extraordinary request : provisions
were scarce; and, purchasing a calf, the captain de-
manded, as his right, the head and fore-quarter of the
animal; which we, however, refused, although he said
it was the perquisite of all captains who had charge
of travellers on the Nile. We landed at the snug har-
bour of Shellal, below Phylee, and there had the final
confirmation of our being on a beaten track, for a
host of donkey-boys gathered round us, clamouring
and shouting to be engaged.

The day we were to leave Aswan for Cairo in a
small diabeah, a steamer came puffing up the river.


SAIL FROM CAIRO FOR ENGLAND. 44'7


His Highness the Viceroy, Ismael Pasha, had sent this
vessel to bring us down, and we sailed on the 19th of
May 1863. The mudirs or governors on the way
were politely attentive, and we anchored at Boulac,
the port of Cairo, on the 25th, after a pleasant voyage
of six days. Few of our Seedees had ever before seen
a steamship, and they viewed it with strong interest.
Every day fresh wonders were revealed to them. The
ruins of Dandoor, Kalap’shee, and Phylee, with their
carvings, paintings, and stone roofs, filled them with
amazement—“no one at Zanzibar could make such
buildings.” On our passage down the river, the wind-
mills, the tall chimneys, the tame buffaloes going
about the villages—all they saw interested, astonished,
and delighted them. At Boulac the naval com-
mander, Latif Pasha, sent for us; and on parting, after
a short interview, he presented Speke with a bouquet
of flowers which had just been handed to him. Our
Seedees were lodged in the public garden at Cairo, as
the people were afraid to admit them into their houses.
On the 1st of June we saw them, headed by Bombay,
depart by train for Suez, en route to Aden and Zan-
aibar. ‘They took leave of us with affectionate reeret
and many prayers, trusting they would again see us in
their own country. On the same day we had a private
audience of his Highness the Viceroy, who showed
great interest in our journey, and offered to aid Speke
in any further exploration. On the 4th of June we
sailed in the Pera, Captain Jamieson, for England,
where we arrived in safety after our long and varied
journey, and an absence of eleven hundred and forty-
six days.


APPENDIX A.


List OF PERSONAL KIT TAKEN WITH US FROM ENGLAND FOR
THE EXPEDITION.


12 blankets (grey Crimean) and 2 pairs scarlet do., from Grindlay &
Co.’s ; 73 lb. weight.
4 leather bags for shooting apparatus, from Grindlay & Co.’s.
1 set of bits in box handle, do.
1 spring balance to 60 Ib., do.
2 iron beds, from Brown & Co.’s, Piccadilly ; 28 Ib. each.
2 belts for revolvers, from Grindlay.
2 watering bridles, do.
4 packs playing-cards, do,
2 iron chairs, Brown & Co.’s ; each 123 Ib.
1 digester for soup, Grindlay & Co.’s. ; 15 Ib.
4 eye-preservers (glass and wire).
24 flannel shirts, from Grindlay & Co.’s.


12 pairs flannel trousers, do.
1 large housewife, do.
4 hats, wideawake and glazed, from Grindlay & Co.’s.
12 ink-powder packets (black and red), do.
India-rubber and India-rubber rings, do.


6 japanned tin trunks, weights 13, 14, and 17 lb., from do.

8 table knives, 6 sailors’, 24 three-bladed (Rogers’) for skinning
specimens, from Grindlay & Co.’s.

6 pairs leather leggings, short and long, from Grindlay & Co.’s,

2 pewter mugs without glass.

1 medicine chest, containing Brown’s blistering tissue, plaster, quinine,
lunar caustic, citric acid, jalap, calomel, rhubarb, blue pill, colo-
cynth, laudanum, Dover’s powders, emetic essence of ginger; 30 lb.

2 mosquito netting.

2 hair pillows.

12 pocket-handkerchiefs.


450 APPENDIX.


2 penholders.

6 dozen pencils, Winsor & Newton’s, &c.

1 2-feet rule.

2 white serge sheets.
12 pairs shoes, Simnett.

6 dozen socks, half woollen, Grindlay & Co.’s.

2 pairs stirrup-leathers.

4 iron stools, Brown’s, and 2 sketching do., Winsor & Newton’s.
7 saucepans (a nest of block-tin), Grindlay.

16 table spoons, 8 table do., 8 tea do.

12 sail-needles, large and small. /
2 lb. mustard and cress seeds.
2 tents (7 by 7, and 7 feet high). / Jj

Tools—2 hammers, 2 saws, pincers, files, chisels, &c.
8 pairs trousers, drill, unbleached.
2 oval tin teapots.

4O Ib. tea, from Sterriker.

2 gingham umbrellas, half carriage size, with white covers, Grindlay


& Co.’s.
waistcoats of Scotch tweed, Grindlay & Co.’s.
veils (green), do.


waterproof sheets (white), about 10 feet square, Grindlay & Co.’s.
photographic instrument for collodion, Bland & Long.


Mop ow


Instruments for Observing ; weight 228 lb.


sextants of 84 inch radius, Troughton & Simms.
stands for do., do.
artificial horizons.
chronometer (gold), Barraud & Lund.
do. (silver), Parkinson & Frodsham.
lever watch (B. & Lund), with double-detaching second-hand.
do. (Dent), with split second-hand.
do. (Jones).
prismatic compasses, cardless, with platinum rings, T. & Simms.
magnetic compasses (pocket), Eliot.
telescope, 1 rain-gauge (travellers’), and 1 rain-gauge (Livingstone’s).
boiling thermometers.
maximum and 1 minimum thermometer, Casella.
Massey’s patent log ; 10 lb.
bull’s-eye lanterns, with vessels to fit for boiling thermometers,
Casella.


BK HK Gm WwW =| = = & bw Ww


Mapping and Drawing Instruments.


2 reams mapping paper, Malby & Sons.
Tracing paper, black and white, Winsor & Newton.


APPENDIX. 451


circular brass protractor, Eliott ; 1 parallel ruler on rollers, Eliott.
case mathematical instruments, Ehott.

pocket-compass, 1 50-feet measuring tape, one drawing-board.
ream open foolscap, graduated in squares.

boxes of water-colours, Winsor & Newton.

block sketch-books, 2 Clifford’s.


Ee DN aH eH Re


Books.


Raper’s ‘ Navigation.’

Coleman’s ‘ Nautical and Lunar Tables.’

log-books, 12 field-books, and 5 longitude do., F’, Galton, Esq.
Nautical Almanacks, 1860-61-62-63.

Tables for measuring breadth of rivers, Galton.

Maps of Africa, all the recent, foreign and English.


Roe ee


Riflee—Arms and Ammunition—Revolvers.


2 single rifles, Lancaster’s elliptical, . 40 bore.
1 single Blisset, : : 4 do.

1 do. do. ; 16 do.

1 double do. : ‘ 20 do.

1 do. smooth do. ; 12 do.

1 do. rifle do. : . (2) 10 do.

1 six-barrelled revolving Colt rifle.

1 Whitworth sporting rifle.


1 double smooth-bore by : : 12 do.
2 Tranter’s revolvers ; 8 lb. each.
500 rounds for each barrel.
50 carbines, with pouches, sword-bayonets, and belts, Royal Artillery
pattern 1860 ; each 13 lb.
200 rounds to each carbine ; caps in complement.


Presents.


1 watch by M‘Cabe, in sword-belt, for Zanzibar sultan.
3 gold-enamelled lever watches, by M‘Cabe.


REMARKS UPON THE ABOVE KIT.


On reaching Egypt we still had a suit of clothes, a single
rifle, and some bullets each. Except the scientific instru-
ments, everything else had been given away as presents or
was worn out. I may remark that we found nothing want-
ing in this outfit to make it complete and excellent in every


452 APPENDIX.


respect. The iron beds and chairs of Messrs Brown & Co.
of Piccadilly, were admirable. The digester, very useful.
The japanned tin cases stood the wear and tear of the
journey to the last; they are recommended as superior for
travelling to trunks or portmanteaus, made of wood or
leather. Crimean blankets, and sheets of white serge, also
sheets of waterproof, are indispensable upon such a journey.
The stout lacing-shoes, made by Messrs Simnett, Bishopsgate
Street, resisted the wet even without blacking. The nest of
block-tin cooking-pots, although in constant use, lasted for
two years, so also did our single canvass tents. Our shep-
herd-tartan waistcoats (both back and front of the same
material) were so strong, that at the end of the journey
they did not appear to have been much worn. The suits of
flannel, though comfortable, were liable to be torn in going
through thorny covers.

The scientific instruments were little damaged by the
journey, as they were always placed in the hands of trust-
worthy porters.


APPENDIX B.


THE following is the analysis of the sand found in the
Apuddo stream (page 343) :—
‘*Lonpon, 17th Nov. 1864.

“DEAR Srr,—In the absence of Sir Roderick Murchison
from town, Mr Francis Galton left with me a small bottle of
sand, together with a note from you, requesting him to get
the contents tested. This has been done in Dr Percy’s
laboratory, and Mr Richard Smith (Dr Percy’s assistant)
reports as follows :—

“<The black sand consists chiefly of titaniferous iron ore
(ilmenite), with small quantities of quartz, magnetic iron
ore, and scales of yellow mica. The sand is free from gold
or silver.’

“Trusting that this information will be in time for your
forthcoming work, I am, dear Sir, yours faithfully,


“TRENHAM REEKS.


**CAPTAIN GRANT.”


THE END.


PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS, EDINBURGH.


LATELY PUBLISHED,
I.


WHAT LED TO THE DISCOVERY OF THE
SOURCE OF THE NILE.


By JOHN HANNING SPEKE, Captain H.M. Indian Army.
Octavo, with Maps, &c., 14s.


‘Every paragraph, to those specially interested in geographical discoveries,
will prove eminently attractive, and will tend, no doubt, to lay the foundation of
accurate information concerning a country which, under its natural aspects, is
so beautiful and so prolific in its productions, and demands, on many grounds,
the attention of the European.”—John Bull.

“¢ Will be read with peculiar interest, as it makes the record of his travels com-
plete, and, at the same time, heightens, if possible, our admiration of his indo-
mitable perseverance as well as tact.” —Dispatch.


1b;


JOURNAL


DISCOVERY OF THE SOURCE OF THE NILE.


By JOHN HANNING SPEKE, Captain H.M. Indian Army. With a
Map of Eastern Equatorial Africa by Caprarin SPEKE; Numerous
Illustrations, chiefly from Drawings by CapraIn GRANT; and Por-
traits, Engraved on Steel, of CAPTAINS SPEKE and GRANT.


Octavo, price 21s.


‘¢ The volume which Captain Speke has presented to the world possesses more
than a geographical interest. It is a monument of perseverance, courage, and
temper displayed under difficulties which have perhaps never been equalled.” —
Times.

“Captain Speke has not written a noble book so much as he has done a noble
deed. The volume which records his vast achievement is but the minor fact—the
history of his discovery, not the discovery itself; yet even as a literary perform-
ance it is worthy of very high praise. It is wholly free from the traces of book-
manufacture. . . . It is, however, a great story that is thus plainly told ; astory
of which nearly all the interest lies in the strange facts related, and, more than
all, in the crowning fact that it frees us, in a large degree, from a geographical
puzzle which had excited the curiosity of mankind—of the most illustrious em-
perors and communities—from very early times.” —A theneum.

“‘This volume of Captain Speke’s, in which he establishes beyond dispute his
right to the honour of a discovery which had engaged the attention and curio-
sity of men from the earliest ages, is not only a record of that discovery—it is
a monument of heroic persistency under circumstances the most appalling, and
a treasury of new and surprising knowledge of many kinds. More enchanting
than a fairy tale, more exciting than a novel, its greatest charm is yet that
every word of itis true, and its thrilling revelations are recounted with a modesty
which is, we suppose, as characteristic of true genius as it is of real bravery.”—
Daily News.


WILLIAM BLACKWOOD & SONS, EDINBURGH & LONDON.


45 >
25 ee =
= — ; -
an IR, TD) EB BTR LY
MAP or THE ROUTE
adopted. by
=| ‘Ng >
CAPTAINS SPEKE & GRANT,
BAHA on their Journey
30 = = = rom 30
ZANZIBAR
Z { PENINSULA To
IL I iB Y Al LY S /
: yO S WeasN I on THE MEDITERRANEAN.
| J fBenispet By A-Keith Johnston FR.S.E.
| ¢
fa 1 yr
\ MIDp D Lk Ek G Y P SCALES
} a 100 50 ° 100 : 200 Eng Miles
i en OO cece
| Ge Minich a = - my 1H0 Geog Miles
| | WeBeni Hassan ix a
| se i 2 7 vs = ' ; r
[D ‘Si. SEL aie T
‘
| XSEOOT 4 |
1.
} | % : | H
| Sos
| : | ‘ t | i
| s A D oR | |
| | <= ‘| | |
| | ee Ginah | |
| | Dundura \ : :
| | : (hep Carnac %
| Goornah |
| | 2 - =e att
| | OP Ne WP) UD) ane EH G Y P T " |
| Esnehi \
——= | = = a 3k ae = en Etfooh > | <a Stites | che =F wat ag rn tke «SS
| \
i | xk @ who © 6 . \
| | yp |
} |
| | ook a | A B I LA
| Li
|
| |
|
} | > ‘Ghai ; \- ‘ip
| pf oKostamneh |
| {
‘| Bareda |
j .
| | DERR A
i | AN TEL A R A Tre | ; :
| WA WD Wy xy © © BD A |
24 Cataract lQogab Ghowab | : ,
| } ra \
ELBab | |
f , Aboo BakecB U IB I Hl | i
I Ta Balu Hul!ab | | i \ |
| N | U JER dutta 8 other valleys TI |
|
| | *Nawrry Welts | |
| jof Mooraa )
| a ‘\ | \
| x | |
| {
| } A : F \ !
z ID JE UR | i
mM A fa s s i \ i
20 - cee == = = IMeaceriacce oe 5 amie th z ; = + 4,20
{ ra Cataract . & Belama |
| { Ahoo dhumed |
\ ph |
| | ») & p Q\ Muon Jalash i
| } S ds Y, Giagee |
| ter « > { Deas bE |
| DO/N GOLA 2 S Lone Hasheem | |
| | 49 cataree ¢ | |
= | Ne | les
S Q A 5% taturac marae | /
a EL Abidy ; |
| ) I, Berber or Moodyyrit 4
| al BoE R)B ER |
El Damerf? |
4 | |
. | |
j
| | ; | ow) ~ 3 1 |
| aS by E
| Seni ie
| 2 & A
| © ‘a 4 j
| f x
| s * é exams |
w ep \ Pp ii TR eae Aik, eS
\| | | yf Halferia 4
I | | KILARTOOM
rr Massuah
- |
a eal i. ||
aoa = ————s Se pot jae = = = ===s = — |} 15 |}
} i}
| \ \ {
F ein i }
r % Ahi Kharras “= i |
i oy OS fl j
Os a | |
| LACES G(s |
; | Wat | A }
| Ww { |
| NN | |
grab |
mt |
| A > | en |
|
| H A \B Mocha
1} x
x 5 Gondar
| ail /O IR
| | a
i | | m6 Tsana or
0) fos { Dembeu L.
| | a
| |
| | B AGAR
|
y N (
ie s
| Hake |
| Be
~
10 = a es A ee | SS, ss
.
| a
ae : ; Lah ER |
Bahr Ser eee S 4 : = ~ 80 Longs Haat of sl
| Sobat R. San ety “Se | {1
{| ‘ / 3 \ of | ai Equator Le
| | 1 y . | 2 j | 4 a os earl
| . S So aa | - te | | |
| xv yg \ | ty mc a | a @ = 4 gM Kenia |
1 heey Sseg | u Sanya 77 | NAG Seite e | |
/ x a4 ‘ ee ; | | Bas Byrgenei |
(0) / * fare ' | | mao | Se
- N » | / S es \ | | sf | Be | = |
i} 1 1 { \ Pine Se | 3 os | |
I | 1 J ae \ / a)
he! = | ‘omer jn,
i « | / ' e Ne \ Wee Lake Ukerewe |
| Ea \ \ ‘ : ‘ \ \ { boar |
' : arbar
| BO \ Nola & ! n } Sy \ Lake © Ujiji | |
q le \ Sy 1 fi ~ 1 SS | i] Kasego7 | |
lI ir Se /
| i] va Ph i t BSR ' t
© O + bs — |
{ Cc xn ) Na \ ‘ ‘
+. ag \ SS &
2). @ 1S / j & \ |
F ~ | } \ vo \ Sketch Map
z NK iw dt AF i= N ( ' Be eee eo
| 3 - > — 1 Md Z { ~~ PART OF EAST & CENTRAL AFRICA,
s wee nace a \ \ eae \ Shewing the probable position
i i 2% = = He i { \ : ' andextent of Lake Uniamesi.
Ib \ Xe , ‘
\ . s y SS i =e
| \ {
Pall \ ‘ 1
BIL =. ie 7 ne = af we = 3) [EN ae = ae! 5
Ry pce [Sa a a | E = ar oa ae ial cs ii oe 4
/
i
|
ie ,
Ve
5
2
ae
Ey
eB
5
a
5
og Equator Equator
a
Nea Z
g
8 |
3
la a |
18 fe YI CTORIA NYANZA
ay 3740 feet, above the Ocean |
3 |
|
|
ee | |
wee pita bond 14
re Mazi Ie Sw eres
} S Mus HA KT 6 |
UB MIAN GA \ ‘ |
= ally |
comb
Nyamanireix Formosa Bay |
as Goman |
23 Q Kilimandj OTE ah
: Port Melinda |
MBA <I Lond | |
Nindo | |
YP Ongembo R. = }
i aoN on D | me wilt]
|
|
| }
Cn fa |
2h : pe : [le
i hin, SEAULO ANZA VA NYY SCP | 2
ee |
|


8000F*
5009 ,,
000 .,
3,000 ..
2000 .,
1.000 .,


B
Y inhabired by Wanled


vo Wapoka


SS AN


4 ZAN ZIBAR I,


ar |


al
Umwaene |
inilasT?


Findon
Light Mboamayi
tarairo


‘Fieve of the Sea


Section af the Country between the Ocean and the Lakes


ist WEAK Johnston Edisburgh.


- . Wiliam Blackwood & Sons, Edinburgh & London. 1862


Ses


Pe
SaaS.


mn
i ge
Stare
S025


want Stat


‘ ~

eee eT

Mane.

Sere
Set


md


Fae scan 7
eS seas


wets,


tne A s ‘i MS 3 ah
es 2 : es : meh RS
A - Dp eer


at es
rE ave


