The Truth About "The Protocols": A Literary Forgery (Philip Graves (1876-1953), 1921)
=====================================================================================
Philip Graves, The Times' Constantinople correspondent — the three articles of 16, 17 and 18 August 1921 ('A Literary Forgery'), reprinted as a Times booklet. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (truthaboutthepro00londiala) — London: Printing House Square, 1921; complete with preface.

;Vf


fhe  Truth   About
uThe  Protocols"


A   LITERARY   FORGERY


From  ®he   Ctmes


California

jgional

,cility


LONDON:
PRINTING  HOUSE  SQUARE,  E.C.4.


ONE   SHILLING   NET.


The  Truth   About
"The   Protocols"

A  LITERARY  FORGERY


From  Cfje  Cimeg  of

August    16,  17,  and  18,  1921


LONDON:
PRINTING  HOUSE  SQUARE,  E.C.4.


PREFACE.


The  so-called  "  Protocols  of  the  Elders  of
Sion "  were  published  in  London  in  1920
under  the  title  of  "  The  Jewish  Peril."

This  book  is  a  translation  of  a  book  pub-
lished in  Russia,  in  1905,  by  Sergei  Nilus,
a  Government  official,  who  professed  to  have
received  from  a  friend  a  copy  of  a  summary
of  the  minutes  of  a  secret  meeting,  held  in
Paris  by  a  Jewish  organization  that  was
plotting  to  overthrow  civilization  in  order  to
establish  a  Jewish  world  state.

These  "  Protocols  "  attracted  little  atten-
tion until  after  the  Russian  Revolution  of
1917,  when  the  appearance  of  the  Bolshevists,
among  whom  were  many  Jews  professing
and  practising  political  doctrines  that  in
some  points  resembled  those  advocated  in
the  "  Protocols,"  led  many  to  believe  that
Nilus's  alleged  discovery  was  genuine.  The
"  Protocols "  were  widely  discussed  and
translated  into  several  European  languages.
Their  authenticity  has  been  frequently  at-
tacked and  many  arguments  have  been
adduced  for  the  theory  that  they  are  a  forgery.

In  the  following  three  articles  the  Con-
stantinople Correspondent  of  The  Times
presents  for  the  first  time  conclusive  proof
that  the  document  is  in  the  main  a  clumsy
plagiarism.  He  has  forwarded  to  The  Times
a  copy  of  the  French  book  from  which  the


A2


plagiarism  is  made.  The  British  Museum
has  a  complete  copy  of  the  book,  which  is
entitled  "  Dialogue  aux  Enfers  entre  Machi-
avel  et  Montesquieu,  ou  la  Politique  de
Machiavel  au  XIX.  Siecle.  Par  un  Con-
temporain,"  and  was  pubh'shed  at  Brussels
in  1865.  Shortly  after  its  publication  the
author,  Maurice  Joly,  a  Paris  lawyer  and
publicist,  was  arrested  by  the  police  of
Napoleon  III.  and  sentenced  to  15  months'
imprisonment.


L— A    LITERARY    FORGERY.


"  There  is  one  thing  about  Constantinople
that  is  worth  your  while  to  remember,"  said  a
diplomatist  to  the  writer  in  1908.  "  If  you
only  stay  here  long  enough  you  will  meet
many  men  who  matter,  and  you  may  find  the
key  to  many  strange  secrets."  Yet  I  must
confess  that  when  the  discovery  which  is  the
theme  of  these  articles  was  communicated  to
me  I  was  at  first  incredulous.  Mr.  X.,  who
brought  me  the  evidence,  was  convinced.
"Read  this  book  through,1'  he  said,  "and
you  will  find  irrefutable  proof  that  the  '  Pro-
tocols of  the  Learned  Elders  of  Sion '  is  a
plagiarism."

Mr.  X.,  who  does  not  wish  his  real  name  to  be
known,  is  a  Russian  landowner  with  English
connexions.  Orthodox  by  religion,  he  is  in
political  opinion  a  Constitutional  Monarchist.
He  came  here  as  a  refugee  after  the  final  failure
of  the  White  cause  in  South  Russia.  He  had
long  been  interested  in  the  Jewish  question  as
far  as  it  concerned  Russia,  had  studied  the
"  Protocols,"  and  during  the  period  of  Denikin's
ascendancy  had  made  investigations  with  the
object  of  discovering  whether  any  occult
*'  Masonic  "  organization,  such  as  the  "  Proto-
cols "  speak  of,  existed  in  Southern  Russia.  The
only  such  organization  was  a  Monarchist  one.
The  discovery  of  the  key  to  the  problem  of  the
"  Protocols  "  came  to  him  by  chance.

A  few  months  ago  he  bought  a  number  of  old
books  from  a  former  officer  of  the  "  Okhrana  "
(Political  Police)  who  had  fled  to  Constantinople.
Among  these  books  was  a  small  volume  in
French,  lacking  the  title-page,  with  dimensions
of  5 Jin.  by  3 fin.  It  had  been  cheaply  re-
bound. On  the  leather  back  is  printed  in


Latin  capitals  the  word  Joli.  The  preface,
entitled  "  Simple  avertissement,"  is  dated
Geneva,  October  15,  1864.  The  book  contains
324  pages,  of  which  numbers  315-322  inclusive
follow  page  24  in  the  only  copy  known  to  Mr.
X,  perhaps  owing  to  a  mistake  when  the  book
was  rebound.  Both  the  paper  and  the  type
are  characteristic  of  the  "  sixties  and  seventies  "
of  the  last  century.  These  details  are  given  in
the  hope  that  they  may  lead  to  the  discovery
of  the  title  of  the  book  [See  Preface].  Mr.  X.
believes  it  must  be  rare,  since,  had  it  not
been  so,  the  "  Protocols  "  would  have  speedily
been  recognized  as  a  plagiarism  by  anyone
who  had  read  the  original.

That  the  latter  is  a  "  fake  "  could  not  be
maintained  for  an  instant  by  anyone  who  had
seen  it.  Its  original  possessor,  the  old  Okhrana
officer,  did  not  remember  where  he  obtained  it,
and  attached  no  importance  to  it.  Mr.  X,
glancing  at  it  one  day,  was  struck  by  a  re-
semblance between  a  passage  which  had  caught
his  eye  and  a  phrase  in  the  French  edition  of
the  "  Protocols  "  (Edition  de  la  Vieillo  France,
1920,  6,  Rue  du  Preaux-Clercs,  5,  Paris  7th
Arrondissement).  He  followed  up  the  clue,  and
soon  realized  that  the  "  Protocols  "  were  to  a
very  large  extent  as  much  a  paraphrase  of  the
Geneva  original  as  the  published  version  of  a
War  Office  or  Foreign  Office  telegram  is  a  para-
phrase of  the  ciphered  original.

Before  receiving  the  book  from  Mr.  X,  I  was,
as  I  have  said,  incredulous.  I  did  not  believe
that  Sergei  Nilus's  "  Protocols  "  were  authentic  ;
they  explained  too  much  by  the  theory  of  a
vast  Jewish  conspiracy.  Professor  Nilus's
account  of  how  they  were  obtained  was  too
melodramatic  to  be  credible,  and  it  was  hard  to
believe  that  real  "  Learned  Elders  of  Sion "
would  not  have  produced  a  more  intelligent
political  scheme  than  the  crude  and  theatrical
subtilties  of  the  Protocols.  But  I  could  not


have  believed,  had  I  not  seon,  that  the  writsr
who  supplied  Nilus  with  his  originals  was  a
careless  and  shameless  plagiarist.

The  Geneva  book  is  a  very  thinly-veiled
attack  on  the  despotism  of  Napoleon  III.  in
the  form  of  a  series  of  25  dialogues  divided  into
four  parts.  The  speakers  are  Montesquieu
and  Machiavelli.  In  the  brief  preface  to  his
book  the  anonymous  author  points  out  that
it  contains  passages  which  are  applicable  to
all  Governments,  "  but  it  particularly  personi-
fies a  political  system  which  has  not  varied  in
its  application  for  a  single  day  since  the  fatal
and  alas  !  too  distant  date  when  it  was
enthroned."  Its  references  to  the  "  Hauss-
mannisation "  of  Paris,  to  the  repressive
measures  and  policy  of  the  French  Emperor,  to
his  wasteful  financial  system,  to  his  foreign  wars,
fro  his  use  of  secret  societies  in  his  foreign  policy
(cf.,  his  notorious  relations  with  the  Carbonari)
and  his  suppression  of  them  in  France,  to  his
relations  with  the  Vatican,  and  to  his  control
of  the  Press  are  unmistakable.

The  Geneva  book,  or  as  it  will  henceforth  be
called  the  Geneva  Dialogues,  opens  with  the
meeting  of  the  spirits  of  Montesquieu  and
Machiavelli  on  a  desolate  beach  in  the  world
of  shades.  After  a  lengthy  exchange  of
civilities  Montesquieu  asks  Machiavelli  to
explain  why  from  an  ardent  Republican  he
had  become  the  author  of  "  The  Prince  "  and
''  the  founder  of  that  sombre  school  of  thought
which  has  made  all  crowned  heads  your  dis-
ciples, but  which  is  well  fitted  to  justify  the
worst  crimes  of  tyranny."  Machiavelli  replies
that  he  is  a  realist  and  proceeds  to  justify  the
teaching  of  "  The  Prince,"  and  to  explain  its
applicability  to  the  Western  European  States
of  1864.

In  the  first  six  "  Geneva  Dialogues  "  Montes-
quieu is  given  a  chance  of  argument  of  which
he  avails  himself.  In  the  seventh  dialogue,


BS


which  corresponds  to  the  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,
and  part  of  the  eighth  "  Protocols,"  he  gives
Machiavelli  permission  to  describe  at  length
how  he  would  solve  the  problem  of  stabilizing
political  societies  "  incessantly  disturbed  by
the  spirit  of  anarchy  and  revolution."  Hence-
forth Machiavelli  or  in  reality  Napoleon  III.,
speaking  through  Machiavelli,  has  the  lion's
share  of  the  dialogue.  Montesquieu's  contri-
butions thereto  become  more  and  more
exclamatory ;  he  is  profoundly  shocked  by
Machiavelli-Napoleon's  defence  of  an  able  and
ruthless  dictatorship,  but  his  counter-arguments
grow  briefer  and  weaker.  At  times,  indeed,
the  author  of  "  L' Esprit  des  Lois  "  is  made  to
cut  as  poor  a  figure  as — parvum  componere
magno — does  Dr.  Watson  when  he  attempts  to
talk  criminology  to  Sherlock  Holmes.

The  "  Protocols "  follow  almost  the  same
order  as  the  Dialogues.  Dialogues  1-17  gene-
rally correspond  with  "  Protocols  "  1-19.  There
are  a  few  exceptions  to  this.  One  is  in  the  18th
"  Protocol,"  where,  together  with  paraphrases
of  passages  from  the  17th  Dialogue  ("  Geneva
Dialogues,"  pp.  216,  217),  there  is  an  echo  of
a  passage  in  the  25th  "  Geneva  Dialogue,"  viz. : —
"  Quand  le  malheureux  est  opprim6  il  dit
*  Si  le  Roi  le  savait '  ;  Quand  on  veut  se
venger,  qu'on  espere  un  secours,  on  dit  '  le
Roi  le  saura.'  '  This  appears  on  page  68  of
the  English  edition  of  the  "  Protocols  "  (4th
Edition,  published  by  "The  Britons,"  62,
Oxford-street,  London,  W.)  as  "  In  order  to
exist,  the  prestige  of  power  must  occupy  such
a  position  that  the  people  can  say  among  them-
selves, '  If  only  the  King  knew  about  it,'  or
'  When  the  King  knows  about  it.'  "

The  last  five  "  Protocols "  (Nos.  20-24  in-
clusive) do  not  contain  so  many  paraphrases
of  the  "  Geneva  Dialogues "  as  the  first  19.
Some  of  their  resemblances  and  paraphrases
are,  however,  very  striking,  e.g.,  the  following : —


A  loan  is  an  issue  of  Government  paper  which  en-
tails an  obligation  to  pay  interest  amounting  to  a
percentage  of  the  total  sum  of  the  borrowed  money.
If  a  loan  is  at  5  per  cent.,  then  in  20  years  the  Govern-
ment will  have  unnecessarily  paid  out  a  sum  equal
to  that  of  the  loan  in  order  to  cover  the  percentage.
In  40  years  it  will  have  paid  twice,  and  in  60  thrice
that  amount,  but  the  loan  will  still  remain  as  an
unpaid  debt. — "  Protocols,"  p.  77.

MONTESQUIEU. — "  How  are  loans  made  ?  By  the
issue  of  bonds  entailing  on  the  Government  the
obligation  to  pay  interest  proportionate  to  the
capital  it  has  been  paid.  Thus,  if  a  loan  is  at  5  per
cent.,  the  State,  after  20  years,  has  paid  out  a  sum
equal  to  the  borrowed  capital.  When  40  years
have  expired  it  has  paid  double,  after  60  years  triple  :
yet  it  remains  debtor  for  the  entire  capital  sum.  —
"  Geneva  Dialogues,"  p.  250.

But  generally  speaking  "  Protocols  "  20
and  21,  which  deal  (somewhat  unconvincingly)
with  the  financial  programme  of  the  Learned
Elders,  owe  less  to  the  "  Geneva  Dialogues,"
Nos.  18-21,  than  to  the  imagination  of  the
plagiarist  author  who  had  for  once  in  a  way
to  show  a  little  originality.  This  is  natural
enough  since  the  "Dialogues"  in  question
describe  the  actual  financial  policy  of  the
French  Imperial  Government,  while  the  "  Pro-
tocols "  deal  with  the  future.  Again  in  the
last  four  "  Geneva  Dialogues "  Machiavelli's
apotheosis  of  the  Second  Empire,  being  based
upon  historical  facts  which  took  place  between
1852  and  1864,  obviously  furnished  scanty
material  for  the  plagiarist  who  wished  to  prove
or,  very  possibly,  had  been  ordered  to  prove
in  the  "  Protocols "  that  the  ultimate  aim
of  the  leaders  of  Jewry  was  to  give  the  world
a  ruler  sprung  from  the  House  of  David.

The  scores  of  parallels  between  the  two  books
and  a  theory  concerning  the  methods  of  the
plagiarist  and  the  reasons  for  the  publication
of  the  "  Protocols  "  in  1905  will  be  the  subject
of  further  articles.  Meanwhile  it  is  amusing
to  find  that  the  culy  subject  with  which  the
"  Protocols "  deal  on  lines  quite  contrary
to  those  followed  by  Machiavelli  in  the  "  Dia-
logues" is  the  private  life  of  the  Sovereign.


9


The  last  words  of  the  "  Protocols  "  are  "  Our
Sovereign  must  be  irreproachable."  The  Elders
evidently  propose  to  keep  the  King  of  Israel
in  good  order.  The  historical  Machiavelli
was,  we  know,  rather  a  scandalous  old  gentle-
man, and  his  shade  insists  that  amorous  adven-
tures, so  far  from  injuring  a  Sovereign's  reputa-
tion, make  him  an  object  of  interest  and
sympathy  to  "  the  fairest  half  of  his  subjects."


10


II.— PLAGIARISM  AT  WORK.


While  the  Geneva  Dialogues  open  with  an
exchange  of  compliments  between  Montesquieu
and  Machiavelli,  which  covers  seven  pages,  the
author  of  the  Protocols  plunges  at  once  in
medias  res.

One  can  imagine  him  hastily  turning  over
those  first  seven  pages  of  the  book  which  he  has
been  ordered  to  paraphrase  against  time,  and
angrily  ejaculating,  "  Nothing  here."  But  on
page  8  of  the  Dialogues  he  finds  what  he  wants  ;
the  greater  part  of  this  page  and  the  next  aro
promptly  paraphrased,  thus  : —
Geneva  Dialogues,  p.  8.  Protocols,  p.  1  ("  The


Among  mankind  the
evil  instinct  is  mightier
than  the  good.  Man  is
more  drawn  to  evil  than
to  good.  Pear  and  Force
have  more  empire  over
him  than  reason.


Britons  "  edition).
It  must  be  noted  that
people  with  corrupt  in-
stincts are  more  numerous
than  those  of  noble  in-
stinct. Therefore  in  gov-
erning the  world  the  best


Every  man  aims  at  domin-    results    are    obtained    by


ation  ;  not  one  but  would
be  an  oppressor  if  ho
could  ;  all  or  almost  all
are  ready  to  sacrifice  the


means  of  violence  and  in-
timidation, and  not  by
acad  emic  discussions.
Every  man  aims  at  power ;


rights  of  others  to  their    every  one  would  like  to  be-
own    interests.     .     .     .        come  a  dictator  if  he  only
could  do  so,  and  rare  in-
deed   are    the    men    who
.  would  not  be  disposed  to

sacrifice    the    welfare    of
others  in  order  to  attain
their  own  personal  aims,
restrains     those        What    restrained      the


What

beasts  of  prey  which  they  wild  beasts  of  prey  which
call  men  from  attacking  we  call  men  ?  What  has
ruled  them  up  to  now  V
In  the  first  stages  of  social
life  they  submitted  to
brute  and  blind  force,  then
to  law,  which  in  reality  is
the  same  force,  only
masked.  Prom  this  I  am


one  another  ?  Brute  un-
restrained Force  in  the
first  stages  of  social  life,
then  the  Law,  that  is  still
force  regulated  by  forms.
You  have  consulted  all
historic ;il  sources  ;  every-
where might  precedes


led  to  deduct  that  by  the


right.    Political  Liberty  is    law   of   nature  right  lies
merely  a  relative  idea. ...    in  might.     Political  freo-

doni    is  not  a  fact  but  an

idea.


11


The  gift  of  liberty  according  to  the  Machia-
velli  of  the  Geneva  Dialogues,  of  self-government
according  to  the  Protocols  (page  2),  leads
speedily  to  civil  and  social  strife,  and  the  State
is  soon  ruined  by  internal  convulsions  or  by
foreign  intervention  following  on  the  heels  of
civil  war.  Then  follows  a  singular  parallel
between  the  two  books  which  deserves  quota-
tion : —

Geneva  Dialogues,  p.  9.  Protocols,  p.  2.

What    arms    will    they        ...     I  would  ask  tha
(States)     employ    in    war    question  why  is  it  not  im-
against   foreign   enemies  ?    moral  for  a  State   which
Will  the  opposing  generals    has  two  enemies,  one  ex-
communicate   their    plans    ternal    and    one    internal,
of  campaign  to  one  another    to  use  different  means  of
and  thus  be  mutually  in    defence  against  the  former
a  position  to  defend  them-    to  that  which  it  would  use
selves  ?     Will  they  mutu-    against  the  latter,  to  make
ally    ban    night    attacks,    secret  plans  of  defence,  to
traps,    ambushes,    battles    attack   him   by   night    or
with  inequality  of  force  ?    with  superior  forces  ?  .  .  .
Of  course  not ;    such  com-
batants   would  court  de-
rision.    Are    you    against
the  employment  of  these
traps  and  tricks,  of  all  the
strategy   indispensable   to
war    against    the    enemy
within,  the  revolutionary  ?

Both  "  Machiavelli  "  and  the  author  of  the
Protocols  agree  (Prot.  p.  3,  Geneva  Dialogues,
p.  11)  almost  in  the  same  words  that  politics
have  nothing  in  common  with  morality.  Right
is  described  in  the  Protocols  as  "an  abstract
idea  established  by  nothing,"  in  the  Dialogues
as  an  "  infinitely  vague  "  expression.  The  end,
say  both,  justifies  the  means.  "  I  pay  less
attention,"  says  Machiavelli,  "  to  what  is
good  and  moral  than  to  what  is  useful  and
necessary."  The  Protocols  (p.  4)  use  the  same
formula,  substituting  "  profitable  "  for  "  use-
ful." According  to  the  Protocols  he  who  would
rule  "  must  have  recourse  to  cunningness  (sic)
and  hypocrisy."  In  the  second  Dialogue  (p.
15)  Montesquieu  reproaches  Machiavelli  for
having  "  only  two  words  to  repeat — 'Force  '  and
'  guile.'  "  Both  Machiavelli  and  the  "  Elders  "


12


of  the  Protocols  preach  despotism  as  the  solo
safeguard  against  anarchy.  In  the  Protocols
this  despotism  has  to  be  Jewish  and  here-
ditary. Machiavelli's  despotism  is  obviously
Napoleonic.

There  are  scores  of  other  parallels  between
the  books.  Fully  50  paragraphs  in  the  Pro-
tocols are  simply  paraphrases  of  passages  in
the  Dialogues.  The  quotation  per  me  reges
regnant,  rightly  given  in  the  Vieille  France
edition  of  the  Protocols  (p.  29),  while  regunt
is  substituted  for  regnant  in  the  English  version
(p.  20),  appears  on  p.  63  of  the  Geneva  Dialogues.
Sulla,  whom  the  English  version  of  the  Pro-
tocols insists  on  calling  "  Silla,"  appears  in
both  books.

After  covering  Italy  with  blood,  Sulla  reappeared
as  a  simple  citizen  in  Borne  :  no  one  durst  touch  a
hair  of  his  head.  Geneva  Dialogues,  p.  159.

Remember  at  the  time  when  Italy  was  streaming
with  blood,  she  did  not  touch  a  hair  of  Silla's  head,
and  he  was  the  man  who  made  her  blood  pour  out.
Protocols,  p.  51.

Sulla,  who  after  the  proscriptions  stalked
"  in  savage  grandeur  home,"  is  one  of  the
tyrants  whom  every  schoolboy  knows  and  those
who  believe  that  Elders  of  the  33rd  Degree  are
responsible  for  the  Protocols,  may  say  that  this
is  a  mere  coincidence.  But  what  about  the
exotic  Vishnu,  the  hundred-armed  Hindu  deity
who  appears  twice  in  each  book  ?  The  following
passages  never  were  examples  of  "  unconscious
plagiarism."

Geneva  Dialogues,  p.  141  : —

Machiavelli. — "  Like  the  God  Vishnu,  my  press
will  have  a  hundred  arms,  and  these  arms  will  give
their  hands  to  all  the  different  shades  of  opinion
throughout  the  country."

Protocols,  p.  43  : —

"  These  newspapers,  like  the  Indian  god  Vishnu,
will  be  possessed  of  hundreds  of  hands,  each  of
which  will  be  feeling  the  pulse  of  varying  public
opinion."

Geneva  Dialogues,  p.  207  : —
Montesquieu. — "  Now     I     understand     the     figure
of     the     god      Vishnu  ;      you     have     a     hundred


13


arms  like  the  Indian  idol,  and  each  of  your  fingers
touches  a  spring."

Protocols,  p.  65  :• —

"  Our  Government  will  resemble  the  Hindu  god
Vishnu.  Each  of  our  hundred  hands  will  hold  one
spring  of  the  social  machinery  of  State."

TAXATION  OF  THE  PRESS.

The  Dialogues  and  the  Protocols  alike
devote  special  attention  to  the  Press,  and  their
schemes  for  the  muzzling  and  control  thereof
are  almost  identical — absolutely  identical,
indeed,  in  many  details.  Thus  Machiavelli  on
pp.  135  and  136  of  the  Dialogues  expounds  the
following  ingenious  scheme  : —

"  I  shall  extend  the  tax  on  newspapers  to  books,
or  rather  I  shall  introduce  a  stamp  duty  on  books
having  less  than  a  certain  number  of  pages.  A  book,
for  example,  with  less  than  200  or  300  pages  will  not
rank  as  a  book,  but  as  a  brochure.  I  am  sure  you  see
the  advantage  of  this  scheme.  On  the  one  hand
I  thin  (je  rarifie)  by  taxation  that  cloud  of  short
books  which  are  the  mere  appendages  of  journalism  ;
on  the  other  I  force  those  who  wish  to  escape  stamp
duty  to  throw  themselves  into  long  and  costly
compositions,  which  will  hardly  ever  be  sold  and
scarcely  read  in  such  a  form."

The  Protocols,  p.  41,  has  : —

"  We  will  tax  it  (the  book  press)  in  the  same
manner  as  the  newspaper  Press — that  is  to  say,  by
means  of  Excise  stamps  and  deposits.  But  on
books  of  less  than  300  pages  we  will  place  a  tax  twice
as  heavy.  These  short  books  we  will  classify  as
pamphlets,  which  constitute  the  most  virulent  form
of  printed  poison.  These  measures  will  also  compel
writers  to  publish  such  long  works  that  they  will
be  little  read  by  the  public  and  so  chiefly  on  account
of  their  high  price."

Both  have  the  same  profound  contempt
for  journalists.

Geneva  Dialogues,  pp.  145,  146  :• —
Machiavelli. — "  You  must  know  that  journalism
is  a  sort  of  Freemasonry ;  those  who  live  by  it  are
bound  ...  to  one  another  by  the  ties  of  pro-
fessional discretion ;  like  the  augurs  of  old,  they
do  not  lightly  divulge  the  secret  of  their  oracles.  They
would  gain  nothing  by  betraying  themselves,  for  they
have  mostly  won  more  or  less  discreditable  scars  ..."

Protocols,  p.  44  : —

"  Already  there  exists  in  French  journalism  a
system  of  Masonic  understanding  for  giving  counter-


14


signs.  All  organs  of  the  Press  are  tied  by  mutual  pro-
fessional secrets  in  the  manner  of  the  ancient  oracles.
Not  one  of  its  members  will  betray  his  knowledge  of
the  secret,  if  the  secret  has  not  been  ordered  to  be
made  public.  No  single  publisher  will  have  the
courage  to  betray  the  secret  entrusted  to  him,  the
reason  being  that  not  one  of  them  is  admitted  into
the  literary  world  without  bearing  the  marks  of  some
shady  act  in  his  past  life."

CONTEMPT  FOB  THE  PEOPLE.
But    this    contempt    is    nothing    compared
to  that  which  both  Machiavelli  and  the  Elders
evince  towards   the  masses  whom  tyranny  is
to  reduce  to  a  more  than  Oriental  servitude.

Geneva  Dialogues,  p.  43  :• —

Machiavelli. — "  You  do  not  know  the  unbounded
meanness  of  the  peoples  ....  grovelling  before
force,  pitiless  towards  the  weak,  implacable  to  faults,
indulgent  to  crimes,  incapable  of  supporting  the
contradictions  of  a  free  regime,  and  patient  to  the
point  of  martyrdom  under  the  violence  of  an  audacious
despotism  .  .  .  giving  themselves  masters  whom
they  pardon  for  deeds  for  the  least  of  which  they
would  have  beheaded  twenty  constitutional  kings."

Protocols,  p.  15  : —

"  In  their  intense  meanness  the  Christian  peoples
help  our  independence — when  kneeling  they  crouch
before  power ;  when  they  are  pitiless  towards  the
weak  ;  merciless  in  dealing  with  faults,  and  lenient  to
crimes  ;  when  they  refuse  to  recognize  the  contra-
dictions of  freedom  ;  when  they  are  patient  to  the
degree  of  martyrdom  in  bearing  with  the  violence  of
an  audacious  despotism.  At  the  hands  of  their
present  dictators,  Premiers,  and  Ministers,  they
endure  abuses  for  the  smallest  of  which  they  would
have  murdered  twenty  kings."

Both  the  Elders  and  Machiavelli  propose
to  make  political  crime  thoroughly  unpopular
by  assimilating  the  treatment  of  the  political
criminal  to  that  of  the  felon.  Both  devote  not
a  little  attention  to  police  organization  and
espionage ;  the  creator  of  Machiavelli  had
evidently  studied  Napoleon  III.'s  police  methods
and  suffered  at  the  hands  of  his  agents.  Each
proposes  to  exercise  a  severe  control  over  the
Bar  and  the  Bench.  As  regards  the  Vatican,
Machiavelli-Napoleon,  with  recent  Italian  his-
tory in  mind,  aims  at  the  complete  control  of
the  Papacy.  After  inflaming  popular  hatred


15


against  the  Church  of  Rome  arid  its  clergy,  he
will  intervene  to  protect  the  Holy  See,  as
Napoleon  III.  did  intervene,  when  "  the
chassepots  worked  wonders.'*  The  learned
Elders  propose  to  follow  a  similar  plan  :  "  when
the  people  in  their  rage  throw  themselves  on
to  the  Vatican  we  shall  appear  as  its  protectors
in  order  to  stop  bloodshed."  Ultimately,  of
course,  they  mean  to  destroy  the  Church.
The  terrible  chiefs  of  a  Pan-Judaic  conspiracy
could  hardly  have  any  other  plan  of  campaign.
Machiavelli,  naturally,  does  not  go  so  far.
Enough  for  him  if  the  Pope  is  safely  lodged  in
the  Napoleonic  pocket.

Is  it  necessary  to  produce  further  proofs
that  the  majority  of  the  Protocols  are  simply
paraphrases  of  the  Geneva  Dialogues,  with
wicked  Hebrew  Elders,  and  finally  an  Israelite
world  ruler  in  the  place  of  Machiavelli-Napoleon
III.,  and  the  brutish  goyim  (Gentiles)  sub-
stituted for  the  fickle  masses,  "  gripped  in  a
vice  by  poverty,  ridden  by  sensuality,  devoured
by  ambition,"  whom  Machiavelli  intends  to
win  ?


16


III.— SOME    CONCLUSIONS.


There  is  no  evidence  as  to  how  the  Geneva
Dialogues  reached  Russia.  The  following  theory
may  be  suggested.

The  Third  Napoleon's  secret  police,  many  of
whom  were  Corsicans,  must  have  known  the
existence  of  the  Dialogues  and  almost  cer-
tainly obtained  them  from  some  of  the
many  persons  arrested  on  the  charge  of  political
conspiracy  during  the  reign  of  Napoleon  III.
In  the  last  two  decades  of  the  19th  century
and  in  the  early  years  of  the  20th  there
were  always  a  few  Corsicans  in  the  Palace
Police  of  the  Tsar,  and  in  the  Russian  secret
service.  Combining  courage  with  secretiveness,
a  high  average  of  intelligence  with  fidelity  to
his  chief,  the  Corsican  makes  a  first-class  secret
agent  or  bodyguard.  It  is  not  improbable  that
Corsicans  who  had  been  in  the  service  of
Napoleon  III.,  or  who  had  had  kinsmen  in  his
secret  service,  brought  the  Geneva  Dialogues
to  Russia,  where  some  member  of  the  Okhrana
or  some  Court  official  obtained  possession
of  them.  But  this  is  only  a  theory.

As  to  the  Protocols,  they  were  first  pub-
lished in  1905  at  Tsarskoye  Selo  in  the  second
edition  of  a  book  entitled  "  The  Great  Within
the  Small,"  the  author  of  which  was  Professor
Sergei  Nilus.  Professor  Nilus  has  been  described
to  the  writer  as  a  learned,  pious,  credulous
Conservative,  who  combined  much  theolo-
gical and  some  historical  erudition  with  a
singular  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  world.  In
January,  1917,  Nilus,  according  to  the  intro-
duction to  the  French  version  of  the  Protocols,
published  a  book,  entitled  "It  is  Here,  at  Our
Doors  !  !  "  in  which  he  republished  the  Pro-
tocols. In  this  latter  work,  according  to  the


17


French  version,  Professor  Nilus  stated  that  the
manuscript  of  the  Protocols  was  given  him  by
Alexis  Nicolaievich  Sukhotin,  a  noble  who
afterwards  became  Vice-Governor  of  Stavropol.

According  to  the  1905  edition  of  the  Pro-
tocols they  were  obtained  by  a  woman  who
stole  them  from  "  one  of  the  most  influential
and  most  highly  initiated  leaders  of  Free-
masonry. The  theft  was  accomplished  at  the
close  of  the  secret  meeting  of  the  '  initiated  '  in
France,  that  nest  of  Jewish  conspiracy."  But
in  the  epilogue  to  the  English  version  of  the
Protocols  Professor  Nilus  says,  "  My  friend
found  them  in  the  safes  at  the  headquarters
of  the  Society  of  Zion  which  are  at  present
situated  in  France."  According  to  the  French
version  of  the  Protocols,  Nilus  in  his  book  of
1917  states  that  the  Protocols  were  notes  of  a
plan  submitted  to  the  "  Council  of  Elders  "  by
Theodor  Hertzl  at  the  first  Zionist  Congress
which  was  held  at  Basle,  in  August,  1897,  and
that  Hertzl  afterwards  complained  to  the
Zionist  Committee  of  Action  of  the  indiscreet
publication  of  confidential  information.  The
Protocols  were  signed  by  "  Zionist  representa-
tives of  the  33rd  Degree "  in  Orient  Free-
masonry and  were  secretly  removed  from  the
complete  file  of  the  proceedings  of  the  afore-
said Zionist  Congress,  which  was  hidden  in  the
"  Chief  Zionist  office,  which  is  situated  in
French  territory."

Such  are  Professor  Nilus's  rather  contra-
dictory accounts  of  the  origin  of  the  Protocols.
Not  a  very  convincing  story  !  Theodor  Hertzl
is  dead ;  Sukhotin  is  dead,  and  where  are  the
signatures  of  the  Zionist  representatives  of  the
33rd  Degree  ?

Turning  to  the  text  of  the  Protocols,  and
comparing  it  with  that  of  the  Geneva  Dialogues,
one  is  struck  by  the  absence  of  any  effort  on  the
part  of  the  plagiarist  to  conceal  his  plagiarisms.
The  paraphrasing  has  been  very  careless ;


18


parts  of  sentences,  whole  phrases  at  times,  are
identical :  the  development  of  the  thought  is
the  same ;  there  has  been  no  attempt  worth
mentioning  to  alter  the  order  of  the  Geneva
Dialogues.  The  plagiarist  has  introduced
Darwin,  Marx,  and  Nietzsche  in  one  passage  in
order  to  be  "  up  to  date  "  ;  he  has  given  a
Jewish  colour  to  "  Machiavelli's  "  schemes  for
dictatorship,  but  he  lias  utterly  failed  to  con-
coal  his  indebtedness  to  the  Geneva  Dialogues-
This  gives  the  impression  that  the  real  writer
of  the  Protocols,  -who  does  not  seem  to  have
had  anything  to  do  with  Nilus  and  may  have
been  some  quite  unimportant  precis  writer
employed  by  the  Court  or  by  the  Okhrana,
was  obliged  to  paraphrase  tho  original  at  short
notice.  A  proof  of  Jewish  conspiracy  was
required  at  once  as  a  weapon  for  the  Con-
servatives against  the  Liberal  elements  in
Hussia.

Mr.  X,  the  discoverer  of  the  plagiarism,
informs  me  that  the  Protocols,  shortly  after
their  discovery  in  1901,  four  years  before  their
publication  by  Professor  Nilus,  served  a  sub-
sidiary purpose,  namely,  the  first  defeat  of
Monsieur  Philippe,  a  French  hypnotist  and
thought-reader,  who  acquired  considerable  in-
fluence over  the  Tsar  and  the  Tsaritsa  ats
the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  The
Court  favourite  was  disliked  by  certain  great
personages,  and  incurred  the  natural  jealousy
of  the  monks,  thaumaturgists,  and  similar
adventurers  who  hoped  to  capture  the  Tsar
through  the  Empress  in  their  own  interest,  or
in  that  of  various  cliques.  Philippe  was  not  a
Jew,  but  it  was  easy  to  represent  a  Frenchman
from  "  that  nest  of  Jewish  conspiracy  "  as  a
Zionist  agent.  Philippe  fell  from  favour,  to
return  to  Russia  and  find  himself  once  more  in
the  Court's  good  graces  at  a  later  date.

But  the  principal  importance  of  the  Protocols
was  their  use  during  the  first  Russian  revolu-


19


tion.  This  revolution  was  supported  by
the  Jewish  element  in  Russia,  notably  by
the  Jewish  Bund.  The  Okhrana  organization
knew  this  perfectly  well  ;  it  had  its  Jewish
and  crypto -Jewish  agents,  one  of  whom  after-
wards assassinated  M.  Stolypin  ;  it  was  in
league  with  the  powerful  Conservative  faction  ;
with  its  allies  it  sought  to  gain  the  Tsar's  ear.
For  many  years  before  the  Russian  revolution
of  1905-1906  there  had  been  a  tale  of  a  secret
council  of  Rabbis  who  plotted  ceaselessly  against
the  Orthodox.  The  publication  of  the  Protocols
in  1905  certainly  came  at  an  opportune
moment  for  the  Conservatives.  It  is  said  by
some  Russians  that  the  manuscript  of  the  Pro-
tocols was  communicated  to  the  Tsar  early
in  1905,  and  that  its  communication  contributed
to  the  fall  of  the  Liberal  Prince  Sviatopolk-
Mirski  in  that  year  and  the  subsequent  strong
reactionary  movement.  However  that  may
be,  the  date  and  place  of  publication  of  Nilus's
first  edition  of  the  Protocols  are  most  significant
now  that  we  know  that  the  originals  which  were
given  him  were  simply  paraphrases.

The  following  conclusions  are,  therefore,
forced  upon  any  reader  of  the  two  books  who
has  studied  Nilus's  account  of  the  origin  of
the  Protocols  and  has  some  acquaintance  with
Russian  history  in  the  years  preceding  the
revolution  of  1905-6  : —

1.  The   Protocols   are   largely   a   paraphrase
of    the    book    here    provisionally    called    the
"  Geneva  Dialogues."

2.  They  were  designed  to  foster  the  belief
among  Russian   Conservatives,   and  especially
in  Court  circles,  that  the  prune  cause  of  dis-
content among  the  politically  minded  elements
in  Russia  was  not  the  repressive  policy  of  the
bureaucracy,    but    a    world-wide    Jewish    con-
spiracy.    They  thus  served  as  a  weapon  against
the    Russian    Liberals,    who    urged    the    Tsar


20


to   make    certain,    concessions    to   the   intelli-
gentsia.

3.  The    Protocols    were    paraphrased    very
hastily  and  carelessly.

4.  Such  portions  of  the  Protocols  as  were  not
derived    from    the    Geneva    Dialogues    were
probably    supplied    by    the    Okhrana,    which
organization     very     possibly     obtained     them
from  the  many  Jews  it  employed  to  spy  on  their
coreligionists.

So  much  for  the  Protocols.  They  have  done
harm  not  so  much,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  by
arousing  anti-Jewish  feeling,  which  is  older  than
the  Protocols  and  will  persist  in  all  countries
where  there  is  a  Jewish  problem  until  that
problem  is  solved ;  rather,  they  have  done
harm  by  persuading  all  sorts  of  mostly  well-to-
do  people  that  every  recent  manifestation  of
discontent  on  the  part  of  the  poor  is  an  un-
natural phenomenon,  a  factitious  agitation
caused  by  a  secret  society  of  Jews.


21


Leading  Article  reprinted  from
of  August  18,  1921.


We  publish  to-day  the  last  of  the  articles
on  the  so-called  "  Protocols  of  the  Elders  of
"  Zion,"  from  our  Constantinople  Correspon-
dent, who  has  effectively  exposed  a  remark-
able forgery.  We  have,  of  course,  no  political
object  in  making  this  discovery  known.  On
the  general  aspects  of  the  Jewish  problem  our
attitude  is  known  to  be  impartial,  and  we  have
no  intention  of  taking  sides  in  those  political
controversies  on  this  question  which  too  fre-
quently engender  excessive  passion  and  obscure
its  real  character.  In  the  interests  of  objective
truth,  however,  it  was  of  great  importance
that  a  legend  like  that  so  long  connected  with
the  "  Protocols  of  the  Elders  of  Zion  "  should
be  exposed  at  the  earliest  possible  opportunity.

Briefly  summarized,  the  facts  of  this  curious
historical  incident  are  as  follows.  A  Russian
book,  published  in  1905  by  an  official  named
SERGEI  NILUS,  contained  a  document  described
as  "  The  Protocols  of  the  Elders  of  Zion,"  and
purported  to  bo  a  summary  of  the  proceedings
of  a  secret  meeting  of  a  Jewish  organization
that  was  plotting  in  France  to  overthrow
Gentile  civilization  and  establish  a  Jewish  world
State.  The  document  attracted  little  atten-
tion until  after  the  Russian  revolution  in  1917,
when  the  astounding  collapse  of  a  great  country
through  the  action  of  the  Bolshevists  and  the
presence  of  a  large  number  of  Jews  in  the
Bolshevist  ranks  caused  many  to  search  for
some  simplified  explanation  of  the  catastrophe.
The  "Protocols"  appeared  to  provide  such  an
explanation,  more  particularly  since  the  tactics


22


of  the  Bolshevists  in  many  respects  resembled
those  advocated  in  the  "  Protocols."  The
book  was  translated  into  several  European
languages  and  made  the  basis  for  impassioned
dissertations  on  an  alleged  Jewish  world  peril.
There  was  a  certain  plausibility  about  this
thesis  that  attracted  many  ;  but  the  authenti-
city of  the  "  Protocols  "  was  very  vigorously
called  in  question,  and  the  whole  matter  was
shrouded  in  doubt  until  our  Correspondert
made  his  remarkable  discovery.  A  Russian
in  Constantinople,  who  had  bought  some  books
from  an  ex-officer  of  the  Russian  Secret  Police,
found  among  them  one  in  which  many  passages
struck  him  by  their  resemblance  to  the
"Protocols."  Our  Correspondent,whose  attention
was  called  to  the  matter,  found  on  examination
that  the  "  Protocols  "  consisted  in  the  main
of  clumsy  plagiarisms  from  this  little  French
book,  which  he  has  forwarded  to  us.  The
book  had  no  title-page,  but  we  identified  it
in  the  British  Museum  as  a  political  pamphlet
directed  against  NAPOLEON  III.  and  published
in  Brussels  in  1865  by  a  French  lawyer  named
MAURICE  JOLY,  and  entitled  "  Dialogue  aux
Enfers  entre  Machiavel  et  Montesquieu."
The  book  was  published  anonymously,  but
the  author  was  immediately  seized  by  NAPO-
LEON'S police  and  sentenced  to  a  term  of  im-
prisonment. A  second  edition  was  published
in  Brussels  in  1868,  with  the  author's  name
and  a  note  on  his  imprisonment.

The  author  of  the  "  Protocols "  simply
copied  from  the  "  Dialogues "  a  number  of
passages  in  which  MACHIAVELLI  is  made  to
enunciate  the  doctrines  and  tactics  of  despot-
ism as  they  were  at  that  time  practised  by
NAPOLEON,  and  put  them  into  the  mouth  of  an
imaginary  Jewish  Elder.  There  can  be  little
doubt  that  the  forgery  was  perpetrated  by  some
member  of  the  Russian  Secret  Police.  NILTTS,
who  may  have  acted  in  good  faith,  declared


23


that  the  manuscript  of  the  "  Protocols  "  had
been  given  him  by  an  official  named  ALEXANDER
SUKHOTIN,  who  professed  to  have  received
it  from  a  woman  who  had  stolen  it  from  an
Elder  of  Zion.  On  the  leather  back  of  the  copy
of  the  "  Dialogues  "  sent  us  by  our  Correspon-
dent we  notice  the  letters  A.S.,  and,  seeing  that
the  book  was  bought  from  an  ex-officer  of  the
Secret  Police,  it  seems  possible  that  this  copy
belonged  at  one  time  to  STJKHOTIN,  and  that  it
was  the  copy  actually  used  in  the  compilation
of  the  "  Protocols."  For  many  years  there
was  a  close  connexion  between  the  Russian
and  the  French  police,  and  one  of  the  confis-
cated copies  of  JOEY'S  book  may  easily  have
failed  into  the  hands  of  a  Russian  agent — such
as  RACHKOVSKY,  at  one  time  head  of  the  Russian
Secret  Police  in  Paris,  to  whom  other  and  more
clumsy  forgeries  have  been  traced — and  may
have  inspired  him  to  invent  a  weapon  for  use
against  Jewish  revolutionaries.  At  any  rate,
the  fact  of  the  plagiarism  has  now  been  conclu-
sively established,  and  the  legend  may  be
allowed  to  pass  into  oblivion.  The  historical
interest  of  the  discovery  is  considerable,  though,
as  we  have  indicated,  it  does  not,  in  our  opinion,
affect  the  Jewish  problem,  which  happily,  in
this  country,  cannot  be  said  to  exist  in  its
Continental  form.


24


BMLUMWVFftQUn


A     000  047  727     3


Univers

Soul

Lib:
