PYRAMIDOGRAPHIA: OR, A DESCRIPTION OF THE PYRAMIDS IN AEGYPT
by John Greaves
London: Printed for George Badger, 1646

[Transcribed from the EEBO-TCP Phase 1 keyed text (TCP ID A41967), via the Text Creation Partnership. Marginal notes and figures omitted.]

Pyramidographia: OR A DESCRIPTION OF THE PYRAMIDS IN AEGYPT.

 By IOHN GREAVES, Professor of Astronomy in the University of OXFORD.

 Romanorum Fabricae & antiqua opera (cum veniâ id dictum sit) nihil accedunt ad Pyramidum splendorem, & superbiam.

 Bellon. lib. 2. Observ. cap. 42.

 LONDON, Printed for George Badger, and are to be sold at his shop in St
 Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet-street 1646.


 The Preface.


 HOw high an estimation the Ancients had of the Aegyptian Pyramids, appeares by the severall testimonies of Herodotus, Diodorus, Strabo, and Pliny. For
 Herodotus acknowledges, that though there were a Temple at Ephesus very renowned, as also

 saith he, that these workes far excell the rest in Aegypt, not only in the massinesse of the structures, and in the expenses, but also in the skilfulnesse of the Architects. He farther addes, The greatnesse of the

worke, and art of the workemen; strike an admiration into the spectators.

 Strabo also testifies, that three of them are very memorable, two of these are accounted amongst the seven miracles of the world. Lastly
 Pliny, though he judges them to be an idle, and vaine ostentation of the wealth of Kings; yet he grants that three of them have filled the world with their fame. Which three by his description, and by such indications, as may be collected out of Diodorus, and Strabo, must necessarily be these three, which now are extant, and of which I intend especially to discourse. For


 Diodorus writes, that they are seated on Libya side, an CXX stadia (or furlongs) from Memphis, and from Nilus XLV. We reade in
 Strabo, XL stadia from the City (Memphis) there is a certaine brow of an hill in which are many Pyramids: where presently after describing more particularly the three greatest, he gives us this character: These three stand neere to one another upon the same plaine. And if this be not sufficient to point them out,
 Pliny delivers many evident markes, whereby to discover them. These three (as he informes us) are very

conspicuous to those that saile upon the Nilus, they are seated on Africa side, upon a rockie, and barren hill, betweene the City Memphis, and that place, which we said is called the Delta, from the Nilus lesse then IV miles, from Memphis VI, there being a village apposite to them, which they name Busiris, from whence they use to ascend up to them. All which characters were, and are, appliable to none, but only to these three.

 Having thus discovered their true place, or situation, we shall next discourse of the Authours, who have written of them. Amongst the Ancients

there were many, who thought it worth their labour to describe them. For Pausanias, as it were complaining that the Graecians had been very curious in describing these, whilst they had omitted many remarkable structures of their owne, writes thus:
 That the Graecians admired things of strangers more then of their owne, seeing that some Historians of note had most accurately described the Pyramids of Aegypt, whereas the Treasurie of Minyas, and walls of Tiryns (places in Boeotia) no lesse to be admired then these, had been omitted by them. Pliny gives us

a large catalogue of Authors, that had purposely treated of this Argument:
 Those which have writ of them, are, Herodotus, Euhemerus, Duris Samius, Aristagoras, Dionysius, Artemidorus, Alexander Polyhistor, Butorides, Antisthenes, Demetrius, Demoteles, Apion. Where we are beholding to him for preserving the names of so many Writers, though their workes (unlesse those of Herodotus) by the injury, and calamity of times, have long since perished. Besides these, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Pomponius Mela, Pliny, Solinus, and Ammianus Marcellinus (the

names of moderne Authors I purposely omit) have given us some relations of them. But it may be, if the writings of Aristides had not perished, who in his
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 speakes thus of himselfe,
 After that I had entred into Aethiopia, and foure times travelled all over Aegypt, and had left nothing unhandled, neither the Pyramids, nor Labyrinth, nor Temples, nor channels, and partly had procured out of their writings such measures as might be had, and partly with the Priests had measured such things as were not obvious, yet could I not preserve them intire for thee, seeing the Books, which

thy servants by my appointment transcribed, have perished: Or if we had the sacred Commentaries of the Aegyptians, so often cited by
 Diodorus, we might receive better satisfaction, and be also more content with the losse of those other writings of the Graecians. But seeing the vicissitudes, and revolutions of times, have deprived us of these, whilst the Pyramids have been too great to be consumed, it will be no superfluous labour to imitate the examples of the Ancients, and to supply the losse of them, by giving a distinct narration of the severall respective dimensions, and proportions

of these Pyramids. In which I shall tread in as eeven a path as I can, between truth, and the traditions of such of the Ancients, as are still extant: First, putting downe those relations, which by them have been transmitted to us: and next, shewing in what manner, upon examination, I found the Pyramids in the yeares one thousand six hundred thirty eight, and one thousand six hundred thirty nine, or in the thousand forty & eighth yeare of the Hegira. For I twice went to Grand Cairo from Alexandria, and from thence into the deserts, for the greater certainty,

to view them: carrying with me a radius of ten feet most accurately divided, besides some other instruments, for the fuller discovery of the truth. But before I descend to a particular description, I shall make enquiry by whom: at what time: and to what end, these Monuments were erected.


 Of the Authors or Founders of the PYRAMIDS.


 IT is the opinion of some moderne Writers, that the Aegyptian Pyramids were erected by the Israelites, during their heavie pressure under the tyrannie of the Pharaohs. And this seems to be confirmed by
 Iosephus; who relates, that when as time had extinguished the memorie of the benefits of Joseph, the Kingdome of Aegypt being transplanted into another Family, they used the Israelites with much severitie, wasting them with severall labours; for they were commanded to cut divers Channels for the River (Nilus) to raise walls, and cast up bankes, whereby to hinder the inundation of the streame: they oppressed also our Nation with those fabrickes of the Pyramids, compelling them to learne many (mechanicall) Arts, and inured them to the supporting of labours. But the sacred Scriptures clearely expressing the slaverie of the Iewes, to have consisted in making and burning of Brick (for the originall is
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

 Lebénim, which the
 Septuagint renders by
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 and
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 ) whereas all these Pyramids consist of Stone, I cannot be induced to subscribe to their assertion.


Much lesse can I assent to that opinion of
 Stephanus,

 Nicetas,

 Nonnus, and the Author of the Greeke


 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , with some others, who derive the name of the Pyramids

 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , that is from Corne, and not
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , from the figure of a flame of fire, which they resemble; because, say most of them, these were built by the Patriarch Ioseph, as
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , Receptacles, and Granaries of the seven plentifull yeares. For, besides that this figure is most improper for such a purpose, a Pyramid being the least capacious of any regular Mathematicall body, the straightnesse, and fewnesse of the roomes within (the rest of the building being one solid, and intire fabrick of stone) doe utterly overthrow this conjecture. Wherefore the relations of Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, and of some others, but especially of these two, both of them having travailed into Aegypt, and conversed with the Priests (besides that the later made use of their Commentaries) will give us the best and clearest light, in matters of so great antiquitie.

 For Herodotus writes thus concerning the first of these Pyramids that
 untill King Rhampsinitus time the Aegyptians report the Lawes to have flourished in Aegypt: after whom, Cheops succeeding in the Kingdome, fell into all manner of vice; for, shutting up the Temples, he forbad the Aegyptians to sacrifice: besides, he commanded that they should be imployed in his workes (hee meanes this Pyramid of which hee discour
 •
 eth) that some of them should receive the stones dug out of the Quarries of the Arabian mountaine, and that from thence they should carry them to the Nilus; these being waf
 •
 ed over the River, others were to receive them, and to draw them to the mountaine, which is called


Libycus. There were imployed in the worke ten Myriads of men, every three moneths a Myriad: the people spent ten yeares in the way, in which they drew the stones, which seemes to me no lesse a worke then the building of the Pyramid it selfe.

 Diodorus Siculus discoursing of the same argument, gives the erector of this another name, different from that of Herodotus, stiling him Chemmis; but in the time and person they both agree, each of them affirming him to have succeeded Rhampsinitus, and to have beene the father of Mycerinus, and to have reigned over the Aegyptians fiftie yeares. This difference of names betweene Herodotus and Diodorus, concerning the same King, may probably be thus reconciled; that Diodorus expresses the genuine denomination in the Aegyptian Language, and that Herodotus renders the signification in the Greeke: a practice not unusuall with him, and with other approved Authors. Thus the Patriarke Isaac in the Scriptures, being denominated from
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , that is laughter, is by Alexander Polyhistor, as
 Eusebius testifies, named
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 . Wherefore
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

 Cham in Hebrew (or in the Greeke flection Chemmis) signifying adustion, which anciently might be the same in Aegyptian, and
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , or
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , signifying swarthie visage, or adult, Herodotus might call him Cheops in Greeke, whom in the Aegyptian Language Diodorus stiles Chemmis. But I goe on with Diodorus. This Chemmis, saith he, erected the greatest of these three Pyramids, which are reputed amongst the seven wonderfull fabricks of the world: where hee also enlarges the number of the workemen imployed by him,

to three hundred and sixtie thousand, which Herodotus mentions onely to have beene an hundred thousand; though both of them concurre, and
 Pliny with them both, that twentie yeares were spent in the building of this Pyramid.

 Concerning the second Pyramid, Herodotus and Diodorus assigne the author of it to have beene Cephren, brother to the former King. Diodorus addes, that by some he is also called Chabryis, and was the sonne of Chemmis; a difference which I imagine to have beene occasioned out of the diversitie of pronuntiation, of Chabryis for Cephren; there being an easie transmutation in letters of the same Organ, as Grammarians use to speake. Cheops, as
 Herodotus informes us, being deceased, his brother Cephren reigned after him; who imitated him, as in other things, so in the making of a Pyramid, the magnitude of which is lesse then that of his brothers. And
 Diodorus relates, that Chemmis being dead, his brother Cephren succeeded him in the Kingdome, and reigned fiftie six yeares: Some say, that not his brother, but his sonne, which was named Chabryis, reigned after him. This is affirmed by the consent of all, that the successor of the former King, in imitation of him, built the second Pyramid, like to the first in respect of the art and workmanship, but farre inferiour to it in respect of magnitude.


 The third Pyramid was erected by
 Mycerinus, some call him Mycherinus, as it is observed by Diodorus, who makes him the sonne of Chemmis, as Herodotus doth of Cheops; the difference betweene them being, as we noted before, rather

nominall then reall. The same
 Herodotus also writes, that some of the Graecians make the third Pyramid the worke of Rhodopis a Curtizan; an errour in opinion of those, who seeme not to know who this Rhodopis might be, of which they speake: for neither could she have undertaken such a Pyramid, on which so many thousand talents were to be spent; neither lived shee in this mans time, but in the time of King Amasis. Now this Amasis, as he elsewhere shewes lived long after these Pyramids were in being. The same storie is recited by
 Strabo and Pliny, both of them omitting the names of the Founders of the former two: Strabo gives her a double name; The third Pyramid is the Sepulcher of a Curtizan, made by her lovers, whom Sappho the Poetresse calls Doricha, Mistresse to her brother Charaxus; others name her Rhodope. But whether wee name her Doricha, or Rhodope, the relation is altogether improbable, if we consider either her condition or the infinite vastnesse of the expense. For
 Diodorus, though he rightly acknowledges this Pyramid to be much lesse then either of the former two, yet in respect of the exquisite workmanship, and richnesse of the materials, he judges it not inferiour to either of them. A structure certainly too great and sumptuous, to have beene the designe, and undertaking of a Curtizan, which could hardly have been performed by a rich, and potent Monarch. And yet Diodorus hath almost the same relation, onely a little altered in the circumstances:
 Some say, that this is the Sepulcher of the strumpet Rhodope; of whom, some of the Nomarchae (or Prefects of the Provinces) being inamoured, by a common

expense to win her favour, they built this Monument. But to passe by this Fable (for it is no better) and to returne to our inquirie. The same Author immediately before ingenuously confesses, that concerning them all three, there is little agreement either amongst the Natives, or amongst Writers:
 For they say, Armaeus made the greatest of these; the second, Amasis; the third, Inaron. And
 Pliny informing us, that these three were made in seventie eight yeares, and foure moneths, leaves the Founders of them very ambiguous: For reciting the names of many Authors that had described them, hee concludes;
 Inter omnes eos non constat à quibus factae sint, justissimo casu obliteratis tantae vanitatis authoribus.


 The Arabians, whose excellencies I judge to have been in the speculative sciences, and not in the Histories, and Occurrences of ancient times, assigne other Founders of these three, different from those mentioned by the Greeks. The Author of the Book intitled, Morat Alzeman, writes, they differ concerning him that built the Pyramids; Some say Joseph, some say Nimrod, some Dalukah the Queene, and some that the Aegyptians built them before the floud: For they foresaw that it would be, and they carried thither their treasures, but it profited them nothing. In another place he tels us that the Coptites (or Aegyptians) report that these two greater Pyramids, and the lesser, which is coloured, are Sepulchers. In the East Pyramid is King Saurid, in the West Pyramid his brother Hougib▪
 and in the coloured Pyramid Fazfarinoun, th
 •
 sonne of Hougib: The Sabeans relate, that one

of them is the Sepulcher of Shiit (that is Seth) and the second the Sepulcher of Hermes, and the coloured one the Sepulcher of Sab, the sonne of Hermes, from whom they are called Sabaeans. They goe in pilgrimage thither, and sacrifice at them a Cocke, and a blacke Calfe, and offer up incense. Ibn Abd Alhokm: another Arabian discoursing of this Argument, confesses, that he could not find amongst the learned men in Aegypt, any certaine relation concerning them (wherefore) what is more reasonable (saith he) then that the Pyramids were built before the Floud? For if they had been built after, there would have been some memory of them amongst men; at last he concludes. The greatest part of Chronologers affirme, that he which built the Pyramids, was Saurid ibn Salhouk the King of Aegypt, who was before the Floud 300 yeares. And this opinion he confirmes out of the Books of the Aegyptians: To which he addes, The Coptites mention
 •
 n their Books, that upon them there is an inscription ingraven; the exposition of it in Arabicke is this: I Saurid the King, built the Pyramids in such and such a time, and finished them in six yeares; he that comes after me, and sayes he is equall to me, let him destroy them in six hundred yeares; and yet it is knowne, that it is easier to plucke downe, then to build; and when I had finished them, I covered them with Sattin, and let him cover them with Mats. The same relation I find in severall others of them, that this Saurid was the Founder of these three Pyramids, which the admiration of after times inrolled amongst the miracles of the world. And these are those three, which are still faire, and intire, and standing neare

to one another, formerly not far distant from the great and ancient City Memphis, built by
 Uchoreus, (of which there is now not so much as the ruines left) and lesse distant from the River Nilus; as Diodorus, Strabo, and Pliny, rightly describe.

 Besides these three, we find mentioned in Herodotus, and Diodorus, the names and Authors of some others, not much inferiour to these in magnitude, long since ruined, and defaced by time. On the contrary, there are many now standing in the Libyan desert, whose names, and Authours, neither Herodotus, nor Diodorus, nor yet any of the Ancients have expressed.

 After Mycerinus, according to

 Herodotus, (for Diodorus is here silent,) Asychis succeeded in the Kingdome,
 who being desirous to excell his Predecessors, left for a monument a Pyramid made of Brickes, with these words ingraven in stone: Compare not me with the Pyramids built of stone, which I as farre excell, as Jupiter doth the other gods. For striking of the bottome of the Lake with long poles, and gathering the dirt which stucke to them, they made thence Brickes, and formed me in this manner.


 The same Author relates, that many Ages after this Asychis, Sanacharib King of the Arabians, and Assyrians, who certainly is the same, which is mentioned in the Scriptures, having expelled Sethon the King of the Aegyptians, and the Priest of Vulcane,

 the Aegyptians recovering their liberty, made choice of twelve Kings, (which is also confirmed by Diodorus) dividing Aegypt into so many parts: For they could at no time live without a

King, these by a common consent built a Labyrinth, above the Lake of Moeris: At the angle where the Labyrinth ends, there is a Pyramid of XL Orgyiae, (that is, of CCXL feet) in which are ingraven huge resemblances of Beasts, the passage to it is under ground. And this is that Pyramid, as may evidently be collected out of
 Strabo, in which Imandes lyes buried, whom we may probably suppose to have been the builder of it: his words are these; At the end of this building (that is, of this Labyrinth) which containes a furlong in length, there is a certaine

 Sepulcher, being a quadrilaterall Pyramid, each side of which is CCCC feet, and the altitude is the same; the name of him that lyes buried there is Imandes, whom the Author of the Epitome cals Maïndes, and Strabo himselfe not long after, Ismandes; Diodorus names him Osymanduas. Which of these two, whether Herodotus, or Strabo, hath given the truest measure of it, unlesse the Pyramid were now extant, cannot be decided by us. Though Pliny adheres to the dimensions of Herodotus: but whereas Herodotus and Strabo mention there but one Pyramid, he makes mention of many: And wh
 ••
 eas Strabo makes this to be quadrilaterall, he desc
 ••
 bes these (if I mistake not his words) to be sexangular.
 Super



 que
 Nemeses XV aediculis incluserit Pyramides

complures (that is above this Labyrinth, which he places in Heracleopolite Nomo) quadragenarum Ulnarum VI radice muros obtinentes.


 Long before these foure Pyramids of Cheops, Cephren, Mycerinus, and Asachis, who immediately succeeded one another in the Kingdome, but after this of Ismandes, Myris as he is called by Diodorus; but Herodotus, Strabo, and Pl
 •
 ny, name him Maeris. Another Aeg
 •
 ptian King built two admirable Pyramid
 •

 ; the description of which though in Herodotus it immediately followes that of the twelve Kings; yet as it may evidently be collected out of him and Diodorus, these two of Moeris must many ages have preceded: For Herodotus tels us, that from Menes (the first King of the Aegyptians, whom Diodorus names Menas) the Priests recited out of their Bookes, CCCXXX Kings, the last of which was Moeris; long after whom reigned Sesostris, who is called by Manethos, Sethosis; and by Diodorus, Sesostris, and Sesoosis; where he more particularly, then Herodotus, expresses this Sesostris to have been seven ages after Moeris, and to have reigned long before these twelve Kings. The which Sesostris, or Sethosis, immediately succeeding Amenophis, (according to Manethos in Iosephus, as we shall shew in the ensuing discourse) must have been before Cheops, Cephren, Mycerinus, and Asychis; and therefore consequently, that Moeris must long have preceded these twelve Kings. This Moeris undertooke, and finished that most admirable Lake, denominated after his name, as it is testified by Herodotus, Diodorus,

Strabo, and Pliny. A work the most usefull, and wonderfull, if it be rightly considered, that I thinke was ever by any man attempted: in the midst of which, he erected two Pyramids; the one in memory of himselfe, the other of his wife, each of them being DC feet in height; the description of both which, and of his Lake, we have in Herodotus, the latter we find in Strabo, but in none so fully as in
 Diodorus, and therefore I shall relate his words. Ten Schoenes, (that is, DC furlongs; though Strabo and Artemidorus before him, observe a difference of Schoenes in Aegypt) above the City (Memphis) Myris dug,
 •
 Lake of admirable use, the greatnesse of which worke is incredible: For they relate, that the circumference of it conteines M.MM.DC. furlongs, the depth of it in many places is fifty fadome (that is, two hundred cubites, or three hundred feet) who therefore may not deservedly aske, that shall consider the greatnesse of the worke, how many myriads of men, and in how many yeares they made it. The common benefit of it to those that inhabit Aegypt, and the wisedome of the King, no man can sufficiently commend. For since the rising of Nilus is not alwayes alike, and the Countrey is the more fruitfull by the moderatenesse of this; He dug a Lake to receive the superfluitie of the water, that neither by the greatnesse of the inundation unseasonably drowning the Countrey, it should occasion Marshes, or Lakes; or flowing lesse then it should doe, for want of water it should corrupt the fruits, he therefore cut a ditch, from the River to the Lake, eighty furlongs long, and three hundred feet in breadth. By which sometimes receiving

in, and sometimes diverting the River, he exhibited a seasonable quantity of water to the husbandmen, the mouth of it sometimes being opened, and sometimes shut, not without much art, and great expences. For he that would open the bars (or sluces) or shut them, it was necessary that he spent at the least fifty Talents. The Lake in this manner benefitting the Aegyptians, hath continued to our times, and from the Author of it, at this day is called the Lake of Myris. The King that dug it, left a place in the midst, in which he built a Sepulcher, and two Pyramids, each a furlong in height; the one for himself the other for his wife, placing upon them two Marble-Statues, sitting on a Throne, imagining by these workes he should propagate to posterity an immortall memory of his worth. The Revenue of the Fish of this Lake he gave to his Wife, for her Unguents, and other Ornaments; the fishing being worth to her a Talent a day: For they report, there are two and twenty sorts of Fishes in it, and that such a multitude is taken, that those who are perpetually imployed in salting them, of which there is a very great number, can hardly dispatch the worke. Thus farre Diodorus: Which description, as it is much more full then that of Herodotus, so Herodotus hath this memorable observation omitted by Diodorus.

 That this Lake was made by hand, and hollowed, it is apparent, because almost in the midst of it there stands two Pyramids, fiftie fadomes above the water, and as many fadomes of the building under wa
 •
 er: upon the top of each of which there is a Colossus of Stone, sitting upon a Throne; so that the Pyramids are an hundred

fadomes high. Strabo I know not by what oversight omits these two Pyramids, whereas he acknowledges the Lake of Moeris, in which they stood,
 to be admirable, being like a Sea for greatnesse, and for colour.


 Besides these which we have handled, and whose Founders are upon record in the writings of the Ancients, there are many others in the Libyan Desart, where it bounds Aegypt, of which there is no particular mention extant, either in the Greeks, Latines, or Arabians. Unlesse we shall apply these words of
 Diodorus to some of them. There are three other Pyramids, each side of which conteine two hundred feet, the structure of them, excepting the magnitude, is like to the former (that is, as he there specifies, to those three Pyramids of Chemmis, Cephren, and Mycerinus) these three Kings before mentioned are reported to have erected them for their Wives. The bignesse of some of these now extant, doth well answer the measure assigned by Diodorus: But if these three Kings built them for their Queenes, it may be wondred why they should have placed them so remote from their owne Sepulchers: or why they should stand at such large, and inequall differences, of severall miles from one another. I find as little satisfaction in
 Pliny, where he writes, Multa circa hoc vanitas illorum hominum fuit, vestigia



 que
 complurium inchoatarum extant, una est in Arsinoite nomo, duae in Memphi, non procul Labyrintho, de quo & ipsi dicemus. For not telling us the Founders of these, he leaves us still in the same darknesse, only we may in generall collect

out of him, and likewise out of that Ode in Horace:


 Exegi monumentum aere perennius:

 Regali



 que
 situ Pyramidum altius.


That they were the works of Aegyptian Kings; but of which of them, and at what time, we are altogether uncertaine. Regum pecuniae,
 saith Pliny, otiosa, ac stulta ostentatio. Of the same opinion is Leo Africanus, in his accurate description of Africa
 ▪ after many yeares travell in those parts. Hac per desertum arenaceum, itur ad Pyramides, nempe ad priscorum Aegypti Regum Sepulchra,

 quo in loco Memphin olim extitisse asserunt. It may be it was the Royall Prerogative, and that it was prohibited to private men, how wealthy, and potent soever, to be thus intombed; but without some farther light▪ from the Ancients, it would be too great a presumption to determine any thing.



 Lucan, I know not upon what ground, makes as if the Ptolemies had imitated the Aegyptian Kings in this particular:
Cùm Ptolemaeorum manes seriem



 que
 pudendam Pyramides claudant.
Surely if they did, these are none of those: For they would have built them at Alexandria, which was then the Regall Seat▪ and not at Memphis, the which as
 Diodorus assures us, began to decay after the building o
 •

 Alexandria, like as the ancient Thebes (as the
 Grecians stiled it; or the City of the Sunne, as the Aegyptians,


according to
 Diodorus called it; or Diospolis, as Diodorus and Strabo
 also name it,) did after the building of Memphis. Those which imagine the Monument, or Sepulcher, mentioned by
 Plutarch at Alexandria, into which Cleopatra fled for feare of Augustus, to have been a Pyramid, are much deceived. For in the life of Marke Antony, where he informes us, that there were Sepulchers near the Temple of Isis, of exquisite workmanship, and very high; into which she conveighed the richest of her treasures, he describes one of them, wherein she hid her selfe, to have had a window above the entrance, by which she drew up with cords the body of Antony, and by which afterwards Proculeius entred, and surprized her. This window is not in any of those Pyramids I have seene; neither can I apprehend, if these were of as solid, and massie stones, and of the same shape, as those at Memphis, and the chambers within as remote from the outward superficies, of what use it could be, either in respect of light, or ornament; and therefore I conjecture these monuments of the Ptolemies, to have beene of a different structure from those of the Pyramids.


 In all other Classicall Authors, I finde no mention of the Founders of the rest in the Libyan Desert: and after such a distance of time, wee must be content to be silent with them.


 Of the Time in which the PYRAMIDS were built.


 TO define the precise Time in which these Pyramids were erected, as it is an inquirie of much difficultie, so of much importance, in regulating the various and uncertaine traditions of the Ancients, concerning the Aegyptian Chronologie. For if wee shall peruse those fragments of Manethos, an Aegyptian Priest, preserved by
 Iosephus; or those relations of
 Herodotus, of CCCXXX Kings to Moeris, from Menes the first that reigned in Aegypt (who probably is
 Mizraim, the second sonne of Cham, and
 Father of the Aegyptians;) or that computation of
 Diodorus, borrowed from their sacred Commentaries, That to the CLXXX Olympiad, or to the time in which he travailed thither, there had beene a Succession in the Royall Throne for XV M yeares; or that calculation of
 Pomponius Mela▪
 of CCCXXX Kings to the time of Amasis, continuing above XIII M yeares; or lastly, those Dynasties mentioned by Africanus and Eusebius, but pretermitted by Herodotus and Diodorus, the first of which
 Ioseph Scaliger places in the VII M and IX yeare of that

 Iulian period, which by him is called Periodus Iuliana postulatitia, and the time tempus prolepticum, preceding the Creation by MCCCXXXVI yeares, we shall finde our selves intangled in a Labyrinth, and Maze of Times, out of which we cannot, without much perplexitie, unwinde our selves. And if we farther consider, that amongst those many names delivered by Manethos, and preserved by Iosephus, Africanus, Eusebius, and Syncellus, how few there are that concurre with those of Herodotus, and Diodorus, or with those in Plato, Strabo, Pliny▪ Plutarch, Censorinus, and some others: and that which is of greater consequence, how difficult it is to reconcile these Names, and Times, to the Aegyptian Kings recorded in the Scriptures, we shall finde our selves beset, and as it were invironed on every side, with great and inextricable doubts. What therefore, in inquiries of this nature, is approved as the most solid, and rationall fo
 ••
 dation, that is, to finde out some common, and received Epocha, in which either all, or most agree, that shall be our guide in matters of so great antiquitie. Now, of all the ancient Epocha's, which may conduce to our purpose, there is none that we may safelier rely upon, then that of the migration of the Israelites out of Aegypt; which had the same hand faithfully to pen it, that was the most active, and miraculous instrument of their departure. And though prophane Historians differ much in the manner of this action, either as they were tainted with malice against the Hebrewes, or mis-led with the calumnies, and false reports of their enemies,

the Aegyptians; of whom,
 Iosephus may seeme to have given a true censure, That all the Aegyptians in generall are ill affected to the Iewes; yet all agree in this, that Moses was the chiefe author, and conductor of this expedition. If therefore wee shall discover the time in which Moses flourished, and in which this great enterprize was performed by him, it will follow by way of consequence, that knowing what Pharaoh, or King in Aegypt was coetaneous, and concurrent with him, we may by Synchronisme, comparing sacred, and prophane Authors, and following the Line of their Successions, as it is delivered by good authoritie, at length fall upon the age in which Cheops, and those other Kings reigned in Aegypt, whom we assigned out of Herodotus, and Diodorus, to have beene the founders of these Pyramids.


 And here, for our i
 •
 quirie what Aegyptian King was concurrent with Moses, we must have recourse to the relations, not onely of the Scriptures, but also of other approved Authors, amongst the Iewes and Gentiles: in which last, though we often finde more then an Aegyptian darknesse, yet sometimes thorough this we may discover some glimmerings of light. By the Scriptures alone, it is impossible to inferre, what King of Aegypt was coetaneous with Moses: seeing the name, which is there given him, of Pharaoh, is a common denomination applyable to all of them; much like Caesar, or Augustus, with the Roman Emperours, or sometime Cosroe with the Persians, and no distinctive appellation. Yet in Herodotus we finde one King, the successor

of Sesostris, to have beene called
 Pheron; which I suppose is Pharaoh, and his proper, and peculiar name. But who this Pharaoh should be, whose heart God hardened, and upon whom Moses wrought so many wonders, is worth our disquisition. Iosephus in his first booke contra Apionem, out of Manethos contends, that Tethmosis (who is tearmed also Amosis by Africanus, and Eusebius) reigned then in Aegypt. The whole force of his argument lyes in this, that Manethos mentions the expulsion of the Nation of Shepheards to have beene by Tethmosis: But the Hebrewes were a Nation of Sheepheards, therfore the Hebrewes were expelled out of Aegypt, or in the Scripture phrase, departed out of Aegypt, under Tethmosis; and consequently, that Moses, who was their Conductor, was coetaneous with him. That the Hebrewes were a Nation of Sheepheards, and so
 •
 ccounted of themselves, and were esteemed by others, is very perspicuous.
 And Ioseph said unto his brethren, and unto his fathers house, I will goe up and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, my brethren, and my fathers house, which were in the land of Canaan. are come unto me. And the men are Sheepheards, for their trade hath beene to feed cattell, and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have. And it shall come to passe, when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, what is your occupation? That ye shall say, thy servants trade hath beene about cattell, from our youth even untill now, both we, and also our Fathers: that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen. For every Sheepheard is an abomination to the Aegyptians. But

before we shall disprove this assertion of Iosephus, which carries much speciousnesse with it, and therefore is approved, and followed, by
 Tatianus, by
 Iustine Martyr, and by
 Clemens Alexandrinus we shall put down the words of Manethos himselfe, as they are reported by
 Iosephus in his first booke contra Apionem. T
 •
 maus by name being our King, under him I know not how God was displeased, and beyond expectation, out of the Easterne countries, men of obscure birth incamped themselves in the country, and easily, and without battaile tooke it by force, binding the Princes, and besides cruelly burning the Cities, and overthrowing the Temples of the Gods. Last of all they made one of themselves a King, who was named Salatis, hee reigning nineteen
 •
 yeares dyed. After him another named Baeon reigned fortie foure yeares: next to him Apachnas; another, thirtie six yeares seven months: then Apophis sixtie one, Janias fiftie, and one month, after all Assis fortie nine yeares and two months. And these were the first six Kings of them alwayes conquering, and desiring to extirpate Aegypt. There nation was called Hycsos, that is kingly Sheepheards. For Hyc in the sacred tongue signifies a King; and Sos a Sheepheard, or Sheepheards in the common dialect, and thence Hycsos is compounded. But some say that these were Arabians. [In other Copies I have found that by the denomination Hyc,
 Kings are not signified, but on the contrary captive Sheepheards▪ For Hyc in the Aegyptian language, when it is pronounced with a broad sound, plainely signifies
 •
 aptives; and this seemes more probable to me, and better agreeing to

the ancient history.] Those Kings therefore which we before mentioned, and those which were called Pastores, and those which descended of them ruled Aegypt five hundred and eleven yeares. After this he mentions that by the Kings of Thebes, and of the rest of Aegypt, there was an invasion made upon these Sheepheards, and a very great and lasting warre. The which he saies were conquered by a King, whose name was Alisfragmuthosis, whereby they lost all Aegypt, being shut up into a place c
 •
 ntaining in circuit ten thousand acres. This space Manethos saies, the Sheepheards incompassed with a great and strong wall, that they might secure all their substance, and their spoiles in a defensible place. But Themosis the sonne of Alisfragmuthosis indeavoring to take them, with four hundred thousand armed men, beleagred the wals. who despairing to take them by Seige, made conditions with them, that they should leave Aegypt, and go without any dammage whither they would: They upon this agreement, no lesse then two hundred and forty thousand, with all their substance went out of Aegypt, by the desert into Syria, and fearing the power of the Assyrians (who then ruled Asia) in that Country, which is now called Judaea, they built a Citie capable to receive so many myriads of men, naming it Hierusalem. § By way of answer to Iosephus, we say that though the Israelites might properly be called Sheepheards, yet it cannot hence be inferred out of Manethos that these Sheepheards were Israelites. Nay if we compare this relation of Manethos with that in Exodus,
 which Iosephus being a Iew, cannot but approve of, we shall finde the

contrary. For there they live under a heavy slavery, and persecution, whereas here they are the persecutors, and afflictors: there they groane under their taskemasters the Aegyptians, here they make all Aegypt to groane under them: lastly wheras there they are imployed in the lowest offices,
 in Morter, and in Brick, and in all manner of service in the field: here, after the destruction of many Citties, and men, and infinite outrages committed upon the Aegyptians, they make one of themselves a King, and for six descents keepe themselves in possession of the royall Throne, of which after a long, and bloody war they are deprived. Their building likewise of a Cittie in Iudaea and naming it Ierusalem, according to Manethos, is a strong argument against Iosephus, that these Sheepheards could not have beene the Israelites. For before the entrance of the Israelites into Canaan, we finde that Ierusalem was a fort of the Iebusites upon mount Sion, unconquered by Ioshua.

 As for the Iebusites the inhabitants of Ierusalem, the children of Israel could not drive them out. But they were long after subdued by David. And
 David and all Israel went to Ierusalem, which is Jebus, where the Iebusites were the Inhabitants of the Land. And the Inhabitants of Jebus said to David, Thou shalt not come hither, Neverthelesse David tooke the castle of Zion, which is the Cittie of David. Besides all this, the History, and Chronology of those ancient times, if we compare Sacred, and prophane Authors, will in no sort admit that these Sheepheards must have beene the Israelites. For if these that departed out of Aegypt in the

reigne of Tethmosis King of Thebais, or of the upper part of Aegypt, were the children of Israel, then must Moses their Conductor have been as ancient as Tethmosis, or Amosis, that is as ancient as Inachus, the first King of the Argiues. For Apion in his fourth Book of the Histories of Aegypt, shewes out of Ptolemaeus Mendesius an Aegyptian Priest, that this Amosis lived in the time of Inachus, as it is recorded by
 Tatianus,

 Iustine M
 •
 rtyr,

 Clemens Alexandrinus, and others. Eusebius though he doth not approve of it, for he places Moses in the time of
 Cecrops, yet he assures us that it was a received opinion among many Learned men.
 Moysen Inachi fuisse temporibus eruditissimi viri tradideruntex nostris Clemens, & Africanus; ex Iudaeis, Iosephus, & Iustus, veteris historiae monimenta replicantes. Now Inachus according to
 Castor an ancient Chronographer
 ▪ with whom Eusebius also concurres, began to reign a thousand & eighty years before the first Olympiad, that is MCCLXVIII before the destruction of the Temple under Zedekiah, and before Christs nativity, after the Dionysian, or common account, MDCCCLVI. That of the Olympiads is so assured an Epocha, and so strongly, and clearly proved by Eclipses of the Sun, and Moone, which are the best demonstrations in Chronology these being expressed by some of the Ancients to have hapned in such a yeare, of such an Olympiad as by
 Ptolemy others in such a yeare of the epocha of Nabonassar, that we cannot erre in our Calculations an houre, much lesse an intire day. By this therefore we shall fixe the time of Zedekiah, and the destruction of the Temple:

and consequently, if, by our continuation of the yeares mentioned in the Sacred story, it shall appeare, that from the time of Moses, either to the first Olympiad, or to Zedekiah, and the destruction of the Temple, there cannot be so great a distance as these suppose, we may safely then conclude that Moses lived not in the time of this Tethmosis, and is not so ancient, as Iosephus makes him, and that these Sheepheards were not the Israelites, but very probably Arabians, as Manethos here also reports, some say that these were Arabians: who to this day for the greatest part, like the Nomades wander up and down, feeding their cattle, and often make incursions upon the Aegyptians, and Syrians. Which occasioned Sesostris the great (as we find it in
 Diodorus) to make a wall on the East side of Aegypt a Thousand and Fifty furlongs in length, from Pelusium by the Desert to Heliopolis, against the inrodes of the Syrians, and Arabians. As at this day the Chinese have done, against the irruptions of the Tartars on the North, and West parts of China, for many hundred miles: The which appeares by a large Mappe of mine of that Countrey, made, and printed in China. On the contrary, if the succession of times, from Moses, recorded in the holy Writ, better agrees, with the age of Amenophis, the Father of Ramesses, whose Story
 Iosephus hath preserved out of Manethos, and whose time and ranke in the Dynasties, Africanus, and Eusebius deliver out of the same Manethos, we may with more probability affirme, that the migration of the Israelites, and time of Moses was, when Amenophis, was Pharaoh, or King of Aegypt, then

that it was when Tethmosis reigned, as Iosephus, and others contend, out of a desire to make Moses ancienter, then in truth he is.

 And though this argument from the Series and successions of time is so demonstrative, and conclusive, that nothing can be opposed against it, and therefore might be sufficient to evince our purpose: yet if we considerately examine another relation of Manethos (which is sleighted, and depressed by Iosephus, because it made not for his purpose) it must necessarily be that by those Sheepheards he meant not the Israelites, but rather, by the Israelites, the leprous people, which in his computation are three hundred thirty years, and sixe months, after the Dynastie of the Sheepheards. And therefore we may oppose the authority of
 Manethos against himselfe, or rather against Iosephus. The summe of whose discourse is this: That Amenophis, who was a great worshipper of the Gods, as Orus one of the former Kings had been, being desirous to see the Gods, one of the Priests of the same name with him, told him he might, if he clensed the Country of leprous, and polluted people. This leprous people chose for their Captaine, one of the Priests of Heliopolis, named Osarsiphus, who changing his name, was called Moses, He causing Amenophis for feare to f
 •
 y into Aethiopia, was afterward by him, and by his Son Sethon, who was also called Ramesses, by the name of his father, overthrown in battell, and the leprous people were pursued by them unto the confines of Syria. Thus far out of Manethos. Here, which is very remarkable, we have expressely the name of Moses, whereas

in the former relation of Manethos, there is no mention of him, but of sixe other Kings, with their peculiar names. Whereas it is not probable he would have omitted the name of Moses, if he had lived in that age, being a name so famous, and so well known to them: and by
 Iosephus acknowledged, that the Aegyptians accounted h
 •
 m to be an admirable, and divine man. The pursuing of them unto the confines of Syria doth very well intimate the following of the Israelites by Pharaoh, and his Host. For his terming them a leprous, and polluted people, we must consider him to haue been an Aegyptian, and therefore not unlikely to throw as many aspersions as he could upon the Israelites: whom they deadly hated, it may be out of memory of their former plagues. How ever it were, Chaeremon hath almost the same History, as
 Iosephus confesses. Chaeremon professing to write the History of Aegypt, saies that under Amenophis, and his son Ramesses two hundred and fifty thousand Leprous, and polluted men were cast out of Aegypt. Their leaders were Moses the Scribe, and Josephus who was also a Sacred Scribe. The Aegyptian name of Moses was Tisithen, of Joseph Peteseph. These comming to Pelusium, and finding there three hundred and eighty thousand men left by Amenophis, which he would not admit into Aegypt, making a league with them, they undertook an expedition against Aegypt. Vpon this Amenophis flies into Aethiopia, and his Son Messenes drives out the Iewes into Syria, in number about two hundred thousand, and receives his Father Amenophis out of Aethiopia. I know
 Lysimachus assignes another

King, and another time, in which Moses lead the Israelites out of Aegypt, and that was when Bocchoris reigned in Aegypt, the nation of the Iewes being infected with leaprosies, and scabs, and other diseases, betooke themselves to the Temples to beg their living, many being tainted with the disease, there happened a dearth in Aegypt, Whereupon Bocchoris consulting with the Oracle of Ammon, received answer, that the leprous people were to be drowned in the Sea, in Sheets of lead, the scabbed were to be carried into the wil: dernesse, who choosing Moses for their leader conquered that country, which is now called Iudaea. Out of which relation of Lysimachus, and some others of like credit,
 Tacitus may have borrowed his in the fifth booke of his Histories. Most authors agree that there arising a contagion in Aegypt, which defiled their bodies, King Bocchoris consulting the Oracle of
 •
 ammon, whereby to finde some remedy, was bid to purge his Kingdome, and to carry that sort of men, as hated of the gods, into other countries, Thence the vulgar sort being inquired after, and collected together, after they had beene left in the deserts, the rest being heavy with teares, Moses one of the banished men admonished them, not to expect the helpe, either of Gods, or men, being deserted by both, but that they should trust to him as their Captaine, sent from Heaven, to whose assistance by their giving credit at the first, they had overcome their present calamities. They assented unto him, and being ignorant of all, they begin their journy, as fortune should lead them. Thus much and a great deale more hath Tacitus


of Moses, and the Jewes. But to passe by his, and Lysimachus calumnies, we can no more assent to these testimonies of theirs, that Moses should have lived in the time of Bocchori
 •
 , then we did to Iosephus that he was coetaneous with Tet
 •
 mosis. For we finde Bocchoris to be placed by Africanus, and
 Eusebius
 ▪ in the twenty fou
 •
 th dynasty, and by
 Diodorus long after Sesostris the great, or Ramesses: which Ramesses, or Sethosis, or Sethon (that is Sesostris, and Sesoosis in Diodorus) both in Manethos, and Chaeremon, is the sonne of Amenophis, who is the last King of the eighteenth dynasty, according to Africanus, and Eusebius. I purposely omit the opinion of
 Apion, that Moses (whome he makes to be of Heliopolis) departed with these lepers, and blinde, and lame, in the first yeare of the seventh Olympiad, in which yeare, saith he, the Phoenicians built Carthage; and that other of
 Porphyrius in his fourth booke against the Christians, that Moses was before Semiramis. Where he places him as much too high, as Apion doth too low.

 Laying therefore aside these vaine, and uncertaine traditions, we have no more assured way exactly to fix the time of Moses, then to have recourse to the sacred Scriptures, and sometimes to compare such authors of the Gentiles with these, against whom we have no just exceptions. For by those, and these conjointly, we may continue his time to the first Olympiad, and thence to the destruction of the Temple, by N
 •

 buchadnezzar King of Babylon: That of the Olympiads being a most certaine, and known epocha

with the Greekes, as that of the destruction of the Temple with the Jewes. From Moses then, or the migration of the Israelites out of Aegypt, to the building of Solomons Temple, are CCCCLXXX yeares currant, or foure hundred seventie nine complete: and so also
 Eusebius computes them. The words of the Text plainly conclude this Summe.
 And it came to passe in the foure hundred and fourth score yeare, after the Children of Israel were come out of the land of Aegypt, in the fourth yeare of Solomons reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of the Lord. From the building of the Temple, to the destruction of it in the reigne of Zedekias, by the calculation, and confession of the best chronologers, are betwixt foure hundred and twenty, and foure hundred and thirty yeares. Which is thus deduced: After the first foundation of the Temple, Solomon reigned thirtie seven yeares,
 Rehoboam with
 Abia twenty; in whose time we are to place Shishak or Sesochosis, the King of Aegypt.
 And it came to passe in the fifth yeare of King Rehoboam, that Shishak King of Aegypt came up against Ierusalem, And he tooke away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the Kings house, he even tooke away all: and he tooke away all the shields of gold, which Solomon had made, This Shishak is named by the Septuagint

 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , by Saint Hierome, Sesac, and is the same whom
 Iosephus cals
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , which he imagines to have beene Ses
 •
 stris the great whose victories, and conquests are described at large by
 Herodotus.


But this Sesostris, or
 Sesoosis as Diodorus also termes him, must long have preceded Rehoboam's time, as in the sequell of this discourse it will appeare. Therefore the more probable opinion is that of Scaliger, that by Shishak is meant Sesochosis, whom Manethos cals
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , and the Scholiast of Apollonius

 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , the time of the XXIIth. dynasty, in which we find him placed by Africanus, and Eusebius, doth well agree with it, and the radicall letters in Shishak, and Sesac, being the same, do very much strengthen our assertion. After Rehoboam and Abiah's reigne,
 Asah and
 Iehosaphat reigned LXVI. years,
 Ioram and
 Ahazia IX.
 Athalia and
 Ioas XLVI.
 Amasias XXIX
 Uzziah LII.
 Iotham XVI.
 Achaz XVI.
 Hezekiah XXIX.


 Now

 in the fourteenth yeare of King Hezekiah, did Sennacharib King of Assyria come up against all the fenced Cities of Judah, and tooke them. But afterwards when he came to besiege Ierusalem—
 It came to passe that night, that the Angell of the Lord went out, and smote in the Campe of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and when they arose early in the morning behold they were all dead corpses. So Sennacharib King of Assyria departed, and went, and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh. In the time of this Sennacharib, Sethon succeeding Anysis reigned in Aegypt, according to
 Herodotus, who in his Euterpe hath plainly the name Sanacharib, stiling him King of the Arabians, and Assyrians, and making him to have received a miraculous defeate, which it may be was that of Hezekiah,


though hee applies it to Sethon King of the Aegyptians. His Story is well worth our observation, which runnes thus.
 After this (Anysis) the Priest of Vulcane, by name Sethon, reigned, who abusing the men of war of the Aegyptians, and contemning them, as not usefull to him, besides other ignominies he deprived them of their Lands, which had been given to every company of twelve by the former Kings. Whence it hapned▪ that when afterwards Sanacharib the King of the Arabians, and Assyrians invaded Aegypt, the Aegyptian Souldiers refused to assist him. Then the Priest destitute of counsell, shut himselfe up, lamenting before the Image how much he was in danger to suffer; in the midst of his mourning falling asleep, a God appeared to him, incouraging him that he should suffer no distresse, if he would march against the Armies of the Arabians. For he would send him succour. He therefore giving credit to this dreame, taking with him such volunteers of the Aegyptians, as followed him, pitched his Army at Pelusium. For there Aegypt is easiest invaded, neither did any of the Souldiers follow him, but Tradesmen, and Artificers, and Merchants. Comming thither, by night an infinite number of Mice, entring upon his enemies, knawed their Quivers, and Bowes, and the leathers of their Shields, so that the next day the enemies destitute of Arms fled, many of them being slaine. And therefore now this King stands in the Temple of Vulcane, in a statue of Marble, holding in his hand a Mouse with this inscription. He that looks upon me let him be religious. After Hezekiah

 Manasses reigned LV yeares.
 Amon II.


 Iosiah XXXI.
 In his dayes Pharaoh Nechon King of Aegypt went up against the King of Assyria to the river Euphrates, and King Josiah we
 ••
 against him, and he slew him at Megiddo, when he had seene him. The same relation we read in Herodotus, if we pardon him the mistake of Magaolo for Megiddo, who writes that
 Necus (the King of Aegypt) fighting a battaile on land with the Syrians in Magdolo, obteined the victory, and after the fight he tooke Cadytus a great City in Syria.

 Next to Iosiah succeeded
 Ioachaz,

 Iehotakim, and
 Iechoniah or Iehoiakin, reigning XI yeares and six months. And in the eleventh yeare of
 Zedekiah the next King after Iechoniah was the Temple burnt by Nebuzaradan, in the

 nineteenth yeare of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon. This Zedekiah, saith
 Josephus, having beene a confederate of the Babylonians for eight yeares, broke his faith with them, and joyning league with the Aegyptians hoped to overthrow the Babylonians. This league we finde intimated in
 Ezekiel; and we read in
 Ieremiah


and
 Iosephus of succours, and assistance, sent by the King of Aegypt, when Zedekiah and Jerusalem were first distressed by the Chaldeans, or forces of the King of Babylon,
 Then Pharaohs army was come forth out of Aegypt, and when the Chaldeans, that besieg
 •
 d Ierusalem, heard tidings of them they departed from Ierusalem. The same is re
 •
 terated by him: Behold Pharaohs army which is come forth to helpe you, shall returne to Aegypt to th
 •
 ir owne land. And the Chaldeans shall come againe, and fight against this City, and take it, and burne it with fire. All which we see was performed by Nebuchadnezzar in the eleventh yeare of Zedekiah: and a judgement also denounced against the King of Aegypt.
 Thus sa
 •
 th the Lord behold I will give Pharaoh Hophra King of Aegypt, into the hands of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seeke his life: as I gave Zedekiah King of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar King of Babylon his enemy, and that sought his life. The same is often threatned by the Prophet
 Ezekiel, who lived in the time of Hezekiah, as Ieremiah did. I am against Pharaoh King of Aegypt, and I will scatter the Aegyptians among the nations, and will disperse them throughout the countries. And I will strengthen the armes of the King of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but I will breake Pharaohs armes. Which prophecies we may discover most manifestly to have beene fulfilled in the reigne of Apries, as
 Herodotus names him, or Apryes as
 Diodorus cals him, or Vaphres, as the Septuagint, and Eusebius, render the name of that King, which here in Ieremiah,


is called Pharaoh Hophra. Who, saith
 Herodotus, next to Psammitichus his Grandfather was the most fortunate of all the former Kings, for twenty five yeares of his reigne, Which might occasion Zedekiah to fly to him for succour: But the Aegyptians rebelling against him, he was overthrowne in battaile, taken prisoner, and afterward strangled by his owne servant Amasis, whom they had made their King. The whole story, and manner, is at large in
 Herodotus, neither did divine vengeance long forbeare to pursue the traitour. For Cambyses the King of the Persians, and of Babylon, comming with an army against him, possest himself of Aegypt, as the Prophets had foretold. Nor could the Aegyptians ever to this day recover the Monarchy. For after the Persians succeeded the Macedonians, after them the Romanes, then the Arabians, next the Mamalukes, or Circassians, and last of all the Turkes, or Scythians. So that we may conclude from the occurrences then happening (the relations of Herodotus exactly agreeing with the threatnings of the Prophets) as also from the computation of times, and from the affinity, and analogy of names, that Hophra, and Apries, or Vaphres, must have been the very same Aegyptian King coetaneous, and concurrent with Zedekiah.


 To reassume then what hath been demonstrated by us. From the migration of the Israelites out of Aegypt, u
 •
 der the conduct of Moses, to the building of Solomons Temple, are foure hundred seventie nine yeares complete, and from the building of the Temple to the destruction of it,

are foure hundred and thirty yeares, and six months. But because it is not probable, that, amongst so many Kings, all of them should have reigned completely so many yeares, as are expressed in the Text: it being the usuall stile of Kings to reckon the yeares current of their reigne, as complete, I shall limit this uncertainty betweene CCCCXX, and CCCCXXX yeares, which is a sufficient latitude. If any one shall desire a more exact calculation, he may compute them, by comparing other places of the Scriptures with these, to be but CCCCXXV. yeares current, according to the opinion of the most Reverend, and judicious Primate of Ireland, to which I willingly subscribe; though either computation be sufficient for my purpose.

 This destruction of the Temple, by our best Chronographers is placed in the first yeare of the forty eighth Olympiad, and in the hundred and sixtieth of the Epocha of Nabonassar, and in the nineteenth (as the Scripture often makes mention) of Nabuchodonosor, the sonne of Nabolassar, (as
 Berosus in Iosephus names him) which Nabolassar must necessarily be the same with him that is called Nabopolassar in Ptolemy, and is the XIV King of the Assyrians and Medes after Nabonassar, whom Nabocolassar (or
 Nabuchodo

 •
 ozor, or
 Nebuchadrezzar, or
 Nebuchad

 •
 ezzar, for so the Scripture also termes him) in
 •
 is Canon Regnorum succeeds. The neernesse of
 •
 he names, and agreement of the times, in the
 •
 acred Scriptures, and prophane Authors, doe
 •
 trongly prove them to be the same. Wherefore we may conclude, that from the time of Moses,


or the migration of the Israelites out of Aegypt
 ▪ or from the end of Amenophis (coetaneous with Moses) the last King of the eighteenth dynasty (as Eusebius out of Manethos rankes him) to the reigne of Apries, or Vaphres, or Hophra; the eighth King of the twenty sixth dynasty (according to the same Eusebius out of Manethos) being coetaneous with Zedekiah King of Iudah, and Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, are DCCCCIV yeares, and from Moses to the first Olympiad DCCXV and not MLXXX as they who make Moses as ancient as Inachus affirme. In which space we may with much certainty, If we give credit to Herodotus, and Diodorus place the Kings, the Founders of the three greatest, and fairest Pyramids; which is the principall intention of this discourse▪ For both of them describe these to have reigned many ages before Apries, and long after Sesostris the great. Which Sesostris, or Sesoosis, as Diodorus also stiles him, must have been the same King, whom Manethos in Iosephus cals Sethosis, and Ramesses, and
 Aegyptus son to Amenophis before mentioned, and brother to Armais, or Danaus; and Eusebius of Scaligers edition in Greek names Sethos
 ▪ the latine translations of Saint Hierome both MSS. and printed copies Sethus, and by all of them is the first King of the XIX dynasty. The great acts, and conquests, assigned by Herodotu
 •

 to Sesostris, and as great attributed by Manethos to Sethosis, or Ramesses, which cannot well be applied to any other precedent, or subsequent Kings together with the relation of them both, tha
 •
 while he was in pursuit of his victories abroad

his brother, whom Manethos names Armais, and
 Danaus (in Herodotus his name is omitted) rebelled against him at home, and the neernsse of the time, which may be collected out of both, do very much confirme the probability of this assertion. Sesostris then, and Sethosis being one, and the same, is by Manethos in Iosephus ranked immediately after Amenophis, (coetaneous with Moses as we have proved) and in the same Manethos in the tradition of Eusebius after Menophis, that is Amenophis, both in the Greeke and Latine Copies. Wherefore the Founders of these Pyramids, having lived after Sesostris, must likewise have beene after Amenophis. If we will come to a greater precisenesse yet of time (for this latitude of nine hundred, and foure yeares, which we assigned from Moses to the destruction of the first Temple, in the time of Zedekiah King of Iudah, and Apries King of Aegypt, is so great, that we may lose our selves in it) we have no other possible meanes left, after the revolution of so many ages, and the losse of so many of the commentaries, and monuments of the Aegyptians, but by having recourse to those dynasties of Manethos, as they are preserved by Africanus, and Eusebius. And yet in neither of these shall we finde the names of Cheops, or Chemmis; of Cephren, or Chabryis; or of Mycerinus, the Authors of the three greater Pyramids, mentioned by Herodotus, and Diodorus; or of Asychis the builder of a fourth, according to Herodotus. Wherefore what their writings have not supplied us with, that reason must. For since these Aegyptian


Kings, as we have proved, lived between Amenophis, and Apries, and by
 Eusebius ou
 •
 of Africanus, Amenophis is the last of the XVIII dynasty, and Apries or Vaphres, the VIII of the XXVI dynasty, we must necessarily place them in one of the intermediate dynasties. But seeing all the intermediate dynasties have their peculiar Kings, unlesse it be the XX, we have no reason to exclude them, and to bring these in their places as usurpers: But rather, with great probability (for I must say here with
 Livy, Quis rem tam veterem pro certo affirmet?) we may assigne to them the XX dynasty. In which we finde not the name of any one King, but yet the space left vacant of CLXXVIII yeares, according to Eusebius.


 Here therefore we shall place.

 First, Cheops, or Chemmis, the Founder of the first Pyramid, who began his reigne in the MMM CCCC XLVIII yeare of the Julian Period, that is CCCCLXXXX years before the first Olympiad, and DCLXXVIII before the first destruction of the Temple, and MCCLXVI▪ before the beginning of the yeares of our Lord. He reigned L yeares, saith Herodotus, and built this Pyramid, as Diodorus observes, a thousand yeares before his time, or the CLXXX Olympiad, whereas he might have said a thousand two hundred and ten.

 Secondly, Cephren or Chabryis the builder of the second, who reigned fifty six yeares.

 Thirdly, Mycerinus the erector of the third, seven yeares.


Fourthly, Asychis the Author of the fourth.

 Fiftly, Anysis the blind.

 How long these two reigned is no where expressed.

 Sixtly, Sabachus the Aethiopian. He conquered Aegypt, and reigned fifty yeares,

 The summe is CLXIII years, this being subducted out of CLXXVIII yeares (the whole time allowed by Eusebius to this dynasty) the remainder is XV yeares; which space we may without any inconvenience divide between Asychis, and Anysis.


 If any shall question why the names of these Kings are omitted by Manethos, an Aegyptian Priest, in the XX dynasty, I can give no other reason, then what we read in Herodotus.

 These Kings (speaking of Cheops and Cephren) the Aegyptians out of hatred will not so much as name, but they call them the Pyramids of Philition a Sheepheard, who in those times, at that place, fed his cattell. The which hatred, occasioned by their oppressions, as
 Diodorus also mentions, might cause him to omit the rest, especially Saba

 •
 hus, an Aethiopian, and an Usurper.

 Following this computation of Eusebius of CLXXVIII yeares for the XX dynasty, and not that of Africanus, who assignes onely an CXXV of whom
 Ioseph Scaliger hath this censure, in istis dynastiis, aliquid turbasse videtur Africanus, ut consuleret rationibus suis; it will follow by way of consequence, as the most Reverend, and learned Primate of Ireland in his Chronologiâ Sacrâ hath singularly well observed.

 First, that the XVIII dynasty ends with the migration of the Israelites out of Aegypt, and

with the death of Amenophis: which is cleerly signified by Manethos, and the times of Belus, and Danaus noted by the Greek Chronographers do evidently confirme it. I mean the Aegyptian Belus, or Amenophis, the Father of Aegyptus, or Sethosis and Danaus, not the Babylonian Belus the father of Ninus, whom Mythologists confound with this; feigning him to have transported colonies out of Aegypt to Babylon. The time allotted by
 Thallus, an ancient Chronographer, to Belus of CCCXX yeares, before the Trojan war, doth exactly agree with this Aegyptian Belus, or Amenophis.


 Secondly, that the XX dynasty will receive those six Kings, which out of Herodotus we have placed there: the number of whose years exceed the time limited by Africanus.


 Thirdly, that the XXII dynasty will fall upon the latter time of King Solomon, whereby Sesonchis the first King of it, may be the same with Sesac, or Shishac, who in the fifth yeare of Rehoboam, the sonne of Solomon, invaded Iudaea Which was the onely reason that moved
 Scaliger to suspect, that something had beene altered by Africanus in these dynasties.

 By the same series, and deduction of times, we may conclude, that the Labyrinth adjoyning to the Pyramid of Osymanduas raised by a common expense of the XII Kings, who succeeded Sethon to have beene MMCCC XXIV yeares since, or DCLXXX before Christ. For Sethon living in the time of Sennacharib, and these immediately following Sethon in the government of the Kingdome, they must

have reigned, either in the same age the Scripture assignes to Sennacharib, or not long after.

 Those other Pyramids, the one of Osymanduas in
 Diodorus, or Ismandes, in
 Strabo; and those two of Moeris, or Myris, in
 Herodotus, and
 Diodorus, it is evident they preceded Sesostris the great, and must therefore have been above three thousand yeares since, but by how many Kings, or how many ages, is hard to be defined.


 Of the end or intention of the PYRAMIDS, that they were for Sepulchers: where, by the way is expressed the manner of imbalming used by the AEGYPTIANS.

 That these Pyramids were intended for Sepulchers, and monuments of the dead, is the constant opinion of most Authors, which have writ of this argument.
 Diodorus expressely tels us that Chemmis and Cephren, although they designed (these two greater) for their Sepulchers, yet it happened that neither of them, were buried in them.

 Strabo judges all those neer Memphis to have beene the Sepulchers of Kings. Forty stadia from the Citie (Memphis) there is a certain brow of an hill in which are many Pyramids the Sepulchers of Kings. And in particular he cals an other neer the lake of Moeris, the

 Sepulcher of Imandes. To which also the writings of the Arabians are consonant, who make the three greater the monuments of Saurid, Hougib, and Fazfarinoun. And the Sabaeans the first of them, the Sepulcher of Seth, the second of Hermes, the third of Sab, the sonne of Hermes, from whom they suppose themselves denominated Sabaeans, as we formerly mentioned. And if none of these authorities were extant, yet the tombe

found in the greatest Pyramid to this day of Cheops, as Herodotus names him, or Chemmis, according to Diodorus, puts it out of controversie. Which may farther be confirmed by the testimony of
 Ibn Abd Alhokm an Arabian, where he discourses of the wonders of Aegypt, who relates that after Almamon the Calife of Babylon, had caused this Pyramid to be opened [about eight hundred years since,]
 they found in it towards the top a chamber, with an hollow stone, in which there was a statue like a man, and within it a man, upon whom was a breast plate of gold, set with Iewels, upon this breast-plate was a sword, of inestimable price, and at his head a carbuncle of the bignesse of an egge, shining like the light of the day, and upon him were characters writ with a pen, which no man understood.


But why the Aegyptian Kings should have been at so vast an expense in the building of these Pyramids, is an inqui
 •
 y of an higher nature.
 Aristotle makes them to have been the workes of tyranny: and Pliny conjectures, that they built them, partly out of ostentation, and partly out of state policy, by keeping the people in imployment, to divert them from mutinies, and rebellions.
 Regum pecuniae otiosa, ac stulta ostentatio. Quippe cum faciendi eas causa à pleris



 que
 tradatur, ne pecuniam successoribus, aut aemulis insidiantibus proeberent, aut ne plebs esset otiosa.


 But the true reason depends upon higher, and more waighty considerations; though I acknowledge these alleaged by Pliny might be secondary motives. And this sprang from the theology, of the Aegyptians, who as Servius shewes in his comment, upon these words of
 Virgil describing the funerall of Polydorus,

 —animam



 que
 Sepulchro

 Condimus.—


beleeved that as long as the body endured so long the soule continued with it, which also was the opinion of the Stoickes.
 Hence the AEgyptians skilfull in wisedome do keepe their dead imbalmed so much the longer, to the end that the soule may for a long while continue, and be obxoxious to the body, least it should quickly passe to another. The Romanes did the contrary, burning their dead, that the soule might suddenly returne into the generality, that is, into its owne nature. Wherefore that the body might not, either by putrefaction, be reduced to dust, out of which it

was first formed; or by fire be converted into ashes (as the manner of the Graecians, and Romanes was) they invented curious compositions, besides the intombing them in stately reconditories, Whereby to preserve them from rottennesse, and to make them eternall,
 Nec eremare, aut fodere fas putant, verùm arte medicatos intrapenetralia collocant, saith Pomponius Mela; And Herodotus gives the reason why they did neither burne, nor bury. For discoursing, in his third booke, of the cruelty of Cambyses, and of his commanding that the body of Amasis, an Aegyptian King, should be taken out of his Sepulcher, whipt, and used with all contumely, he reports that after all he bid it to be burnt,
 commanding that which was not holy. For the Persians imagine the fire to be a God, and neither of them are accustomed to burne the dead body. The Persians for the reason before alleaged, because they conceive it unfitting for a god to devour the carcaise of a man; and the Aegyptians because they are perswaded the fire is a living creature, devouring all things that it receives, and after it is satisfyed with food, dyes with that which it hath devoured. Nor is it their custome of giving the dead body

 to beasts, but of imbalming (or salting) it, not only for this reason but that it may not be consumed with wormes.
 The terme used by Herodotus)
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , of salting, or imbalming the dead, is also used by Baruch and by
 Plato, and by
 Lucian in his discourse de Luctu, treating of the severall sorts of buriall practiced by severall nations. (c) The Grecian doth burne [the dead] the Persian bury, the Indian doth anoint

with the fat of swine, the Scythian eates, and the Aegyptian
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 imbalmes, (or pouders,) Which manner also is alluded to by Antoninus under the word
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉


 that which the other day was excrementitious matter, within few dayes shall either be
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , an imbalmed body, or meer ashes: in the one expressing the custome of the Aegyptians, in the other of the Romanes, Where Doctor
 Casaubone, the learned son of a learned Father, hath rightly corrected the errors of those who render
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

 to be a certaine sort of fish. By this meanes then salting the body, and imbalming it (the manner of both we shall describe out of Herodotus, and Diodorus) the soule was obliged (according to the beliefe of the Aegyptians) to abide with the body, and the body came to be as durable as marble. In so much as Plato, who lived in Aegypt, with Eudoxus no lesse then XIII yeares, as
 Strabo witnesseth, brings it for an argument in his Phoedon to prove the immortality of the soule, by the long duration of these bodyes. Which surely would have beene more conclusive with him, could he have imagined that to these times, that is till MM yeares after him, they should have continued so solid, and intire, as to this day we finde many of them. Wherefore
 Saint Augustine truly affirmes, that the Aegyptians alone beleeve the resurrection, because they carefully preserve their dead corpses. For they have a custome of drying up the bodyes, and rendring them as durable as brasse, these [in their language] they call Gabbares. Whence the Glosse of Isidore, Gabares mortuorum, in Vulcanius, his edition: or as
 Spondanus


reads, Gabares mortuorum condita corpora.


 The manner how the Aegyptians prepared and imbalmed these bodies, is very copiously, and by what I observed at my being there, very faithfully described by Herodotus, and Diodorus, and therefore I shal put down their own words. Their mourning saith Herodotus, and manner of buriall are in this kind. When any man of quality of the family is dead, all the women
besmeare their heads and faces with dirt, then leaving the body with their kindred, they goe lamenting up and down the city, with their kinsfolks, their apparrell being girt about them, and their breasts naked. On the other side, the men having likewise their clothes guirt about them beate themselves. These things being done, they carry it to be

 imbalmed. For this there are some appointed, that professe the art, these, when the body is brought to

them shew to the bringers of it certain patterns of dead bodies in wood, l
 •
 ke it in painting. One of these they say is accurately made (which I think
 •
 t not lawfull to name) they shew a second inferiour to it, and of an easier price, and a third cheaper then the former. Which being seen they aske of them according to what pattern they will have the dead body prepared? When thay have agreed upon the price, they depart thence, Those that remain, carefully imbalme the body in this manner. First of all they draw out the brain with a crooked iron by the nostrills, which when they have drawn out they infuse

 medicaments. Then with a sharp Aethiopicke stone they cut it about the bowels, and take out all the guts: which purged, and washed with wine made of palmes, they againe wash with sweet odours beaten, then filling up the

 belly, with pure Mirrhe beaten, and Cassia, and other odours, except frankincense, they sow it up againe, having done this they salt it with nitre, hiding it seventy dayes (For longer it is not lawfull to salt it) seventy dayes being ended, after they have washed the

body binding it with fillets (or

 ribbands) and wrapping it in a shrowd of silke linnen, they smeare it with gumme, which the Aeg
 •
 ptians often use instead of glue. The kindred receiving it thence make

 a coffine of wood, in the similitude of a man, in which they put the dead body; and being

thus inlosed they place it in a reconditorie in the house, setting it upright against the wall. In this manner with great expenses they prepare (the funeralls)
 •
 f their dead. But those who avoiding too great expenses desire a mediocrity, prepare them in this manner. They take a clyster with the juice of Cedar, with which they fill the belly by the fundament, neither cutting it, nor taking it out, and salt it so many dayes, as we mentioned before. In the last of which they take out that (clyster) of Cedar out of the belly, which before they injected. This hath such efficacy, that it carries out with it the whole panch, and entrailes corrupted. The Nitre consumes the flesh, and there is onely left, the skin, and bones, of the dead body. When they have done this, they restore the body to the kindred, doing nothing more. The third manner of preparing the dead is of them which are of meaner fortune: with lotions they wash the belly, and dry it with salt seventy dayes, then they deliver it to be carried away.



 Diodorus Siculus as his manner is, more distinctly, and cleerly, with some remarkable circumstances expresseth the same thing. If any one dye amongst the Aegyptians, all his kindr
 •
 d and friends, casting du
 •
 t upon their heads, goe lamenting about the City, till such time as the

body is buried. In the mean time they abstain from baths, and wine, a
 •
 d all delicate meat; neither doe t
 •
 ey w
 •
 are costly apparell The manner of their buriall is three-fold. The one is very costly, the secondlesse, the third very meane. In the first they say there is spent a talent of silver, in the second twenty minae, in the last there is very li
 •
 le expense. Those who take care to dresse the body are artizans receiving this skill from their Ancestors. These shewing a b
 •
 ll, to the kindred of the dead▪ of the expenses upon each kind of buriall, ask them in what manner they will have the body to be prepared When they have agreed upon it, they deliver the body to such as are usually appointed to this offce. First he which is called the Scribe, laying it upon the ground describes about the bowels on the left side, how much is to be cut away. Then he which is called the Cutter, taking an Aethiopick stone, and cutt
 •
 ng away as much of the flesh, as the law commands, presently flye
 •
 away, as fast as he can; they which are present running
 •
 f
 •
 er him, and cast
 •
 ng st
 •
 nes at him, and cursing him (hereby) turn
 •
 ng all the execration upon him. For whosoever doth offer violence, or wound, or do any kind of in
 •
 ury to a body of the same nature with himselfe, they thinke him worthy of hatred. But those which are called the
 •
 mbalmers, they esteem them worthy of
 •
 onour, and respect. For they are familiar with their Priests, and they goe into the Temples, as holy men, without any proh
 •
 bi
 •
 ion. As s
 •
 on as they meet about the dressing of the d
 •
 ssected b
 •
 dy▪ one thrusting his hand by the wound of the dead body into
 •
 is entra
 •
 les, takes
 •
 ut all the bowels w
 •
 thin, besides the heart, and kidneyes; another

clenses all the entrailes, washing them with wine made of palmes, and with od
 •
 urs. Lastly the whole body being carefully anointed with the
 •
 uice of cedar, and other things for above thirty dayes, and afterward with Mirrhe, and Cinamon, and such other things, which have power not onely to keep it for a long time, but also to give a sweet smell, they deliver it to the kindred.
 •
 his being thus fin
 •
 shed, every member of the body is kept so entire, that upon the browes, and

 eye-lids, the haires remain, and the whole shape of the body (continues) unchanged, and the image of the countenance may be known. Hence many of the Aegyptians keeping the bodies of their Ancestors in magnificent houses, d
 •
 e see so expressely the faces of them
 •
 ead, many ages before they were born, that beholding the b
 •
 gnesse of each of them, and the dimensions of their bod
 •
 es▪ and the lineaments of their faces, it affords them wonderfull content of mind, no otherw
 •
 se then as if they were now living with them. Thus farre Diodorus. By which description of his, and that of Herodotus, we see the truth of what
 Tully writes. The Aegyptians imbalme their dead, and keep them at home: Amongst themselves above ground, Saith Sex
 •
 us Empiricus: and
 intra penetralia in Pomponius Mel's expression: and in lectulis, according to Athanasius in the life of Antony. Lucian addes farther in his tract de luctu.

 They bring the dried body (I speak
 •
 what I have seen) as a guest to their feasts, and invitations, and oftentimes ore necessit
 •
 us of m
 •
 ny is supplyed, by giving his brother, or his father in pledge. The former custome is intimated by Silius



 Italicus. speaking of the severall manners of buriall of divers nations.


 Aegyptia tellus

 Claudit odorato post funus stantia Saxo,

 Corpora, & a mensis exanguem haud separat umbram.


 The latter is confirmed by
 Diodorus Siculus. They have a custome of depositing for a pledge the bodies of their dead parents. It is the greatest ignominy that may be not to redeem them; and if they do it not they themselves are deprived of buriall. And therefore sayes he immediately before, Such as for any crime, or debt, are hindred from being buried, are kept at home without a coffine: whom afterwards their posterity growing rich, discharging their debts, and paying mony in compensation of their crimes honourably bury. For the Aegyptians glory that their Parents, and Ancestors, were buried with honour.


 This manner of the Aegyptians imbalming, we find also practised by Ioseph upon his Father Iacob in Aegypt: and if we will beleeve Tacitus,

 The Hebrewes (in generall) learned from the Aegyptians rather to bury their dead, then to burn them. Where
 Spondanus insteed of condere cadavera
 ▪ reades condire, as if it had been their custome of poudring, or imbalming the dead. Wash them, and anoint them we know they did, by what was done to our Saviour, and to the widdow Dorcas: and long before it was in use amongst the Gentiles, as well as Jews, as appears by the funerall of Patroclus in
 Homer, and of Missenus the Trojane in
 Virgil.



Corpus



 que
 lavant frigentis, & ungunt,
And of Tarquinius the Romane in Ennius.
 Tarquinii corpus bona foemina lavit, & unxit.


 But certainly the Aegyptian manner of imbalming, which wee have described out of Herodotus, and Diodorus, was not received by them; or if it were Martha the sister of Lazarus needed not to have feared, that after foure dayes the body should have stunk. They which infer out of the Funerall of Asa King of Iudah, that it was the custome of the Jewes, as well as Aegyptians, have very little probability for their assertion. We read that they buried him in his own Sepulcher, which he had made for himselfe in the City of David, and laid him in the bed, which was filled with sweet odours, and divers kinds of spices prepared by the Apothecaries art: and they made a very great burning for him. This very great burning is so contrary to the practise of
 •
 he Aegyptians, to whom it was an abomination, as appeares by the authorities before cited of Herodotus, and Mela, besides the litle affinity of filling the bed with sweet odours, and the Aegyptians filling the body, and the place of the entrailes with sweet odours, according both to Herodotus, and Diodorus, that we shall not need to inla
 •
 g our selves in any other confutation. But as for that of Iacob, and Ioseph, the Father, and the Sonne▪ both living, and dying in Aegypt, the text is cleare they were imbalmed after the fashion of the Aegyptians.
 And Ioseph commanded his servants the Physicians to imbalm his father, and the Physicians imbalmed Israel, and

forty dayes were fulfilled for him (for so are fulfilled the dayes of those which are imbalmed) And the Aegyptians mourned for him threescore and ten day
 •
 s. In the same Chapter we read
 So Ioseph dyed be
 •
 ng an hundred and ten yeares old, and they imb
 •
 lmed him, and he was put in a coffine in Aegypt. Both which places are very consonant to the traditions of Herodotus, and Diodorus, and may s
 •
 rve to shew what necessity there is of having oft times recourse to the learning of the heathen, for the illustration of the Scriptures. Forty dayes were fulfilled for the imbalming of Iacob, This
 Diodorus tells us was their custome, they anointed the dea
 •
 body with the juice of Cedar, and other things for above
 •
 hirty dayes, and afterward with myrrhe, and Cinamon, and the like; which might make up the residue of the forty dayes. And the Aegyptians mourned for him threescore and ten dayes. This time out of Herodotus may be collected to have been from the first day of the death of the person, till the body was returned by the Physicians after seventy dayes perfectly imbalmed. The Text sayes, and Ioseph was put in a coffine: which is very lively represented by

 Herodotus. The kindred rec
 •
 iving the dead body from the imb
 •
 lmers make a coffine of wood in the simil
 ••
 u
 •
 e of a man, in which they put it. This coffine then as it is probable, of Ioseph was of wood, and not ma
 •
 morea theca, as (s)

 •
 ajetane imagines, the former being the custome of the Aegyptians. Besides that this was much easier, and fitter to be carried by the Israelites into Canaan, marching on foot, and for ought we read destitute of wagons, and other carriages.


 The tradition of the ancient Hebrewes in their commentaries is very probable, and consonant to it. They carried in the desert two arckes, the one of God, the other of Joseph, that the arcke of the Covenant, this the arcke (or coffine) in which they carried Josephs bones out of Aegypt. This coffine (if it be lawfull for me to conjecture after the revolution of three thousand yeares) I conceive to have been of sycomore (a great tree very plentifully growing in AEgypt) of which sort there are many found in the Mummies, very faire, intire, and free from corruption to this day. Though I know the Arabians, and Persians have a different tradition that his coffine was of glasse.
 They put his blessed body, after they had washed it, into a coffine of glasse, and buried it in the channell of the river Nilus, saith Emir Cond a Persian.


 That phrase of Ioseph where hee takes an oath of the children of Israel,
 yee shall carry up my bones from hence, surely is a synecdoche, or figurative speech: And so is that in Exodus. And
 Moses tooke the bones of Joseph with him: for he had staightly sworne the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and yee shall carry up my bones away hence with you: For his body being boweled, and then imbalmed, after the manner of the Aegyptians, not onely the bones, but the skin, the flesh, and all besides the entrailes

(which according to
 Plutarch were thrown into the river) would have continued perfect, and intire, a much longer space, then from his death to their migration out of Aegypt.

 Having thus by art found out wayes to make the body durable, whereby the soule might continue with it, as we shewed before, which els would have been at liberty to have passed into some other body,
 this also being the opinion of the Aegyptians, from whom Pythagoras borrowed his

 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , or transanimation (the which made him to forbid his Disciples the eating of flesh, Ne forte bubulam quis de aliquo proavo suo obsonaret, as Tertullian wittily speakes) the next care of the Aegyptians was to provide conditories, which might be as lasting as the body, and in which it might continue safe from the injury of time, and men. That occasioned the ancient Kings of Thebes in Aegypt to build those, which
 Diodorus thus describes. There are they say the wonderfull Sepulchers of the ancient Kings, which in magnificence excede the imitation of posterity. Of these in the sacred commentaries forty seven are mentioned, but in the time of Ptolemaeus Lagi there remained but XVII. Many of them at our being in Aegypt, in the hundred and eightieth Olympiad were decayed, neither are these things alone reported by the Aegyptians, out of the sacred bookes, but by many a
 •
 so of the Graecians▪ who in the time of Ptolemaeus Lagi went to Thebes, and having compiled histories (amongst whom is Hecataeus) agree with our relations. And thi
 •
 might occasion also those others recorded by Strabo, which he cals
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , or Mercuriale
 •



tumulos, seen by him neer Siene, in the upper parts of Aegypt, very strange, and memorable
 Passing in a chariot from Siene to Philae, over a very even plaine, about an hundred stadia, all the way almost, of both sides, we saw in many places Mercurial tombes: a great stone, smooth, and almost Spherical, of that blacke, and hard marble, out of which morters are made, placed upon a greater stone, and on the top of this another, some of them lying by themselves: the greatest of them was no lesse then twelve feet diameter, all of them greater then the halfe of this. Many ages after, when the regal throne was removed from Thebes to Me
 •

 phis, the same religion, and opinion continuing amongst the Aegyptians, that so long as the body indured, so long the soule continued with it, not as quickning, and animating it, but as an attendant, or guardian, and as it were unwilling to leave her former habitation: it is not to be doubted this incited the Kings there, together with their private ambition, and thirst after glory, to be at so vast expenses in the the building of these Pyramids; and the Aegyptians of lower quality, to spare for no cost, in cutting those hypogaea, those caves, or dormitories, in the Libyan deserts, which by the Christians now adayes are called the mummies. Diodorus Siculus excellently expresses their opinion, and beleefe, in this particular, together with their extreme cost of building Sepulchers, in these words.
 The Aegyptians make small account of the time of this life being l
 •
 mited but that which after death is joyned with a glorious memory of virtue they highly value: They call the houses of the living innes, because for a

short space we inhabit these: But the Sepulchers, of the dead they name eternall mansions, because they continue with the Gods for an infinite space. Wherefore in the structures of their houses they are litle solicitous but in exquisitely adorning their Sepulchers they thinke no cost sufficient


 Now why the Aegyptians did build their Sepulchers often in the forme of Pyramids (for they were not alwayes of this figure, as appeares by those
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 or Mercuriales tumult, before cited out of Strabo, which were sphericall; and by those hypogaea, or caves still extant in the rocks of the de
 •
 ert) Pierius in his hieroglyphickes, or rather the Anonymus author at the end of him, gives severall philosophicall reasons.
 By a Pyramid, saith he, the Ancient Aegyptians expressed the nature of things, and that informed substance receiving all formes. Because as a Pyramid hav
 •
 ng its beginning from a point at the top▪ is by degrees dilated on all parts, So the nature of all things proceeding from one fountaine, and beginning, which is indivisible, namely from God, the chiefe workemaster, afterwards receives severall formes, and is diffused into various kindes, and species, all which it conjoynes to that beginning, and point, from whence every thing issues, and flowes. There may also be given an other reason for this taken from Astronomy. For the Aegyptians were excellent Aronomers, yea, the first inventors of it, these [dividing the zodiaque, and all things under it in to twelve signes] will have each signe to be a kind of Pyramid, the basis of which shall be in the heaven (For the heaven is the foundation of Astronomy) and the point of it shall be in the center of


 〈◊〉
 earth, Seeing therefore in these Pyramids all
 •
 hings are made, and that the comming of the sun, which is as it were a point in respect of those signes, is the cause of the production of naturall things,
 •
 nd its departure the cause of their corruption▪ it seems very fitly that by a Pyramid, nature the parent of all things, may be expressed. Also the same Aegyptians under the forme of a Pyramid shadowed out the soule of man, making under huge Pyramids the magnificent Sepulchers of their Kings, and Heroes, to testify that the soule was still exi

 •
 tent, notwithstanding the body were dissolved, and corrupted, the which should generate, and produce another body for it selfe, when it should seem good
 •
 o the first Agent, (that is the circle of thirty six thousand yeares being transacted.) Like as a Pyramid (as it is knowne to Geometricians) the top of it standing fixt, and the base being moved a

 •
 out, describes a circle, and the whole body of it a
 ••
 ne, So that the circle expresses that space of years,
 •
 nd the cone that body which in that space is produced. For it was the opinion of the Aegyp
 •
 ians, that in the rev
 •
 lution of thirty six thousand years, all things should be restored to their former state, Plato witnesseth that he received it from them; who seems als
 •
 to me in his Timaeus to attest this thing, that is, that our soule hath the forme of a Pyramid, which (soule) according to the same Plato, i
 •
 of a fiery nature, and adhereth to the body as a Pyramid doth to the basis, or as fire doth to the
 〈◊〉
 well. Thus far the Anonymus author in Pierius; most of which reasons of his are but pretty fancies, without any solid proofe from good Authors. For he might as well say that the Aegyptians

were excellent Geometricians, as well as Astrono
 •
 ers (as they were very skilfull in both) and that they made these Pyramids, to expresse the first, a
 •
 d most simple of Mathematicall bodyes: or else being excellent Arithmeticians, to represent the mysteries of pyramidall numbers; or else being well
 •
 een in the optickes, to shadow out the manner of vision, and the emission of rayes from luminous bodyes, as also the effluvium of the species intentionales from the object, all which are supposed to be pyramidall. But this were to play with truth, and to indulge too much to fancy. Wherefore I conceive the reason why they made these Sepulchers in the figure of a Pyramid, was; either as apprehending this to be the most permament form of structure, as in truth it is (For by reason of the contracting, and lessening of it at the top, it is neither overpressed with its owne waight; nor is so subject to the sinking in of raine, as other buildings:) or else hereby they intended to represent some of their Gods. For anciently both they, and some others of the Gentiles, by Columnes and obeliskes, did so: Whereas a Pyramid is but a greater kinde of obeliske, as an obeliske is but a lesser sort of Pyramid. Thus we finde in
 Clemens Alexandrinus that Callithoe, the Priestesie of Iuno, decked the Column of the Goddesse▪ with
 ••
 ow
 •
 es and Garlands: that is, saith Joseph Scaliger, the image of the Goddesse Fo
 •
 at tha
 •
 time the statues of the Gods were
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 . Pyramidal columnes, or obeliskes. And
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 was nothing else but
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

 a column en
 ••
 ing in a point (that is a Pyramid) as
 Su
 •
 das relates. Which kinde

of Columnes, (saith the same Author) some make proper to Apollo, others to Bacchus, and others to them both.

 Isidore writes that they were dedicated to the sunne, whom Diodorus describes the Aegyptians to have worshipped under the name of Osiris, as they did the moone by
 •
 he Goddesse Isis; and therefore as Isis cornigera represented the hornes of the moone, or Luna
 •
 alcata: so these Pyramids, & obelisci acuminati, might not unfitly resemble the raies of the Sunne, or their God Osiris. In
 Pausanias also we read
 •
 hat in the City Corinth
 •
 punc; Iupiter Melichius, and Diana surnamed Patrôa were made with litle, or
 •
 o Art: Melichius being represented by a Pyramid, and Diana by a Columne. Whence Clemens Alexandrinus imagines this to have been the first
 •
 inde of Idolat
 •
 y in the world (and therefore well agreeing with the antiquity of the Aegyp

 •
 ians) Before the exact art of making statues was
 •
 ound out, the Ancients erecting Columnes,

 wor

 ••
 ipped these as the images of God.


 This practise of the Aegyptians was but rare

 •
 y imitated by other nations, I mean of erecting Pyramids for Sepulchers; though Servius seems
 •
 o make it frequent in his comment upon these
 •
 erses of Virgil.



 —Fuit ingens monte sub alto

 Regis De cenni, terreno ex aggere bustum

 Antiqui Laurentis, opaca



 que
 il ce tectum.


 With the Ancients (saith Servius) Noble
 •
 en were buried, either under mountaines, or in
 〈◊〉
 un
 •
 aines, wh
 •
 nce the custome came, that over
 •
 he dead▪ either Pyramids were made or huge co

 •
 umnes erected. In imitation of the later custome

it may be
 Absalom erected his pillar: and Pausanias describing the manner of burial amongst the ancient nation of the Sicyonians tels us
 that they covered the body with earth, and raised pillars over it. But for the former of Pyramids, I finde none out of Aegypt accounted miraculous, unlesse it be the Sepulcher of Porsena King of Hetruria (with which I shall conclude) described by Pliny out of Varro: being more to be admired for the number, and contrivance of the Pyramids, then for any excessive magnitude.
 We shall use M. Varro's owne words, in the description of it. He was buried, saith he, without the Citie Clusium, in which place he left a monument of square stone. Each side of it is three hundred feet broad, and fif
 •
 y feet high. Within the square basis there is an inextricable labyrinth,
 •
 hither who so adventures without a clue can finde no passage out. Upon this square there stand five Pyramids, foure in the angles, and one in the middle, in the bottome they are broad seventy five feet, and high an hundred and fifty. They are pointed in such a manner, that at the top there is one brasse circle, and covering for them all, from which there hang bells fastned to chaines: these being moved by the Winde, give a sound a far off as at Dodona it hath formerly beene▪ Upon this circle the
 •
 e are f
 •
 ure other Pyramids each of them an hundred feet high. Above


 which upon one plain there are five Pyramids, the altitude of which Varro was ashamed to adde. The Hetruscan fables report that it was as much, as that of the whole worke. With so vaine a madnes he sought glory by an expense usefull to no man: wasting besides the wealth of his Kingdome, that in the end the commendation of the Artificer should be the greatest.


 A description of the Pyramids in Aegypt, as I found them, in the MXLVIII yeare of the Hegira, or in the yeares MDCXXXVIII, and MDCXXXIX of our Lord, after the Dionysian account.


 HAving discovered the Founders of these Pyramids, and the time in which they were erected, and lastly the end, for which these monuments were built: next in the method we proposed, the sciography, of them is to be set downe: Where we shall begin with the dimensions of their figure without, and then we shall examine their severall spaces, and partitions within.


 A description of the first and fairest Pyramid.


 THe first, and fairest of the three greater Pyramids, is situated on the top of a rocky hill, in the sandy desert of Libya, about a quarter of a mile distant to the West, from the plaines of Aegypt: above which the rocke riseth an hundred feet, or better, with a gentle, and easy ascent.

Upon this advantageous rise, and upon this solid foundation the Pyramid is erected: the heigth of the situation adding to the beauty of the work, and the solidity of the rocke giving the superstructure a permament, and stable support. Each side of the Pyramid, computing it according to
 Herodotus conteines in length DCCC Graecian feet: and in
 Diodorus Siculus account DCC:
 Strabo reckons it lesse then a furlong that is lesse then DC Graecian feet, or six hundred twenty five Romane: And
 Pliny equals it to DCCCLX
 •
 XIII. That of Diodorus Siculus in my judgement comes neerest to the truth, and may serve in some kinde to confirm those proportions, which in another discourse I have assigned to the Graecian measures. For measuring the North side of it, near the basis, by an exquisite radius of ten feet in length, taking two severall stations, as Mathematicians use to doe, when any obstacle hinders their approach, I found it to be six hundred ninety three feet, according to the English Standard: which quantity is somewhat lesse then that of Diodorus. The rest of the sides were examined by a line, for want of an even level, and a convenient distance to place my instruments, both which the area on the former side afforded.

 The altitude of this Pyramid was long since measured by Thales Milesius, who according to
 Tatianus Assyrius lived about the fiftieth Olympiad: but his observation is no where by the Ancients expressed. Onely
 Pliny tels us of a course proposed by him, how it might be found, and that is by observing such an houre, when the

shadow of the body is equall to its height. A way at the best, by reason of the faintnesse, and scattering of the extremity of the shadow, in so great an altitude, uncertaine, and subject unto errour. And yet
 Diogenes Laertius in the life of Thales hath the same story, from the Authority of Hieronymus. Hieronymus reports, that he measured the Pyramids by their shadow, marking when they are of an equall quantity. Wherefore I shall passe by his, and give my owne observations. The altitude is something defective of the latitude; though in
 Strabos computation it exceeds; but
 Diodorus rightly acknowledges it to be lesse: which, if we measure by its perpendicular, is foure hundred eighty one feet; but if we take it as the Pyramid ascends inclining (as all such figures do) then is it equall, in respect of the lines subtending the severall angles, to the latitude of the Basis, that is to six hundred ninety three feet. With reference to this great altitude
 Statius cals them.


 —audacia saxa

 Pyramidum—


 Iulius Solinus goes farther yet. The Pyramids are sharpe pointed towers in Aegypt, exceeding all height, which may be made by hand.

 Ammianus Marcellinus in his expression ascends as high. The Pyramids are towers erected altogether exceeding the height, which may be made by man, in the bottome they are broadest, ending in sharpe points atop: which figure is therefore by Geometricians called Pyramidall, because in the similitude of fire it is sharpned into a cone, as we speake,

 Propertius with the liberty of a

poet, in an Hyperbole flies higher yet.

 Pyramidum sumptus ad sidera ducti.
 And the
 Greeke Epigrammat
 •
 st in a transcendent expression is no way short of him.


 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 .



 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 .


 What excessive heights these fancied to themselves, or borrowed from the relations of others, I shall not now examine: this I am certaine of, that the shaft, or spire, of Pauls in London before it was casually burnt, being as much, or somewhat more then the altitude of the tower now standing, did exceed the height of this Pyramid. For
 Cambden describes it to have beene, in a perpendicular, five hundred and twenty feet from the ground.

 If we imagine upon the sides of the basis, which is perfectly square, foure equilaterall triangles mutually propending, and inclining, till they all meet on high as it were in a point (for so the top seems to them which stand below) then shall we have a true notion, of the just dimension, and figure of this Pyramid: the perimeter of each triangle cōprehending two thousand seventy nine feet (besides the latitude of a litle plain, or flat on the top) and the perimeter of the basis, two thousand seven hundred seventy two feet. Whereby the whole area of the basis (to proportion it to our measures) conteins foure hundred eighty thousand, two hundred forty nine square feet, or eleven English acres of ground, and 1089 of 43560 parts of an acre. A proportion so monstrous, that if the Ancients did not attest as much, and some of them describe it to be


more, this age would hardly be induced to give credit to it. But Herodotus describing each side to conteine eight hundred feet, the area must of necessity be greater then that by me assigned▪ the summe amounting to six hundred, and forty thousand: or computing it as Diodorus Siculus doth, the area will comprehend foure hundred and ninety thousand feet: and in the calculation of Pliny if we shall square eight hundred eighty three (which is the number allotted by him to the measure of each side) the product seven hundred seventy nine thousand six hundred eighty nine, will much exceed, both that of Herodotus, and this of Diodorus. Though certainly Pliny is much mistaken, in assigning the measure of the side to be eight hundred eighty three feet, and the basis of the Pyramid to be but eight iugera or Romane acres For if we take the Romane iugerum to conteine in length two hundred and forty feet, and in breadth one hundred and twenty, as may be evidently proved out of
 Varro, and is expressely affirmed by
 Quintilian, then will the superficies, or whole extention, of the iugerum be equall to twenty eight thousand eight hundred Romane feet: with which if we divide seven hundred seventy nine thousand six hundred eighty nine, the result will be twenty seven Romane iugera, and 2089 of 28800 parts of an acre. Wherefore if we take those numbers eight hundred eighty three of Pliny to be true, then I suppose he writ twenty eight iugera, insteed of eight, or else in his proportion of the side, to the area of the basis he hath erred.

 The ascent to the top of the Pyramid is contrived

in this manner. From all the sides without we ascend by degrees: the lowermost degree is neer foure feet in height, and three in breadth, This runnes about the Pyramid in a level; and at the first, when the stones were intire, which a
 ••
 now somewhat decayed, made on every side
 〈◊〉
 it a long, but narrow walke. The second degree, is like the first, each stone amounting to almost foure feet in height, and three in breadth; it retires inward from the first neer three feet, and this runnes about the Pyramid in a level, as the former. In the same manner is the third row placed upon the second, and so in order the rest, like so many staires rise one above an other to the top. Which ends not in a point, as Mathematicall Pyramids doe, but in a litle flat, or square. Of this Herodotus hath no where left us the dimensions: But
 Henricus Stephanus, an able, and deserving man, in his Comment hath supplied it for him. For he makes it to be eight orgyiae. Where if we take the orgyia, as both
 Hesychius, and
 Suidas do, for the distance betweene the hands extended at length, that is for the fadome, or six feet, then should it be forty eight feet in bredth at the top. But the truth is, Stephanus, in this particular, whilest he corrects the errours of Valla's interpretation, is to be corrected himselfe. For that latitude which Herodotus assignes to the admirable bridge below (of which there is nothing now remaining he hath carried up, by a mistake, to the top of the Pyramid.

 Diodorus Siculus comes nearer to the truth, who describes it to be but nine feet
 Pliny makes the bredth at the top to be twenty

five feet. Altitudo (I would rather read it latitudo) a cacumine pedes XXV. By my measure it is XIII feet, and 280 of 1000 parts of the English foot. Upon this flat, if we assent to the opinion of
 Proclus, it may be supposed that the Aegyptian Priests made their observations in Astronomy; and that from hence, or neer this place, they first discovered, by the rising of Sirius, their annus

 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , or Canicularis, as also their periodus Sothiaca, or annus magnus

 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , or annus Heliacus, or annus Dei, as it is termed by
 Censorinus, consisting of 1460 sidereall years: in which space their Thoth Vagum, and fixum, came to have the same beginning. That the Priests might neer these Pyramids make their observations I no way question, this rising of the hill being, in my judgement, as fit a place as any in Aegypt for such a designe: and so much the fitter by the vicinity of Memphis. But that these Pyramids were designed for observatories, (whereas by the testimonies of the Ancients I have proved before, that they were intended for Sepulchers,) is no way to be credited upon the single authority of Proclus. Neither can I apprehend to what purpose the Priests with so much difficulty should ascend so high, when below with more ease, and as much certainty, they might from their owne lodgings hewen in the rockes, upon which the Pyramids are erected, make the same observations. For seeing all Aegypt is but as it were one continued plaine, they might from these cliffes have, over the plaines of Aegypt, as free, and open a prospect of the heavens, as from the tops of the Pyramids themselves. And therfore Tully


writes more truely.
 Aegyptii, aut Babylonii, in camporum patentium oequoribus habitantes, cum ex terra nihil emineret; quod contemplationi coeli officere posset, omnem curam in siderum cognitione p
 •
 suerunt. The top of this Pyramid is covered not with one or three massy stones, as some have imagined, but with nine, besides two which are wanting at the angles, The degrees by which we ascend up (as I observed in measuring many of them) are not all of an equall depth, for some are neer foure feet, others want of three, and these the higher we ascend, do so much the more diminish: neither is the breadth of them alike; the difference in this kinde being, as farre as I could conjecture, proportionable to their depth. And therefore a right line extended from any part of the basis without, to the top, will equally touch the outward angle of every degree. Of these it was impossible for me to take an exact measure, since in such a revolution of time, if the inner parts of the Pyramid have not lost any thing of their first perfection, as being not exposed to the injury of the
 aire, and fall of raines, yet the outward parts, that is these degrees,

or rowes of stone, have bin much wasted

and impaired by both. And therefore they cannot conveniently now be ascended, but either at the South side, or at the East angle, on the North, They are well stiled by Herodotus

 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , that is litle altars. For in the forme of altars they rise one above an other to the top. And these are all made of massy, and polished stones, hewen according to Herodotus, and Diodorus, out of the Arabian mountaines, which bound the upper part of Aegypt, or that above the Delta, on the East, as the Libyan mountaines terminate it on the West, being so vast, that the breadth, and depth of every step, is one single, and intire stone. The relation of
 Herodotus, and
 Pomponius Mela, is more admirable, who make the least stone in this Pyramid to be thirty feet. And this I can grant in some, yet surely it cannot be admitted in all, unlesse we interpret their words, that the least stone is thirty square, or to speake more properly, thirty Cubicall feet; which dimension, or a greater, in the exteriour ones, I can without any difficulty admit. The number of these steps is not mentioned by the Ancients, and that caused me, and two that were with me, to be the more diligent in computing them, because by moderne writers, and some of those too of repute, they are described with much diversity, and contrariety. The degrees, saith
 Bellonius, are two hundred and fifty, each of them single conteines in height forty five digits, at the top it is two paces broad. For this I take to be the meaning of what Clusius renders thus: A basi autem ad cacumen ipsius supputationem facientes, comperimus circiter, CCL gradus, singuli


 •
 ltitudinem habent V solearum calcei IX pollicum longitudinis, in fastigio duos passus habet. Where I conceive his passus is in the same sense to be understood here above, as not long before he explains himself in describing the basis below, which in his account is CCCXXIV passus paululum extensis cruribus.

 Albertus Lewenstainius reckons the steps to be two hundred and sixty, each of them a foot, and an halfe in depth, Iohannes Helfricus counts them to be two hundred and thirty.
 Sebastianus Serlius upon a relation of Grimano the Patriarch of Aquileia, and afterwards Cardinall, (who in his travailes in Aegypt measured these degrees) computes them to be two hundred and ten, and the height of every step to be equally three palmes, and an halfe. It would be but lost labour to mention the different, and repugnant relations of severall others. That which by experience, and by a diligent calculation, I, and two others found, is this, that the number of degrees from the bottome to the top is two hundred and seven; though one of them in descending reckoned two hundred and eight.

 Such as please may give credit to those fabulous traditions of some, That a Turkish archer standing at the top cannot shoot beyond the bottome, but that the arrow will necessarily fall upon these steps. If the Turkish bow (which, by those figures that I have seen in Ancient monuments, is the same with that of the Parthians, so dreadfull to the Romanes) be but as swift, and strong, as the English: as surely it is much more, if we consider with what incredible force some of them will pierce a planke of six inches

in thicknesse (I speake what I have seen) it will not seem strange, that they should carry twelve-score, in length; which distance is beyond the basis of this Pyramid.

 The same credit is to be given to those reports of the Ancients, that this Pyramid, and the rest, cast no shadows.
 Solinus writes expresly. mensuram umbrarum egressae nullas habent umbras. And
 Ausonius.



 Quadro cui in fastigia cono

 Surgit et ipsa suas consumit Pyramis umbras.


 Ammianus Marcellinus hath almost the same relation. Vmbras quo



 que
 mechanicâ ratione consumit. Lastly,
 Cassiodorus confirmes the same. Pyramides in Aegypto, quarum in suo statu se umbra consumens, ultra constructionis spacia nullâ parte respicitur. All which in the winter season I can in no sort admit to be true. For at that time I have seen them cast a shadow at noon: and if I had not seen it, yet reason, and the art of measuring altitudes by shadowes, and on the contrary of knowing the length of shadowes by altitudes, doth necessarily infer as much. Besides, how could Thales Milesius, aabove two thousand yeares since, have taken their heigth by shadowes, according to Pliny, and Laertius, as we mentioned before, if so be these Pyramids have no shadowes at all? To reconcile the difference: we may imagine, Solinus, Ausonius, Marcellnus, and Cassiodorus, meane in the summer time; or which is neerer the truth, that almost, for three quarters of the yeare, they have no shadowes: and this I grant to be true at midday.


 The description of the inside of the first Pyramid.

 Having finished the description of the superficies of the greater Pyramid, with the figure, and dimensions of it, as they present themselves to the view without: I shall now looke inwards, and lead the Reader into the severall spaces, and partitions within: of which if the Ancients have been silent, we must chiefly impute it to a reverend, and awfull regard, mixed with superstition, in not presuming to enter those chambers of death, which religion, and devotion, had consecrated, to the rest, and quiet of the dead. Wherefore Herodotus mentions no more but onely in generall, that some secret Vaults,

 are hewen in the rocke under the Pyramid. Diodorus Siculus is silent; though both inlarge themselves in other particulars lesse necessary.
 Strabo also is very concise, whose whole description both of this, and of the second Pyramid, is included in this short expression. Forty stadia (or furlongs) from the City (Memphis) there is a certaine brow of an hill, in which are many Pyramids, the Sepulchers of Kings: three of them are memorable, two of these are accounted amongst the seven miracles of the world, each of these are a furlong in height: the figure is quadrilaterall, the altitude somewhat exceedes each side, and the one is somewhat bigger then the other. On high as it were in the midst between the sides, there is a stone, that may be removed, which being taken out, there is an oblique (or shelving) entra
 •
 ce (for so I render that which by him is termed
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 ) ledding to the tombe.

 Pliny expresses


nothing within, but onely a well (which is still extant) of eighty six cubits in depth, to which he probably imagines, by some secret aquaeduct, the water of the river Nilus to be brought.
 Aristides in his oration intiled
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉

 ▪ upon a misinformation of the Aegyptian Priests, makes the foundation of the structure, to have descended as far below, as the altitude ascends above. Of which I se no necessity, seeing all of thē are founded upon rocks, His wordes are these: Now as with admiration we behold the tops of the Pyramids,

 but that which is as much more under ground opposite to it, we are ignorant of (I speake what I have received from the Priests.) And this is that which hath been delivered to us by the Ancients: which I was unwilling to pretermit, more out of reverence of Antiquity, then out of any speciall satisfaction. The Arabian writers, especially such as have purposely treated of the wonders of AEgypt, have given us a more ful description of what is within these Pyramids: but that hath been mix'd with so many invetions of their owne, that the truth hath been darkned▪ and almost quite extinguished by them. I shall put downe that which is confessed by them, to be the most probable relation, as it is reported by Ibn Abd Alhokm, whose words out of the Arabick are these.
 The greatest part of Chronologers agree, that he which built the Pyramids was Saurid Ibn Salhouk King of Aegypt, who lived three hundred yeares before the floud. The occasion of this was because he saw in his sleep, that the whole earth was turned over with the inhabitants of it, the men lying upon their faces, and the stars

falling downe and striking one another, with a terrible noise, and being troubled with this he concealed it. Then after this he saw the sixt stars falling to the earth, in the similitude of white fowle, and they snatched up men, and carried them between two great mountaines, and these mountaines closed upon them, and the shining stars were made darke And he awaked with great feare, and assembled the chiefe Priests of all the Provi
 •
 ces of Aegypt, an hundred and thirty Priests, the chiefe of them was called Aclimun. He related the whole matter to them, and they took the altitude of the stars, and ma
 •
 e their prognostication, and they foretold of a a deluge. The King said will it come to our Country? They answered yea, and will destroy it. And there remained a certain number of years for to come, and hee commanded in the mean space to build the Pyramids, and that a vault (or cesterne) should be made, into wh
 •
 ch the river Nilus should enter, from whence it should runne into the countries of the West, and into the land Al-Said; and he filled them with

 telesmes▪ and with strange things, and with riches, & treasures, & the like. He ingraved in them all things that were told him by wise men, as also all profound sciences, the names of

 alakakirs, the uses, & hurts of thē. The

science of Astrology, and of Arithmeticke, and of Geometry, and of Physicke. All this may be interpreted by him that knowes their characters, and language. After he had given order for this building, they cut out vast columnes, and wonderfull stones. They fetch massy stones from the Aethiopians, and made with these the foundations of the three Pyramids, fastning them together with lead, and iron. They built the gates of them 40 cubits under ground, and they made the height of the Pyramids 100 roiall cubits▪ which are 500 of ours i
 •
 these times; he also made each side of them an hundred royall cubits. The beginning of this building was in a fortunate horoscope. After that he had finished it, he covered it with coloured Satten, from the top to the bottome and
 •
 e appointed a solemne festivall, at which were present all the inhabitants of his Kingdome. Then be built in the Westerne Pyramid thirty treasuries, filled with store of riches, and utensils, and with signatures made of pretious stones and with instruments of iron, and vessels of earth, and with armes which rust not, and with glasse which might be bended, and yet not broken, and with strange spels, and with severall kinds of akakirs, single, and double, and with deadly poisons, and with oth
 •
 r things besides. He made also in the East Pyramid, divers caelestia
 •
 spheres, and stars, and what the severally operate in their aspects: and the perfumes which are to be used to them and the books which treat of these matters H
 •
 put also in the col
 •
 ured Pyramid, the commentaries of the Priests▪ in chests of black marble▪ and with every Priest a booke, in which were the wonders of his profession, and of his actions, and

of his nature, and what was done in his time, and what is, and what shall be, from the beginning of time, to the end of it. H
 •
 placed in every Pyramid a Treasurer: the treasurer of the westerly Pyramid was a statue of marble stone standing upright with a lance, and upon his head a Se
 •
 pent w
 •
 eathed. He that came neare it, and stood still, the Serpent bit him of one side and wreathed round about his throat, and killed him, and then returned to his place. Hee made the treasurer of the East Pyramid an idoll of black Agate, his eyes open, and shining, sitting upon a throne with a lance; when any lookt upon him, he heard of one side of him a voice, which took away his sense, so that he fell prostrate upon his face, and ceased not till he died. He made the treasurer of the coloured Pyramid a statue of stone, (called) Albut, sitting. He which looked towards it was drawn by the statue, till he stucke to it, and could not be separated from it, till such time as he dyed. The
 •
 optites write in their bookes, that there is an inscription ingraven upon them, the exposi
 •
 io
 •
 of which in Arabicke is this. I King Saurid built the Pyramids in such, and such a time, and finished them in six yeares. He that comes after me, and sayes that he is equall to me▪ let him destroy them in six hundred yeares, and yet it is knowne, that it is easier, to pluck down, then to build up. I also covered them, when I had finished them, with Satten, and let him cover them with mats. After that Almamon the Calife entred Aegypt, and saw the Pyramids, he desired to know what was within▪ and therefore would have them opened: they told him it could not p
 •
 ssibly be done: he replyed, I will have it certainly done. And

that hole was opened for him, which stands open to this day, with fire, and vinegar. Two smiths prepared, and sharpned the iron, and engines, which they forced in, and
 •
 here was a great expense in the opening of it: the thicknes of the wall was found to be twenty cubits, and when they came to the end of the wall behind the place they had digged, there was an ewer (or pot) of green Em
 •
 aula, in it were a thousand dinars very waighty, every dinar was an ounce of our ounces: they wondred at it, but knew not the meaning of it. Then Almamon said, cast up the account, how much hath been spent in making the entrance: they cast it up, and lo it was the s
 •
 me summe which they found, it neither exceeded, nor was defective. Within they found a square well, in the square of it there were doores, every doore opened into an house (or vault) in which there were dead bodies wrapped up in linnen. They found towards the top of the Pyramid a chamber in which there was an hollow stone: in it was a statue of stone like a man, and within it a man, upon whom was a breast-plate of gold set with jewels, upon his breast was a sword of unva
 •
 uable price, and a
 •
 his head a Carbuncle, of the bignesse of an egge, shining like the light of the day, and upon him were characters written with a pen, no man knows what they sign
 •
 fy Af
 •
 er Almamon had op'ned it, men en
 •
 red into i
 •
 for many years, and descended by the slippery passage, which is in it; and some of them came out s
 •
 fe▪ and others dyed. Thus farre the Arabians: which traditions of theirs, are litle better then a Romance, and therefore leaving these, I shall give a more true, and particular description out of mine own experience, and observations.


On the North side ascending thirty eight feet, upon an artificiall bank of earth, there is a square, and narrow passage leading into the Pyramid, thorough the mouth of which (being equidistant from the two sides of the Pyramid) we enter as it were down the steep of an hill, declining with an angle of twenty six degrees. The breadth of this entrance is exactly three feet, and 4
 ••
 parts of 1000 of the English foot: the length of it beginning from the first declivity, which is some ten palmes without, to the utmost extremity of the neck, or straight within, where it contracts it selfe almost nine feet continued, with scarce halfe the depth it had at the first entrance (though it keep still the same breadth) is ninty two feet, and an halfe. The structure of it hath been the labour of an exquisite hand, as appeares by the smoothnesse, and evenesse of the work, and by the close knitting of the joints. A property long since observed, and commended by Diodorus,
 to have run thorough the fabrick of the whole body of this Pyramid. Having passed with tapers in our hands this narrow straight, though with some difficulty (for at the farther end of it we must serpent-like creep upon our bellies) we land in a place somewhat la
 •
 ger▪ and of a pretty height, but lying incomposed: having been dug away, either by the curiosity or ava
 •
 ice of some, in hope to discover an hidden treasure; or rather by the command of Almamon, the deservedly renowned Calife of Babylon. By whomsoever it were, it is not worth the inquiry, nor doth the place merit describing, but that I was unwilling to pretermit any thing: being only an habitation for bats, and

those so ugly, and of so large a size, (exceeding a foot in length) that I have not elsewhere seen the like. The length of this obscure, and broken space, conteineth eighty nine feet, the breadth and height is various, and not worth consideration. On the left hand of this, adjoyning to that narrow entrance thorough which we passed, we climbe up a steep, and massy stone eight or nine feet in height, where we immediately enter upon the lower end of the first
 •
 allery. The pavement of this rises with a gentle acclivity, consisting of smooth, and polished marble, and where not smeared with dust, and filth, appearing of a white, and alabaster colour: the sides, and roofe, as Titus Livius Burretinus, a Venetian, an ingenious young man, who accompanied me thither, obserserved, was of impolished stone, not so hard, and compact as that on the pavement, but more soft, and tender: the breadth almost five feet, and about the same quantity the height, if he have not mistaken. He likewise discovered some irregularity in the breadth, it opening a little wider in some places, then in others; but this inequality could not be discerned by the eye, but only by measuring it with a carefull hand. By my observation with a line, this Gallery conteined in length an hundred and ten feet. At the end of this begins the second Gallery, a very stately peece of work, and not inferiour, either in respect of the curiosity of Art, or richnesse of materials, to the most sumptuous, and magnificent buildings. It is divided from the former by a wall, through which stooping, we passed in a square hole, much about the same bignesse, as that by

which we entred into the

Pyramid, but of no considerable length. This narrow passage lieth levell, not rising with an acclivity as doth the pavement below, & roof above, of both these Galleries. At the end of it, on the right hand, is the well mentioned by Pliny: the which is circular, and not square, as the Arabian writers describe: the diameter of it exceeds three feet, the sides are lined with white marble, and the descent into it is by fastning the hands, and feet, in litle open spaces, cut in the sides within, opposite, and answerable to one another, in a perpendicular. In the same manner are almost all the wells, and passages into the cesterns at Alexandria contrived, without staires or windings but only with inlets, and square holes, on each side within: by which, using the feet and hands, one may with ease descend. Many of these cesternes, are with open, and double Arches, the lowermost Arch being supported by a row of speckled, and Thebaick marble pillars, upon the top of which stands a second row, bearing the upper and higher Arch: the walls within are covered with a sort of plaister for the colour white; but of so durable a substance, that neither by time, nor by the water

is it yet corrupted, and impaired. But I returne from the cesternes, and wells there, to this in the Pyramid;
 which in Plinies calculation, is eighty six cubits in depth
 ▪ and it may be was the passage to those secret vaults, mentioned, but not described by Herodotus, that were hewen out of the naturall rock, over which this Pyramid is erected. By my measure sounding it with a line, it conteines twenty feet in depth. The reason of the difference between Plinie's observation and mine, I suppose to be this, that since his time, it hath almost been dammed up, and choaked with rubbage, which I plainly discovered at the bottome, by throwing down some combustible matter set on fire. Leaving the well, and going on straight upon a levell, the distance of fifteen feet, we entred another square passage, opening against the former, and of the same bignesse. The stones are very massy, and exquisitely jointed, I know not whither of that gli
 •
 tering, and speckled marble, I mentioned in the columnes, of the cesterns at Alexandria. This leadeth (running in length upon a levell an hundred & ten feet) into an arched vault, or litle chamber: which by reason it was of a gravelike smell, and halfe full of rubbage, occasioned my le
 ••
 er stay. This chamber stands East and West: the length of it is lesse then twenty feet▪ the breadth about seventeen, and the height lesse then fifteen. The walls are entire, and plastered over with lime, the roofe is covered with large smooth stones, not lying flat, but shelving and meeting above in a kind of Arch, or rather an Angle. On the East side of this room, in the midle of it, there seems to have been a

passage leading to some other place. Whither this way the Priests went into the hollow of that huge Sphinx, as Strabo & Pliny term it, or Androphinx,
 as Herodotus cals such kinds (being by Plini's calculation CII feet in compasse about the head, in height LXII, in length CXLIII: and by my observation made of one entire stone) which stands not far distant without the Pyramid, South East of it, or into any other private retirement, I cannot determine; & it may be too this served for no such purpose, but rather as a theca, or nichio, as the Italians speak, wherein some idol might be placed; or else for a peece of ornament (for it is made of polished stone) in the architecture of those times, which ours may no more understand, then they doe the reason of the rest of those strange proportions, that appear in the passages, and inner rooms of this Pyramid. Returning back the same way we came, as soon as we are out of this narrow, and square passage, we climbe over it, and going straight on, in the trace of the second Gallery, uppon a shelving pavement (like that of the first) rising with an angle of twenty six degrees, we at length come to another partition. The length of the Gallery, from the well below to this partition above, is an hundred fifty and foure feet: but if we measure the pavement of the floore, it is somewhat lesse, by reason of a litle vacuity (some fifteen feet in length) as we described before, between the well, and the square hole we climbed over. And here to reassume some part of that, which hath been spoken, if we consider the narrow entrance at the mouth of the Pyramid, by which we descend; and the length of the first.

and second Galleries, by which we ascend, all of them lying as it were in the same continued line, and leading to the midle of the Pyramid, we may easily apprehend a reason of that strange Echo within, of foure, or five voices, mentioned by Plutarch in his fourth book De placitis Philosophorum:
 or rather of a long continued sound, as I found by experience discharging a musket at the entrance. For the sound being shut in, and carried in those close, and smooth passages, like as in so many pipes, or trunks, finding no issue out reflects upon it selfe, and causes a confused noise, and circulation of the aire, which by degrees vanishes, as the motion of it ceases. This Gallery or Corridore (or whatsoever else I may call it) is built of white, and polished marble, the which is very evenly cut in spacious squares, or tables. Of such materials as is the pavement, such is the roofe, and such are the side walls, that flank it: the coagmentation, or knitting of the joints, is so close, that they are scarce discernable by a curious eye, & that which adds a grace to the whole structure, though it makes the passage the more slippery, & difficult, is the acclivity, & rising of the ascent. The height of this Gallery is 26 feet, the breadth is 6 feet, and 870 parts of the foot divided into a 1000. of which three feet, and 435 of 1000 parts of a foot, are to be allowed for the way, in the midst: which is set, and bounded on both sides with two banks (like benches) of sleek and polished stone; each of these hath one foot, 717 of 1000 parts of a foot in breadth, and as much in depth. Upon the top of these benches near the Angle, where they close, and join with

the wall, are litle spaces, cut in right angled parallell figures, set on each side opposite to one another: intended no question, for some other end then ornament. In the casting, and ranging of the marbles in both the side walls, there is one peece of Architecture, in my judgement, very gracefull, and that is that all the courses, or ranges, which are but seven (so great are those stones) do set, and flag over one another, about three inches: the bottome of the uppermost course oversetting the higher part of the second, and the lower part of this overflagging the top of the third, and
 •
 o in order the rest, as they descend. Which will better be conceived by the representation of it to the eye in this figure, then by any other description.


Having passed this Gallery, we enter another square hole, of the same dimensions with the former, which brings us into two anticamerette, as the Italians would call them, or anticlosets (give me leave in so unusuall a structure to frame some unusuall termes) lined with a rich, and speckled kind of Thebaick marble. The first of these hath the dimensions almost equall to the second: the second is thus proportioned, the area is levell, the figure of it is oblong, the one side conteining seven feet, the other three and an halfe, the height is ten feet. On the East and West sides, within two feet and an halfe of the top, which is somewhat larger then the bottom, are three cavities, or litle seats, in this manner.


 This inner Anticloset is separated from the former, by a stone of red speckled marble, which hāgs in 2 mortices (like the leaf of a sluce) between 3 walls, more then 3 feet above the pavement, and wanting 2 of the roof. Out of this closet we enter another square hole, over which are five lines cut parallell, and perpendicular in this manner.


Besides these I have not observed any other sculptures, or ingravings, in the whole Pyramid. And therefore it may justly be wondred, whence the Arabia is borrowed those vain traditions I before related, that all Seie
 •
 ces are inscribed within in hieroglyphicks: and as justly it may be questioned, upon what authority Dio, or his epitomizer Xiphilinus, reports that Cornelius Gallus (whom
 Strabo more truly names Aelius Gallus, with whom hee travailed into Aegypt, as a friend, and companion)
 ingraved in the Pyramids his victories, unlesse we understand some other Pyramids not now existent. This square passage is of the same widenesse, and dimensions, as the rest, & is in length near nine feet, (being all of Thebaick marble, most exquisitely cut) which lands us at the North end, of a very sumptuous, and well proportioned room. The distance from the end of the second Gallery to this entry, running upon the same levell, is twenty foure feet. This rich, and spacious chamber, in which art may seem to have contended with nature, the curious work being not inferiour to the rich materials, stands as it were in the heart, and centar of the Pyramid, equidistant from all the sides and almost in the midst between the Basis, and the top. The floor, the sides, the roof of it, are all made of vast, and exquisite tables of Thebaick marble, which if they were not vailed, and obscured by the steame of tapers, would appeare glistering, and shining. From the top of it descending to the bottome, there are but six ranges of stone, all which being respectively sized to an equall height, very gracefully in one, and the same altitude,

run round the room. The stones which cover this place, are of a strange, and stupendious length, like so many huge beames lying flat, and traversing the room, and withall supporting that infinite masse, and waight of the Pyramid above. Of these there are nine, which cover the roofe; two of them are lesse by halfe in breadth then the rest; the one at the East end, the other at the West. The length of this chamber on the South side, most acurately taken at the joint, or line, where the first and second row of stones meet, is thirty four English feet, and 300 and 80 parts of the foot divided into a thousand (that is 34 feet and 380 of 1000 parts of a foot.) The breadth of the West side at the joint, or line, where the first, and second row of stones meet, is seventeen feet, and an hundred and ninety parts of the foot divided into a thousand (that is 17 feet, and 190 of 1000 parts of a foot.) The height is nineteen feet and an halfe.


Within this glorious roome (for so I may justly call it) as within some consecrated Oratory, stands the monument of Cheops, or Chemmis, of one peece of marble, hollow within, and uncovered at the top▪ and sounding like a bell. Which I mention not as any rarity, either in nature, or in art (For I have observed the like sound, in other tombs of marble cut hollow like this) but because I find modern Authors to take notice of it as a wonder. Some write, that the body hath been removed hence, whereas Diodorus hath left above sixteen hundred yeeres since, a memorable passage concerning Chemmis the the builder of this Pyramid, and Cephren the Founder of the next adjoyning Although (saith hee) these Kings intended these for their Sepulchers,

 yet it hapened that neither of them were buried there. For the people being exasperated against them, by reason of the toilsomnesse of these works, and for their cruelty, and oppression, threatned to teare in pieces their dead bodies, and with ignominy to throw them out of their Sepulchers, Wherefore both of them dying commanded their friends privately to bury them, in an obscure place. This monument in respect of the nature, and quality of the stone, is the same with which the whole roome is lined: as by breaking a litle fragment of it, I plainly discovered, being a speckled kind of marble, with black, and white, and red spots, as it were equally mixt, which some writers call Thebaick marble. Though I conceive it to be that sort of Porphyry which Pliny calls Leucostictos, and describes thus.
 Rubet Porphyrites in eâdem Aegypto, ex eo candidis intervenientibus

punctis leucostictos appellatur. Quantislibet molibus caedendis sufficiunt lapidicinae. Of this kind of marble there were, and still are, an infinite quantity of columnes in Aegypt. But a Venetian, a man very curious, who accompanied me thither, imagined that this sort of marble came from mount Sina, where he had lived amongst the rocks, which he affirmed to be speckled with party colours of black, and white, and red, like this: and to confirm his assertion, he alleaged that he had seen a great column, left imperfect, amongst the cliffes, almost as big as that huge, and admirable
 Corinthian pillar standing to the South of Alexandria, which by my measure is near foure times as big as any of those vast Corinthian pillars, in the Porticus before the Pantheon at Rome; all which are of the same coloured marble with this monument, and so are all the obeliscks with hieroglyphicks, both in Rome, and Alexandria. Which opinion of his doth well correspond with the tradition of Aristides, who reports that, in Arabia there is a quarry of excellent Porphyry. The figure of this tombe without, is like an Altar, or more neerly to expresse it, like two cubes finely set together, and hollowed within: it is cut smooth, and plain, without any sculpture, and ingraving; or any relevy, and imbossement. The exteriour superficies of it conteines

in length seven, feet three inches and an halfe. Bellonius makes it twelve feet, and Monsieur de Breves nine; but both of them have exceeded. In depth it is three feet, three inches, and three quarters, and is the same in breadth. The hollow part within, is in length, on the West side, sixe feet, and foure hundred eighty eight parts of the English foot divided into a thousand parts (that is 6 feet, and 488 of 1000 parts of a foot) in breadth, at the North end, two feet, and two hundred and eighteen parts of the foot divided into a thousand parts (that is 2 feet, and 218 of 1000 parts of a foot.) The depth is 2 feet, and 860 of 1000 parts of the English foot. A narrow space, yet large enough to conteine, a

most potent, and dreadfull Monarch being dead, to whom living, all Aegypt was too streight, and narrow a circuit. By these dimensions, and by such other observations, as have been taken by me from severall imbalmed bodies in Aegypt, we may conclude that there is no decay in nature; (though the question is as ol
 •
 as

 Homer) but that the men of this age are of the same stature, they were near three thousand years agoe; notwithstanding Saint
 Augustine, and others, are of a different opinion. Quis j
 •
 m aevo isto non minor suis Parentibus nascitur? saith Solinus.


 It may justly be questioned how this monument could be brought hither, since it is an impossibility that by those narrow passages before described, it should have entred. Wherefore we must imagine that by some machina it was raised, and conveyed up without, before this oratory, or chamber, was finished, and the roof closed. The position of it is thus▪ it stands exactly in the Meridian, North and South, and is as it were equidistant from all sides of the chamber, except the East, from whence it is doubly remoter, then from the West. Under it I found a litle hollow space to have been dug away, and a large stone in the pavement removed, at the angle next adjoining to it: which ) Sands erroneously imagines, to be a passage into some other compartiment: dug away no doubt by the avarice of some, who might not improbably conjecture an hidden treasure to bee reposited there. An expensfull prodigality, out of superstition used by the Ancients, and with the same blind devotion taken up, and continued to this day in the East Indies.


And yet it seems by Iosephu's relation, that by the wisest King, in a time as clear, and unclouded as any, it was put in practice, who thus describes the funerall of King David.

 His sonne Solomon buried him magnificently in Hierusalem, who, besides the usuall solemnities at the funeralls of Kings, brought into his monument very great riches, the multitude of which we may easily collect by that which shall be spoken. For thirteen hundred years after, Hyrcanus the high Priest being besieged by Antiochus surnamed Pius, the sonne of Demetrius, and being willing to give mony to raise the siege, and to lead away his army, not knowing where to procure it, he opened one of the vaults of the Sepulcher of David, and tooke thence three thousand talents, part whereof being given to Antiochus, he freed himselfe from the danger of the siege, as we have elsewhere declared. And again after many yeares King Herod opening another vault, tooke out a great quantity of mony; yet neither of them came to the c
 •
 ffins of the Kings, for they were with much art hid under ground, that they might not be found by such as entred into the Sepulcher.


 The ingenious reader will excuse my curiosity, if before I conclude my description of this Pyramid, I pretermit not any thing within, of how light a consequence soever. This made me take notice of two inlets, or spaces, in the South and North sides of this chamber, just opposite to one another; that on the North was in breadth 700 of 1000 parts of the English foot, in depth 400 of 1000 parts: eevenly cut, and running in a straight line six feet, and farther, into the thicknesse

of the wall. That on the South is larger, and somewhat round, not so long as the former▪ and by the blacknesse within seems to have been a receptacle, for the burning of lamps. T. L
 •
 vius Burretinus would gladly have beleeved, that it had been an hearth for one of those eternall lamps, such as have been found in Tulliola's tomb in Italy,
 and, if Cambden be not misinformed, in England, dedicated to the Urnes, and ashes of the dead; but I imagine the invention not to be so ancient as this Pyramid. However certainly a noble invention: and therefore pitty it is, it should have been smothered by the negligence of writers, as with a dampe. How much better might Pliny, if he knew the composition of it, have described it, then he hath done the linum asbestinum, a sort of linnen spun out of the veines, as some suppose, of the Carystian, or Cyprian stone (which in my travailes I have often seen) Though Salmasius, with more probability, contends the true asbestinum to be the linum vivum,
 or linum Indicum: in the folds and wreaths of which, they inclosed the dead body of the Prince (for saith Pliny, Regum inde funebres tunicae: and no wonder, seeing not long after he addes, aequat pretia excellentium margaritarum) committing it to the fire, and flames, till it were consumed to ashes: while in the same flames, this shrowd of linnen, as if it had only been bathed, and washed (to allude to his expression) by the fire, became more white, and refined. Surely a rare, and commendable peice of skill, which Pancirollus justly reckons amongst the Deperdita; but infinitely inferiour either in respect of art, or use, unto the

former. And thus have I finished my description of all the inner parts of this Pyramid: where I could neither borrow light to conduct me, from the Ancients: nor receive any manuduction from the uncertaine informations of modern travailers, in those dark, and hidden paths. We are now come abroad into the light, and Sunne, where I found my Janizary, and an English Captain, a litle impatient to have waited above three houres without, in expectation of my return: who imagined whatsoever they understood not, to be an impertinent, and vain curiosity.


 A description of the second PYRAMID.

 FRom this Pyramid we went to the second, being scarce distant the flight of an arrow from it: where by the way I observed, on the West side of the
 •
 ir
 •
 t, the ruines of a pile of building, all of square, and polished stone: such as Pliny calls Basaltes, and describes to be ferrei coloris,

 & duritiae, of an iron colour, and hardnesse: Formerly it may be some habitation of the Priests, or some monument of the dead. To the right hand of this, tending to the South, stands this second Pyramid, of which besides the miracle, the Ancient, and Modern writers, have delivered litle.
 Herodotus relates, that Cephren, in imitation of his brother Cheops, built this, but that he fell short in respect of the magnitude. For (saith he) wee have measured them. It were to be wished for fuller satisfaction of the Reader, he had expressed the quantity, and also the manner how hee took his measure. He addes, it hath no subterraneous structures,

 neither is the Nilus by a channell derived into it, as in the former. Diodorus somewhat more particularly describes it thus: that for the architecture it is like unto the former, but much inferiour to it in respect of magnitude: Each side of the Basis conteins a stadium in length. That is, to comment on his words, of Grecian

feet sixe hundred, of Romane sixe hundred twenty five. So that by this computation, each side should want an hundred Grecian feet of the former Pyramid. Pliny makes the difference to be greater, for assigning eight hundred eighty three feet to the former, he allowes to the side of the Basis of this, but seven hundred thirty seven. By my observation, the stones are of colour white, nothing so great, and vast, as those of the first, and fairest Pyramid; the sides rise not with degrees like that, but are smooth, and equall, the whole fabrick (except where it is opposed to the South) seeming very entire, free from any deformed ruptures, or breaches. The height of it, taken by as deliberate a conjecture as I could make (which it was easie to do by reason of the nearnesse of this, and the former, being both upon the same plain) is not inferiour to it; and therefore Strabo hath rightly judged them to be equall. The sides also of the Basis of both are alike, as, besides the authority of Strabo
 ▪ the Venetian Doctor assured me, who measured it with a line. There is no entry leading into it, and therefore what may be within, whither such spaces, and compartiments, as I observed in the former, or whither different, or none, I must leave to every mans private conjecture, and to the discovery of after times.


This is bounded on the North, and West sides, with two very stately, and elaborate peeces; which I doe not so much admire, as that by all writers, they have been pretermitted. About thirty feet in depth, and more then a thousand and foure hundred in length, out of the hard rocke these buildings have been cut in a perpendicular, and squared by the chessell, as I suppose, for lodgings of the Priests. They run along at a convenient distance, parallel to the two sides, we mentioned of this Pyramid, meeting in a right angle, and making a very faire, and gracefull prospect. The entrance into them is by square openings, hewen out of the rocke, much of the same bignes, with those I described in the first Pyramid. Whither these were symbolicall (as the Theology of the Aegyptians consisted much in mysterious figures) and the depressure, and lownes of these, were to teach the Priests humility: and the squarenes, and eevenes of them, an uniforme, and regular deportment in their actions, I leave to such as have written of their hieroglyphickes to determine. The hollow space within, of them all, is somewhat like to a square, and well proportioned chamber, covered, and arched above with the naturall rocke: in most of which (as I remember) there was a passage opening into some other compartiment, which the rubbage, and darknes, hindered me from viewing. On the North side without, I observed a line, and only one, ingraven with sacred and Aegyptian characters, such as are mentioned by
 Herodotus, and
 Diodorus, to have been used by the Priests, and were different from the

vulgar characters in civill affaires: in which former kinde
 Iustine Martyr makes Moses to have been skilfull: as the Scripture makes him to have been learned in all the wisedome of the Aegyptians. These ranne not downwards, as the Chinese in our times write, but were continued in a streight line, as we use to write: and are to be read (if any understand those mysterious sculptures) by proceeding from the right hand to the left, and as it were imitating the motion, and course of the Planets. For so
 Herodotus expresly informes us, that the Grecians write, and cast account, going from the left hand to the right, the Aegyptians from the right hand to the left. And this is that which in an obscure expression is also intimated by
 Pomponius Mela: Aegyptii] suis literis perversè utuntur. A manner practised by the Hebrewes, Chaldaeans, and Syrians to this day: and not unlikely to have been borrowed by them from the Aegyptians: to whom the Chaldaeans also allowed their first skill in Astrology, as the Graecians did their knowledge in Geometry; the former being attested by
 Diodorus, and the later confessed by
 Proclus, and other Grecians. And surely in imitation of these, or of the Jewes, the Arabians neighbouring upon both, have taken up this manner of writing, and continued it to our times: communicating it also by their conquests, to the Persians, and Turkes.


 A description of the third PYRAMID.

 FRom this Pyramid we went unto the third, standing distant from the second about a furlong, upon an advantageous height, and rising of the rocke, whereby at a good distance it seemes equall to the former; though the whole pile is much lesse, and lower. The time was so far spent with my other observations, that I could not take so exact a view, as I desired, and the worke deserved; yet I tooke so much of both, as to be able to confute the errors of others. But before I performe this, I shall relate what the Ancients, and some one or two of our best writers, which have travelled thither, have delivered concerning this. Herodotus discoursing of it, tels us, that (Mycerinus) left a Pyramid much lesse then that of his father, wanting of all sides (for it is quadrangular) twenty feet: it is three hundred feet on every side, being to the midle of it built with Aethiopicke marble. Diodorus Siculus is somewhat larger, and cleerer. Every side of the basis (Mycerinus) caused to be made three hundred feet in length, he raised the walls fifteene Stories, with black stone, like Thebaicke marble, the rest of it he finished, with such materials as the other Pyramids are built. This worke although it is exceeded by the rest in magnitude, yet for the

structure, art, and magnificence of the marble, it very farre excels them. In the side towards the North, Mycerinus the name of the Founder, is ingraven. Thus far Diodorus. To whom I shall adjoine the testimony of Strabo: Farther,

 upon a higher rise of the hill is the third (Pyramid) much lesse then the two former, but built with a greater expense: For almost from the Foundation of it to the midle, it consists of blacke stone, with which they make mortars, brought from the remotest mountaines of Aethiopia, which being hard, and not easie to be wrought, hath made the worke the more costly. Pliny also, not as a spectator, and eye-witnesse, as the former, but as an Historian writes thus. The third (Pyramid) is lesse then the former we mentioned, but much more beautifull: it is erected with Aethiopicke marble, and is three hundred sixty three feet between the angles. And this is all that hath been preserved of the Ancients concerning this Pyramid. Amongst moderne writers, none deserves to be placed before Bellonius, or rather before P. Gillius. For
 Thuanus makes the other to have been a plagiarius, and to have published in his owne name the observations of P. Gillius: a man very curious, and inquisitive after truth, as appeares by his topography of Constantinople, and his Bosphorus Thracius, to whom Bellonius served as an amanuensis. The third

 Pyramid is much lesse then the former two, but is a third part greater then that which is at Rome, neere the mons testaceus, as you passe to Saint Pauls in the Ostian way. It is still perfect, and no more corrupted, then as if it had been newly built, For it is made of a kinde of marble,

called basaltes, or Aethiopicke marble, harder then iron it selfe.



 It will be in vaine to repeate the traditions, and descriptions of severall others: all which by a kinde of confederacie, agree in the same tale for the substance, only differing in some circumstances: So that I shrewdly suspect, that Diodorus hath borrowed most of his relation from Herodotus: and Strabo, and Pliny, from Diodorus, or

from them both: and the more learned neoterickes from them all. For else how can it be imagined, they should so constantly agree in that, which if my eyes, and memory extreamly faile me not, is most evidently false? And therefore I have a strong jealousie, that they never came neere this third Pyramid; but that they did, as I have observed all travailers in my time in Aegypt to doe, fill themselves so full, and as it were so surfeit with the sight of the greater, and fairer Pyramid, that they had no appetite to be spectators of the rest: where they should only see the same miracle (for the Pyramids are all of the same figure) the farther they went, decreasing, and presented as it were in a lesse Volumne: Or if they did view this, it was quasi per transennam, very perfunctorily, and sleightly; and that through a false, and coloured glasse. For they have mistaken both in the quality of the stone, and colour of the Pyramid. I begin with Herodotus,
 who by a notable peece of forgetfulnes, if it be not a
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 in the copies, makes the dimensions of each of the sides, in the basis of this, to be three hundred feet, and yet to want but twenty of the first Pyramid, to which he assigned before eight hundred feet▪ an impossibility in arithmeticke. And therefore it will be no presumption to correct the place, and in stead of
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 , to write
 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
 . I know not how to palliate, or excuse his other errour, where he makes this Pyramid to be built as far as to the midle of it, with Aethiopicke marble. If this sort of marble be ferrei coloris,
 as it is described by Pliny, and granted by Diodorus, and Strabo,


both of them expressing the colour to be blacke, and the latter bringing it from the remotest mountaines of Aethiopia, where the marble hath the same tincture and colour, with the Inhabitants, then can this relation of Herodotus no way be admitted. For the whole Pyramid seemes to be of cleere, and white stone, somewhat choicer, and brighter, then that in either of the two other Pyramids. And therefore I wonder that Diodorus, Strabo, and Pliny, and amongst latter Authors, Bellonius, Gillius, and severall others, should have all followed Herodotus: when with a litle paines, and circumspection, they might have reformed his, and their owne errour. It may perhaps be alleaged in their defence, that they meane the buildings within are erected with blacke, and Aethiopicke marble: and yet if this be granted, since there is no entrance leading into this, no more then is into the second Pyramid, what may be within depends upon the incertainty of tradition, or conjecture, both which are very fallible, Though it cannot be denied, but that close by this, on the East side of it, there are the ruines of a pile of building, with a sad, and dusky colour, much like that we described in passing to the second Pyramid, which might be the ground, and occasion of this errour. I cannot excuse the Ancients, but Bellonius, or Gillius (For it is no matter which of them ownes the relation, when both of them have erred) are farre more inexcusable, Because it might have been expected from them, what Livy supposes, Novi semper scriptores, aut inrebus certius aliquid allaturos se, aut scribendi arte rudem vetustatem superaturos

credunt. Whereas these on the contrary, have depraved, what hath been, in this particular, with truth delivered by the Ancients. For whereas Herodotus, and Diodorus, equal the side of the basis to three hundred feet, and Pliny extends it to three hundred sixty three, these make it only a third part greater then the Pyramid at Rome of C. Caestius, neere the mons testaceus. So that either they have much enlarged that at Rome, or shruncke, and contracted this. For the Pyramid at Rome, exactly measured on that side, which stands within the City, is completely seventy eight feet English in breadth: to which if we adde a third part of it, the result will be an hundred and foure: which should be equal to this Aegyptian Pyramid, in the notion, and acception of Bellonius. An unpardonable oversight, no lesse then two hundred feet, in a very litle more then three hundred. For so much, besides the authority of Herodotus, and Diodorus, before cited, I take the side of this Pyramid to be, and the altitude to have much the same proportion.


 I would gladly have seen in this, the name of Mycerinus the Founder of it ingraven, as
 Diodorus mentions: or that other inscription in the first, whereof Herodotus procured the interpretation: but both have been defaced by time. His words are these:
 In the Pyramid there are Aegyptian characters inscribed, which shew how much was expended upon the workemen, in radishes, onions, and garlicke, which an interpreter (as I well remember) said was the summe of a thousand and six hundred talents of silver, which

if it be so, how much is it credible was spent in iron, and in meat, and in clothes for the labourers? Hereby I might have knowne what to determine of the ancient Aegyptian letters: I meane not the sacred ones (for those were all Symbolical, expressing the abstractest notions of the minde, by visible similitudes of birds, and beasts, or by representations of some other familiar objects) but those used in civill affaires. By such sculptures, which I have seene in gemmes found at Alexandria, and amongst the Mummies, I can no way subscribe to the assertion of Kircherus, though an able man, who, in his Prodromus Coptus, contends that the present Aegyptian, or Coptite character (which certainly is nothing but a corruption, and distortion of the Greeke) is the same with that of the ancient Aegyptians.


 Of the rest of the PYRAMIDS in the Libyan desert.

 I Have done with these three Pyramids, each of them being very remarkable, and the two first reckoned amongst the miracles of the world. The rest in the Libyan desert lying scattered here, and there, are (excepting one of them) but lesser copies, and as it were models of these: and therefore I shall neither much trouble my selfe, nor the Reader, with the discription of them. Though to speake the truth, did not the three first standing so neere together obscure the luster of the rest, which lye far scattered, some of them were very considerable. And therefore I


cannot but taxe the omission of the Ancients, and the inaduertency of all moderne writers, and travailers, who with too much supinenes have neglected the description of one of them: which in my judgement is as worthy of memory, and as neere a miracle, as any of those three, which I have mentioned. And this stands from these South, and by West, at twenty miles distance, more within the sandy desert, upon a rocky level like these, and not far from the village whence we enter the Mummies. This as the Venetian Doctor assured me, and as I could judge by conjecture at a distance, hath the same dimensions, that the first, and fairest of these; hath graduations, or ascents without, and of the same colour like that, (but more decayed, especially at the top) and an entrance into it on the North side, which is barred up within; and therefore whatsoever is spoken of the first, in respect of the exteriour figure, is appliable to this.
 Bellonius extremely exceeds in his computation of the number of thē, who thus writes. Above an 100 others are seen dispersed up and down in that plain, I could not discover 20. And long since, Ibn Almatoug in his book of the miracles of Aegypt, reckons them to be but XVIII. There are in the West side no more famous buildings then the Pyramids, the number of them is XVIII: of these, there are three in that part which is opposite to Fostat (or

 Cairo.)


 In what manner the PYRAMIDS were built.

 WE had ended our discourse of the Pyramids, but that I find one scruple toucht

upon by Herodotus, Diodorus, and Pliny, which is worth the discussion, as a point of some concernment in architecture: and that is, in what manner these Pyramids were built, and with what art and contrivance the stones, especially those vast ones in the first, were conveied up.
 Herodotus who first raised the doubt, gives this solution. They carried up the rest of the stones with litle engines made of wood, raising them from the ground upon the first row: when the stone was lodged upon this row, it was put into another engine, standing upon the first step, from thence it was conveied to the second row by another. For so many rowes, and orders of steps, as there were, so many engines were there: or els they removed the engine which was one, and easy to be carried, to every particular row, as often as they moved a stone. We will relate that which is spoken of either part. Therefore those in the Pyramid were first made, which were the highest, then by degrees the rest, last of all those which are neerest to the ground, and are the lowest. The first part of this solution of Herodotus is full of difficulty. How in the erecting, and placing of so many machinae, charged with such massy stones, and those continually passing over the lower degrees, could it be avoided, but that they must either unsetle them, or indanger the breaking of some portions of them; which mutilations would have been like scars in the face of so magnificent a building? His second answer is the sounder; but I conceive the text to be imperfect.
 D
 •
 odorus hath another fancy: The stones (saith he) at a great distance off were prepared in Arabia: and they report that by the help of Aggeres

(engines not being then invented) the work was erected. And that which begets the greatest admiration is, that so vast a structure was perfected in that place, which is all about replenished with sand where there appeares not any relicks, either of the aggeres, or of the hewing, and polishing of the stones. So that it seems not peece-meale by the industry of men, bu
 •
 altogether, and at once, the whole pile, as it were by some God, was erected in the midst of the sands. Some of the Aegyptians relate wonders of it, and indeavour to obtrude I know not what fables; namely, that these aggeres consisting of salt, and nitre, were dissolved by letting in the river, which wholly consumed them without the labour of hands, leaving this structure (intire.) But the truth of the buisines is not so, but that those multitudes of men, which were imployed in raising the agggeres▪ carried them away
 •
 nto their former places. For as they report three hundred and sixty thousand men were imployed in these offices, and the whole worke was scarce finished in the space of twenty yeares. Pliny partly agrees with him, and partly gives another answer. The question is, by what means the cement was con
 •
 eied up to such a height (he rather might have questioned, how those vast stones were conveied up) some say that banks of nitre, and salt were made up, as the work rose, which being finished, they were washed away by the river (Nilus) Others imagine that bridges were made with bricke: which, the worke being ended, were distributed into private houses. For they conceive that the Nilus being much


lower, could not come to wash them (away.) If I may assume the liberty of a travailer, I imagine that they were erected, neither as Herodotus describes, nor as Diodorus reports, nor as Pliny relates: but that first they made a large, and spacious tower in the midst reaching to the top; to the sides of this tower, I conceive the rest of the building to have been applied, peece after peece, like so many buttresses, or supporters, still lessening in height, till at last they came to the lowermost degree. A difficult peice of building taken in the best, & easiest projection: And therefore it is no wonder, if it were not often imitated by the Ancients, and no where expressed, or commended, by the great master of Architecture Vitruvius. Yet surely if we judge of things by the events, and if we reflect upon the intention of monuments, which are raised by the living to perpetuate the memory of the dead, then is this as commendable a way as any. And therefore we see at Rome, that though by the revolution of so many ages the Mausoleum of Augustus be almost decayed, and the Septizonium of Severus be utterly lost, both intended for lasting & stately Sepulchers; yet the Pyramid of C. Caestius stands fair, and almost intire: which is no more to be compared, either for the vastnes of the stones, or the whole bulk, and fabrick of it, with these, then are the limbs, & body of a dwarf, to the dimensions of a gyant, or some large colossus.



 I have done with the work, but the Artizans, deserve not to be pretermitted: concerning whom the observation of Diodorus is as true, as it is boldly delivered by him. It is confessed, that these works (speaking of the Pyramids) far excell the rest in Aegypt, not only in the massinesse of the

structures, and in the expenses, but also in the industry (and skill) of the Artificers. The Aegyptians thinke, the architects are more to be admired then the Kings, who were at the expense. For they by their abilities, and study, these by their wealth received by inheritance, and by the labours of others erected them.


 The Conclusion,

 ANd thus much of the Sciography, or of the artificiall, and architectonicall part: I shall shut up all with one observation in nature for the recreation of the Reader, recited by Strabo in these words.
 Wee ought not to omit one of the strange things seen by us at the Pyramids. Some heapes of stone, being fragments hewen off lye before the Pyramids, amongst th
 •
 se are found litle stones, some in the similitude, and bignesse of lentils, some as of graines of barly, which appeare halfe unscaled: they report these are some relicks of the provisions, which were given to the workmen, and have been petrified: which seems probable enough.


 These, if there were ever any such, are either consumed by time, or scattered by the winds, or buried with those tempests of sand, to which the deserts are perpetually exposed: But Diodorus, who not long preceded him, was not so curious, as to deliver this relation. And were not Strabo a writer of much gravity, and judgement, I should suspect that these petrified graines (though I know such petrefactions to be no impossibility in nature. For I have seen at Venice the bones and flesh of a man, and the whole head intirely transmuted into stone: and at Rome cleare conduit

water, by long standing in aquaeducts, hath been turned into perfect Alabaster) are like those loafes of bread, which are reported to bee found by the red sea converted into stone, and by the inhabitants supposed to bee some of the bread the Israelites left behind them, when they passed over for feare of Pharaoh. They are sold at Grand Cairo handsomely made up in the manner of the bread of these times, which is enough to discover the imposture. For the scripture makes them to have been unleavened cakes:
 and they baked unleavened cakes, of the dough which they brought forth out of Aegypt. Or else Strabo's relation may be like the tradition of the rising of dead mens bones every year in Aegypt: a thing superstitiously beleeved by the Christians: and by the Priests, either out of ignorance, or policy, maintained, as an argument of the resurrection. The possibility and truth of it, Metrophanes the Patriarch of Alexandria thought (but very illogically) might be proved our of the Prophet Esay.
 And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcaises of the men that have transgressed against me, for their worme shall not dye, neither shall their fire bee quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.


 But I have digressed too farre. The confutation of these, and the description of the mummies, or of the rest of the Aegyptian Sepulchers (for from thence comes the matter of this their supposed resurrection) and that infinite masse, and variety of hieroglyphicks, which I have either seen there, or bought, or transcribed elsewhere, may be the
 argument of another discourse.


 FINIS.
